.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993
.\"	 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Takashi Nishida
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Sat Sep 24 15:51:25 JST 2005 (ver0.03)
.\"         by Takashi Nishida
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$Id: dump.8.in,v 1.57 2004/07/13 08:17:32 stelian Exp $
.\"
.\"WORD:	end-of-media indication	メディア終端検出
.\"WORD:	incremental backup	増分バックアップ
.\"WORD:	end-of-media		メディア終端
.\"WORD:	save			保存
.\"WORD:	feature			機能
.\"WORD:	modified Tower of Hanoi algorithm	修正版のハノイの塔アルゴリズム
.\"
.TH DUMP 8 "version 0.4b40 of May 2, 2005" BSD "System management commands"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O dump \- ext2/3 filesystem backup
dump \- ext2/3 ファイルシステムのバックアップ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .B dump 
.\"O [\fB\-\fIlevel#\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-ackMnqSuv]
.\"O [\fB\-A \fIfile\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-B \fIrecords\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-b \fIblocksize\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-d \fIdensity\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-D \fIfile\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-e \fIinode numbers\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-E \fIfile\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-f \fIfile\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-F \fIscript\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-h \fIlevel\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-I \fInr errors\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-j\fIcompression level\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-L \fIlabel\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-Q \fIfile\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-s \fIfeet\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-T \fIdate\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-y\fR]
.\"O [\fB\-z\fIcompression level\fR]
.\"O .I files-to-dump
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B dump 
.\"O [\fB\-W \fR| \fB\-w\fR]
.B dump 
[\fB\-\fIlevel#\fR]
[\fB\-ackMnqSuv]
[\fB\-A \fIfile\fR]
[\fB\-B \fIrecords\fR]
[\fB\-b \fIblocksize\fR]
[\fB\-d \fIdensity\fR]
[\fB\-D \fIfile\fR]
[\fB\-e \fIinode numbers\fR]
[\fB\-E \fIfile\fR]
[\fB\-f \fIfile\fR]
[\fB\-F \fIscript\fR]
[\fB\-h \fIlevel\fR]
[\fB\-I \fInr errors\fR]
[\fB\-j\fIcompression level\fR]
[\fB\-L \fIlabel\fR]
[\fB\-Q \fIfile\fR]
[\fB\-s \fIfeet\fR]
[\fB\-T \fIdate\fR]
[\fB\-y\fR]
[\fB\-z\fIcompression level\fR]
.I files-to-dump
.PP
.B dump 
[\fB\-W \fR| \fB\-w\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Dump
.\"O examines files on an ext2/3 filesystem and determines which files need to be
.\"O backed up. These files are copied to the given disk, tape or other storage
.\"O medium for safe keeping (see the
.\"O .B \-f 
.\"O option below for doing remote backups). A dump that is larger than the output 
.\"O medium is broken into multiple volumes. On most media the size is determined by
.\"O writing until an end-of-media indication is returned.
.B dump
は ext2/3 ファイルシステム上のファイルを調べて、バックアップする必要のある
ファイルを決定し、それらのファイルを
指定されたディスクやテープ、その他の保管用の記憶メディアにコピーする
(リモートバックアップを行う場合は下記の
.B \-f
オプションを参照のこと)。
出力メディアより大きなダンプは複数のボリュームに分割される。
多くのメディアでは、サイズの決定はメディア終端検出 (end-of-media indication)
が返ってくるまで書き込むことで行われる。
.\"O .PP
.PP
.\"O On media that cannot reliably return an end-of-media indication (such as some
.\"O cartridge tape drives), each volume is of a fixed size; the actual size is 
.\"O determined by specifying cartridge media, or via the tape size, density and/or
.\"O block count options below. By default, the same output file name is used for
.\"O each volume after prompting the operator to change media.
(いくつかのカートリッジテープドライブのように)
メディア終端検出が返さないことがあるメディアでは、
それぞれのボリュームは固定サイズとなる。
実際のサイズの決定は、カートリッジメディアの指定、つまり
テープのサイズ、密度やブロック数 (下記参照) を通じて行われる。
デフォルトでは、オペレータにメディア交換を指示した後の各ボリュームでも
同じ出力ファイル名が使われる。
.\"O .PP
.PP
.\"O .I files-to-dump
.\"O is either a mountpoint of a filesystem or a list of files and directories to be
.\"O backed up as a subset of a filesystem. In the former case, either the path to a
.\"O mounted filesystem or the device of an unmounted filesystem can be used. In the
.\"O latter case, certain restrictions are placed on the backup:
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O is not allowed, the only dump level that is supported is
.\"O .B 0 
.\"O and all the files and directories must reside on the same filesystem.
.I ダンプされるファイル
は、ファイルシステムのマウントポイント、もしくは、
ファイルシステムの一部としてバックアップされる
ファイルやディレクトリのリスト、
のいずれかである。
前者の場合、ファイルの指定は、
マウントされているファイルシステムのパスと、
マウントされていないファイルシステムのデバイスの、
いずれでも可能である。
後者の場合、バックアップには若干の制限がある:
.B \-u
は使用できず、
サポートされるダンプレベルは
.B 0 
だけであり、すべてのファイルとディレクトリは同一ファイルシステム上に
属していないといけない。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.\"O The following options are supported by
.\"O .B dump:
.SH オプション
.B dump
では以下のオプションがサポートされている:
.\"O .TP
.\"O- .BI \-0\-9
.\"O- Dump levels. A level 0, full backup, guarantees the entire file system is
.\"O- copied (but see also the
.\"O+ .BI \-level#
.\"O+ The dump level (any integer). A level 0, full backup, guarantees the
.\"O+ entire file system is copied (but see also the
.\"O .B \-h
.\"O option below). A level number above 0, incremental backup, tells
.\"O .B dump
.\"O to
.\"O copy all files new or modified since the last dump of a lower level. The 
.\"O- default level is 9.
.\"O+ default level is 9. Historically only levels 0 to 9 were usable in
.\"O+ dump, this version is able to understand any integer as a dump level.
.TP
.BI \-0\-9
ダンプレベル (dump level)。
レベル 0 はフルバックアップで、ファイルシステム全体のコピーを保証する
(但し、以下の
.B \-h
オプションを見ること)。
0 より大きいレベル番号は増分バックアップ (incremental backup) で、
そのレベルより番号が小さいレベルの最後のダンプ以後の
新しいファイルと修正されたファイルすべてのコピーを指示する。
デフォルトのレベルは 9 である。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-a 
.\"O \*(lqauto-size\*(rq. Bypass all tape length calculations, and write until an 
.\"O end-of-media indication is returned.  This works best for most modern tape
.\"O drives, and is the default. Use of this option is particularly recommended when
.\"O appending to an existing tape, or using a tape drive with hardware compression 
.\"O (where you can never be sure about the compression ratio).
.TP
.BI \-a 
\*(lqオートサイズ\*(rq。
テープ長の計算すべてをスキップし、
メディア終端検出が返ってくるまで書き込む。
このオプションは最近のテープドライブの多くでうまく動作し、デフォルトで有効で
ある。現在使用中のテープへの追記や、ハードウェア圧縮機能を持つテープドライブ
を利用する際には、このオプションの使用を特に推奨する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-A " archive_file"
.\"O Archive a dump table-of-contents in the specified
.\"O .I archive_file
.\"O to be used by 
.\"O .BR restore (8)
.\"O to determine whether a file is in the dump file that is being restored.
.TP
.BI \-A " archive_file"
ダンプの内容一覧を、指定した
.I archive_file
に収録する。
このダンプの内容一覧は、
.BR restore (8)
があるファイルが
リストアしようとするダンプファイルの中にあるかどうかを
判断するのに利用できる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-b " blocksize"
.\"O- The number of kilobytes per dump record. The default blocksize is 10
.\"O- and the maximal value is 1024.
.\"O+ The number of kilobytes per dump record. The default blocksize is 10,
.\"O+ unless the
.\"O+ .B \-d
.\"O+ option has been used to specify a tape density of 6250BPI or more,
.\"O+ in which case the default blocksize is 32. Th maximal value is 1024.
.\"O Note however that, since the IO system slices all requests into chunks
.\"O of 
.\"O .B MAXBSIZE
.\"O (which can be as low as 64kB), you can experience problems with
.\"O .BR dump (8)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR restore (8)
.\"O when using a higher value, depending on your kernel and/or libC versions.
.TP
.BI \-b " blocksize"
ダンプレコード (dump record) のキロバイト数。
ブロックサイズ (block size) はデフォルトでは 10 で、最大値は 1024 である。
注意すべきこととして、
IO システムではすべての IO 要求は
.B MAXBSIZE
の塊 (64kB という小さな大きさのこともある) に分割されるので、
カーネルや libC のバージョンによっては、
.BR dump (8)
や
.BR restore (8)
でブロックサイズに大きな値を用いると問題が起こる場合がある。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-B " records"
.\"O The number of 1 kB blocks per volume. Not normally required, as
.\"O .B dump
.\"O can detect end-of-media. When the specified size is reached,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O waits for you to change the volume.  This option overrides the calculation of 
.\"O tape size based on length and density. If compression is on this limits the 
.\"O- size of the compressed output per volume.
.\"O+ size of the compressed output per volume.  Multiple values may be given
.\"O+ as a single argument separated by commas.  Each value will be used for one
.\"O+ dump volume in the order listed; if
.\"O+ .B dump
.\"O+ creates more volumes than the
.\"O+ number of values given, the last value will be used for the remaining
.\"O+ volumes. This is useful for filling up already partially filled media
.\"O+ (and then continuing with full size volumes on empty media) or mixing media
.\"O+ of different sizes.
.TP
.BI \-B " records"
ボリュームの 1kB ブロックの数。
.B dump
はメディア終端 (end-of-media) が検出できるので、
通常は必要ではない。
指定された数値に到達すると、
.B dump
はユーザがボリュームを交換するのを待つ。
このオプションは、テープ長と密度に基づくテープサイズの計算よりも
優先される。圧縮が有効の場合は、この値による制限は
ボリュームあたりの圧縮出力のサイズに適用される。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-c
.\"O Change the defaults for use with a cartridge tape drive, with a density of 8000
.\"O bpi, and a length of 1700 feet. Specifying a cartridge drive overrides the
.\"O end-of-media detection.
.TP
.BI \-c
デフォルト設定をカートリッジテープドライブ用、すなわち密度 800 bpi、
長さ 1700 feet に変更する。
カートリッジドライブの指定はメディア終端検出よりも優先される。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-d " density"
.\"O Set tape density to
.\"O .IR density .
.\"O The default is 1600BPI. Specifying a tape density overrides the end-of-media
.\"O detection.
.TP
.BI \-d " density"
テープの密度を
.IR density 
に設定する。
デフォルトは 1600BPI。
テープ密度の指定は
メディア終端検出よりも優先される。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-D " file"
.\"O Set the path name of the file storing the information about the previous 
.\"O full and incremental dumps. The default location is
.\"O .IR /etc/dumpdates .
.TP
.BI \-D " file"
過去のフルダンプと増分ダンプに関する情報を格納するファイルのパス名を設定する。
デフォルトの場所は
.IR /etc/dumpdates
。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-e " inodes"
.\"O Exclude 
.\"O .I inodes
.\"O from the dump. The
.\"O .I inodes
.\"O parameter is a comma separated list of inode numbers (you can use
.\"O .BR stat (1)
.\"O to find the inode number for a file or directory).
.TP
.BI \-e " inodes"
ダンプから
.I inodes
を除外する。
引数
.I inodes
はコンマで区切った inode 番号のリストである
(ファイルやディレクトリの inode 番号を知るには
.BR stat (1)
が使える)。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-E " file"
.\"O Read list of inodes to be excluded from the dump from the text file
.\"O .IR file .
.\"O The file 
.\"O .I file
.\"O should be an ordinary file containing inode numbers separated by newlines.
.TP
.BI \-E " file"
ダンプから除外する inode のリストを
テキストファイル
.IR file 
から読む。
ファイル
.I file
は、改行で区切られた inode 番号を含む通常のファイルでなければならない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-f " file"
.\"O Write the backup to
.\"O .IR file ;
.\"O .I file
.\"O may be a special device file like
.\"O .I /dev/st0
.\"O (a tape drive),
.\"O .I /dev/rsd1c
.\"O (a floppy disk drive), an ordinary file, or
.\"O .I \-
.\"O (the standard output). Multiple file names may be given as a single argument
.\"O separated by commas. Each file will be used for one dump volume in the order
.\"O listed; if the dump requires more volumes than the number of names given,
.\"O the last file name will used for all remaining volumes after prompting for
.\"O media changes. If the name of the file is of the form
.\"O .I host:file
.\"O or
.\"O .I user@host:file
.\"O .B dump
.\"O- writes to the named file on the remote host using
.\"O+ writes to the named file on the remote host (which should already 
.\"O+ exist, dump doesn't create a new remote file) using
.\"O .BR rmt (8).
.\"O The default path name of the remote
.\"O .BR rmt (8)
.\"O program is
.\"O .IR /etc/rmt ;
.\"O this can be overridden by the environment variable
.\"O .BR RMT .
.TP
.BI \-f " file"
バックアップを
.IR file
に書きこむ。
.I file
としては
.I /dev/st0
(テープドライブ) や
.I /dev/rsd1c
(フロッピーディスクドライブ) のようなデバイスファイル、
通常のファイル、
.I \-
(標準出力)
が指定可能である。
カンマで区切ることで、複数のファイル名を一つの引き数に指定することが
できる。それぞれのファイルは、リストに指定された順番で、一つのダンプ
ボリュームとして使われる。指定したファイル名の数よりも多くのボリュームが
必要な場合、最後のファイル名が残りすべてのボリュームで使用される
(ボリューム感ではメディア変更のプロンプトが出される)。
ファイル名が
.I host:file
か
.I user@host:file
の形式の場合、
.B dump
は
.BR rmt (8)
を使って
リモートホスト上のファイルに書き込みを行う。
リモートの
.BR rmt (8)
プラグラムのデフォルトのパス名は
.IR /etc/rmt 
である。このパスは環境変数
.BR RMT 
により上書きできる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-F " script"
.\"O Run script at the end of each tape (except for the last one). 
.\"O The device name and the current volume number are passed on the
.\"O command line. The script must return 0 if 
.\"O .B dump
.\"O should continue without asking the user to change the tape, 1 if 
.\"O .B dump
.\"O should continue but ask the user to change the tape. Any other exit code will 
.\"O cause
.\"O .B dump
.\"O to abort. For security reasons,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O reverts back to the real user ID and the real group ID before running the
.\"O script.
.TP
.BI \-F " script"
各テープの終りでスクリプト script を走らせる (最後の1巻は除外)。
デバイス名と現在のボリューム番号がコマンドラインに渡される。
.B dump
がテープ交換の要求を行わずに処理を続けるには、スクリプトは 0 を
返さなければならない。
1 を返すと、
.B dump
はテープ交換を要求する。
他の終了コードの場合、
.B dump
は中止 (abort) する。
セキュリティ上の理由により、
スクリプトを走らせる前に
.B dump
は実ユーザー ID, 実グループ ID に戻る。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-h " level"
.\"O Honor the user
.\"O .B nodump
.\"O flag
.\"O .B UF_NODUMP
.\"O only for dumps at or above the given
.\"O .IR level .
.\"O The default honor level is 1, so that incremental backups omit such files but
.\"O full backups retain them.
.TP
.BI \-h " level"
指定した
.I level
以上のダンプでのみ
ユーザの
.B nodump
フラグ
.B UF_NODUMP
に従う。
デフォルトの honor level は 1 であり、したがって
増分バックアップではそのようなファイルは無視されるが、
フルバックアップでは保存される。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-I " nr errors"
.\"O By default,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O will ignore the first 32 read errors on the file system before asking for 
.\"O operator intervention. You can change this using this flag to any value. This 
.\"O is useful when running
.\"O .B dump
.\"O on an active filesystem where read errors simply indicate an inconsistency 
.\"O between the mapping and dumping passes.
.\"O .IP
.\"O A value of 0 means that all read errors will be ignored.
.TP
.BI \-I " nr errors"
デフォルトでは、
.B dump
はファイルシステムのリードエラーは最初の 32 件は無視されるが、
その後はユーザに対処を要求する。
このフラグを使うと、この件数を任意の値に変えることができる。
稼働状態にあるファイルシステムで
.B dump
を走らせる際に、リードエラーとしてマッピングとダンプ処理の間の矛盾を
示すエラーだけが発生するような場合に、このオプションは便利である。
.IP
値が 0 の場合、リードエラーがすべて無視される。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-j "compression level"
.\"O Compress every block to be written on the tape using bzlib library. This option
.\"O will work only when dumping to a file or pipe or, when dumping to a tape drive,
.\"O if the tape drive is capable of writing variable length blocks. You will need
.\"O at least the 0.4b24 version of 
.\"O .B restore
.\"O in order to extract compressed tapes. Tapes written using compression will not
.\"O be compatible with the BSD tape format. The (optional) parameter specifies the 
.\"O compression level bzlib will use. The default compression level is 2. If the
.\"O optional parameter is specified, there should be no white space between the 
.\"O option letter and the parameter.
.TP
.BI \-j "compression level"
bzlib ライブラリを用いて、テープに書き込まれる各ブロックを圧縮する。
このオプションが動作するのは、ダンプの書き込み対象が、ファイル、パイプ、
もしくは可変長ブロックの書き込みができるテープドライブの場合だけである。
圧縮されたテープを展開するには、
バージョン 0.4b24 以降の
.B restore
が必要である。
圧縮を用いて書き込まれたテープは BSD テープフォーマットとは互換性がない。
(省略可能な) パラメータは bzlib が使用する圧縮レベルを指定する。
デフォルトの圧縮レベルは 2 である。オプションのパラメータを指定する場合は、
オプション文字とパラメータの間に空白を入れてはならない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-k
.\"O Use Kerberos authentication to talk to remote tape servers. (Only available if
.\"O this option was enabled when
.\"O .B dump
.\"O was compiled.)
.TP
.BI \-k
リモートのテープサーバとの通信に Kerberos 認証を使う
.RB ( dump
のコンパイル時にこのオプションが有効になっている場合のみ利用可能)。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-L " label"
.\"O The user-supplied text string
.\"O .I label
.\"O is placed into the dump header, where tools like
.\"O .BR restore (8)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR file (8)
.\"O can access it. Note that this label is limited to be at most 
.\"O .B LBLSIZE
.\"O (currently 16) characters, which must include the terminating \e0.
.TP
.BI \-L " label"
ユーザー指定のテキスト文字列
.I label
をダンプのヘッダーに入れる。
ダンプのヘッダーは、
.BR restore (8)
や
.BR file (8)
のようなツールからアクセスできる。
このラベルの長さは、終端の \e0 も含めて最大で
.B LBLSIZE
(一般に 16) 文字である点に注意すること。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-m
.\"O If this flag is specified,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O will optimise the output for inodes having been changed but not modified since 
.\"O the last dump ('changed' and 'modified' have the meaning defined in
.\"O .BR stat (2)
.\"O ). For those inodes,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O will save only the metadata, instead of saving the entire inode contents. 
.\"O Inodes which are either directories or have been modified since the last dump 
.\"O are saved in a regular way. Uses of this flag must be consistent, meaning that
.\"O either every dump in an incremental dump set have the flag, or no one has it.
.\"O .IP
.\"O Tapes written using such 'metadata only' inodes will not be compatible with the
.\"O BSD tape format or older versions of
.\"O .B restore.
.TP
.BI \-m
このフラグが指定されると、
.B dump
は最後のダンプ以降に change されたが modify されていない inode の
出力を最適化する
('changed' と modified' の意味は
.BR stat (2)
で定義されているものである)。
それらの inode の場合、
.B dump
は inode の内容全体を保存する代わりに、メタデータのみを保存する。
ディレクトリの inode や最後のダンプ以降に modify された inode は
通常の方法で保存される。
このフラグを使用するかどうかは首尾一貫していなくてはならない。
つまり、増分ダンプを含むすべてのダンプにこのフラグを使うか、
全く使わないかである。
.IP
このような「メタデータだけ」の inode を使って書き込まれたテープは
BSD テープフォーマットや
古いバージョンの
.B restore
とは互換性がない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-M
.\"O Enable the multi-volume feature. The name specified with 
.\"O .B f 
.\"O is treated as a prefix and 
.\"O .B dump
.\"O writes in sequence to
.\"O .I <prefix>001, <prefix>002 
.\"O etc. This can be useful when dumping to files on an ext2 partition, in order to
.\"O bypass the 2GB file size limitation.
.TP
.BI \-M
マルチボリューム機能を有効にする。
.B f 
オプションで指定された名前を接頭辞 (prefix) としてみなされ、
.B dump
は
.I <prefix>001, <prefix>002 
といったファイルに順番に書き出して行く。
これは、
ext2 パーティション上のファイルにダンプする際に、
2GBのファイルサイズ制限を回避するのに便利である。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-n
.\"O Whenever
.\"O .B dump
.\"O requires operator attention, notify all operators in the group
.\"O .B operator
.\"O by means similar to a
.\"O .BR wall (1).
.TP
.BI \-n
オペレータによる対処が必要なときに、グループ
.B operator
に属するオペレータ全員に
.BR wall (1)
と同様の方法で通知を行う。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-q
.\"O Make
.\"O .B dump
.\"O abort immediately whenever operator attention is required, without prompting in
.\"O case of write errors, tape changes etc.
.TP
.BI \-q
オペレータによる対処が必要な場合には常に
.B dump
が直ちに終了するように指示する。
ただし、テープ書き込みエラーやテープ交換などでプロンプトを表示する場合は除く。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-Q " file"
.\"O Enable the Quick File Access support. Tape positions for each inode are stored 
.\"O into the file
.\"O .I file
.\"O which is used by 
.\"O .B restore
.\"O (if called with parameter 
.\"O .B \-Q
.\"O and the filename) to directly position the tape at the file 
.\"O .B restore 
.\"O is currently working on. This saves hours when restoring single files from
.\"O large backups, saves the tapes and the drive's head.
.TP
.BI \-Q " file"
Quick File Access を有効にする。
各 inode のテープ位置をファイル
.I file
に記録する。
このファイルは、
.RB ( restore
が
.B \-Q
フラグとファイル名のパラメータ付きで呼ばれた場合に)
.B restore 
が処理しようとしているファイルの位置にテープを
直接移動するために使用される。
この機能を使うと、巨大なバックアップから個別のファイルをリストアする際に
時間が節約できるとともに、テープやドライブのヘッドの消耗も防ぐことができる。
.\"O .IP
.\"O It is recommended to set up the st driver to return logical tape positions 
.\"O rather than physical before calling 
.\"O .B dump/restore 
.\"O with parameter 
.\"O .BR \-Q .
.\"O Since not all tape devices support physical tape positions those tape devices 
.\"O return an error during 
.\"O .B dump/restore
.\"O when the st driver is set to the default physical setting.  Please see the 
.\"O .BR st (4)
.\"O man page, option 
.\"O .B MTSETDRVBUFFER
.\"O , or the 
.\"O .BR mt (1)
.\"O man page, on how to set the driver to return logical tape positions.
.IP
.B dump/restore 
を
.BR \-Q 
パラメータをつけて呼ぶ前に、
物理的なテープ位置ではなく論理的な位置を返すように
st トライバを設定することを推奨する。
すべてのテープデバイスが物理的なテープ位置をサポートしているわけではないので、
stドライバがデフォルトの物理的テープ位置を使う設定になっている場合には、
それらのテープデバイスが
.B dump/restore
中にエラーを返す場合がある。
ドライバを論理テープ位置を返すように設定する方法については、
.BR st (4)
のマニュアル、オプション
.BR MTSETDRVBUFFER 、
.BR mt (1)
のマニュアルを参照のこと。
.\"O .IP
.\"O Before calling
.\"O .B restore
.\"O with parameter
.\"O .BR \-Q ,
.\"O always make sure the st driver is set to return the same type of tape position
.\"O used during the call to 
.\"O .BR dump .
.\"O Otherwise 
.\"O .B restore
.\"O may be confused.
.\"O .IP
.\"O This option can be used when dumping to local tapes (see above) or to local 
.\"O files.
.IP
.B restore
を
.BR \-Q 
パラメータ付きで呼ぶ前には、必ず
.BR dump 
を呼んだときに使用したテープ位置の種別と同じものを返すように
st ドライバを設定しておくこと。
さもないと、
.B restore
は混乱してしまう。
.IP
このオプションが利用可能なのは、
ローカルのテープ (上述) もしくはローカルのファイルに
ダンプする場合である。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-s " feet"
.\"O Attempt to calculate the amount of tape needed at a particular density. If this
.\"O amount is exceeded,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O prompts for a new tape. It is recommended to be a bit conservative on this 
.\"O option. The default tape length is 2300 feet. Specifying the tape size 
.\"O overrides end-of-media detection.
.TP
.BI \-s " feet"
特定の密度において必要なテープの量を計算する。
この量を越えたときには、
.B dump
は新しいテープを要求するプロンプトを出す。
このオプションは少し控え目に設定する方がよい。
デフォルトのテープ長は 2300 フィートである。
テープサイズの指定はメディア終端検出より優先される。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-S
.\"O Size estimate. Determine the amount of space that is needed to perform the dump
.\"O without actually doing it, and display the estimated number of bytes it will
.\"O take. This is useful with incremental dumps to determine how many volumes of
.\"O media will be needed.
.TP
.BI \-S
サイズ推定。
実際にダンプを実行せずに、ダンプの実行に必要なスペースの量を決定し、
推定した必要バイト数を表示する。
これは、増分ダンプで便利で、
メディアが何ボリューム必要になるかがわかる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-T " date"
.\"O Use the specified date as the starting time for the dump instead of the time 
.\"O determined from looking in
.\"O .I /etc/dumpdates .
.\"O The format of
.\"O .I date
.\"O is the same as that of
.\"O .BR ctime (3)
.\"O followed by an rfc822 timezone specification: either a plus or minus sign
.\"O followed by two digits for the number of hours and two digits for the minutes.
.\"O For example, -0800 for eight hours west of Greenwich or +0230 for two hours
.\"O and a half east of Greenwich. This timezone offset takes into account
.\"O daylight savings time (if applicable to the timezone): UTC offsets
.\"O when daylight savings time is in effect will be different than offsets
.\"O when daylight savings time is not in effect. For backward
.\"O compatibility, if no timezone is specified, a local time is assumed.
.\"O This option is useful for automated dump scripts that wish to dump over a 
.\"O specific period of time. The
.\"O .B \-T
.\"O option is mutually exclusive from the
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O option.
.TP
.BI \-T " date"
.I /etc/dumpdates
から得られる時間のかわりに、指定日時をダンプ起点時間として使う。
.I date
の書式は
.BR ctime (3)
と同じで、
rfc822 タイムゾーン指定が続く。
タイムゾーン指定は、+/- 符号に 2桁の時間 (hour) と 2桁の分 (minute) が
続く形式で、
例えば、-800 はグリニッジより 8時間西で、+0230 は 2時間半東を表す。
(夏時間があるタイムゾーンの場合には) このタイムゾーンオフセットは
夏時間の分も考慮に入れて指定する:
夏時間が有効なときの UTC オフセットは
夏時間でないときのオフセットとは異なる。
過去との互換性のため、
タイムゾーンが指定されない場合は、ローカル時間であると仮定される。
このオプションは、期間を指定して自動的でダンプを行うスクリプトで便利である。
.B \-T
オプションと
.B \-u
オプションは同時に使用できない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-u
.\"O Update the file
.\"O .I /etc/dumpdates
.\"O after a successful dump. The format of
.\"O .I /etc/dumpdates
.\"O is readable by people, consisting of one free format record per line:
.\"O filesystem name, increment level and
.\"O .BR ctime (3)
.\"O format dump date followed by a rfc822 timezone specification (see the
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O option for details). If no timezone offset is specified, times are interpreted 
.\"O as local. Whenever the file is written, all dates in the file are converted 
.\"O to the local time zone, without changing the UTC times. There
.\"O may be only one entry per filesystem at each level. The file
.\"O .I /etc/dumpdates
.\"O may be edited to change any of the fields, if necessary.
.TP
.BI \-u
ダンプが成功した後に
.I /etc/dumpdates
ファイルを更新する。
.I /etc/dumpdates
のフォーマットは人間が読める形式で、フリーフォーマットで以下の行から成る:
ファイルシステム名、増分レベル、
.BR ctime (3)
フォーマットのダンプ日時、rfc822のタイムゾーン識別子
.\"訳注: タイムゾーンの説明は -T オプションに記載されているので
.\"      日本語訳では -T とする (原文は -u となっている)
(詳細は
.B \-T
オプションの項を参照)。
タイムゾーンオフセットが指定されないと、ローカル時間と解釈される。
このファイルに書き込みを行う度に、
ファイル内のすべての日時はローカルのタイムゾーンに変換される。
但し、UTC 時間は変更されない。各ダンプレベルについてファイルシステム毎に
一つのエントリだけが作られる。
必要であれば、
もし必要ならば、
.I /etc/dumpdates
ファイルを編集して、任意のフィールドを変更することもできる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-v
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-v
.\"O (verbose) makes
.\"O .B dump
.\"O to print extra information which could be helpful in debug sessions.
.TP
.BI \-v
.B \-v
(verbose) オプションは
.B dump
にデバッグに有益な追加の情報を表示させる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-W
.\"O .B Dump
.\"O tells the operator what file systems need to be dumped. This information is
.\"O gleaned from the files
.\"O .I /etc/dumpdates
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /etc/fstab .
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-W
.\"O option causes
.\"O .B dump
.\"O to print out, for all file systems in
.\"O .I /etc/dumpdates ,
.\"O and regognized file systems in
.\"O .I /etc/mtab
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /etc/fstab .
.\"O the most recent dump date and level, and highlights those that should be 
.\"O dumped. If the
.\"O .B \-W
.\"O option is set, all other options are ignored, and
.\"O .B dump
.\"O exits immediately.
.TP
.BI \-W
.B dump
はどのファイルシステムがダンプする必要があるかをオペレータに通知する。
この情報は
.I /etc/dumpdates
と
.I /etc/fstab
ファイルから収集される。
.B \-W
オプションでは、
.I /etc/dumpdates
内のすべてのファイルシステムと、
.I /etc/mtab
と
.IR /etc/fstab
のうちダンプ対象と認識されたファイルシステムについて、
最後のダンプ日時・レベルと、強調表示でダンプすべきかどうかが
表示される。
.B \-W
が設定されると、すべてのオプションが無視され、
.B dump
はすぐに終了する。
.\"O .TP 
.\"O .BI \-w
.\"O Is like
.\"O .BR \-W ,
.\"O but prints only recognized filesystems in
.\"O .I /etc/mtab
.\"O and
.\"O .I /etc/fstab
.\"O which need to be dumped.
.TP 
.BI \-w
は
.BR \-W
に似ているが、
.I /etc/mtab
と
.I /etc/fstab
のうちダンプが必要とされたファイルシステムのみを出力する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-y
.\"O Compress every block to be written to the tape using the lzo library.
.\"O This doesn't compress as well as the zlib library but it's much faster.
.\"O This option will work only when dumping to a file or pipe or, when dumping to
.\"O a tape drive, if the tape drive is capable of writing variable length blocks.
.\"O You will need at least the 0.4b34 version of
.\"O .B restore
.\"O in order to extract compressed tapes. Tapes written using compression will not
.\"O be compatible with the BSD tape format.
.TP
.BI \-y
lzo ライブラリを用いて、テープに書き込まれる各ブロックを圧縮する。
これは zlib と比べて圧縮率はよくないが高速である。
このオプションが動作するのは、ダンプの書き込み対象が、ファイル、パイプ、
もしくは可変長ブロックの書き込みができるテープドライブの場合だけである。
圧縮されたテープを展開するには、
バージョン 0.4b34 以降の
.B restore
が必要である。
圧縮を用いて書き込まれたテープは BSD テープフォーマットとは互換性がない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .BI \-z "compression level"
.\"O Compress every block to be written on the tape using zlib library. This option
.\"O will work only when dumping to a file or pipe or, when dumping to a tape drive,
.\"O if the tape drive is capable of writing variable length blocks. You will need 
.\"O at least the 0.4b22 version of
.\"O .B restore
.\"O in order to extract compressed tapes. Tapes written using compression will not
.\"O be compatible with the BSD tape format. The (optional) parameter specifies the
.\"O compression level zlib will use. The default compression level is 2. If the
.\"O optional parameter is specified, there should be no white space between the 
.\"O option letter and the parameter.
.TP
.BI \-z "compression level"
zlib ライブラリを用いて、テープに書き込まれる各ブロックを圧縮する。
このオプションが動作するのは、ダンプの書き込み対象が、ファイル、パイプ、
もしくは可変長ブロックの書き込みができるテープドライブの場合だけである。
圧縮されたテープを展開するには、
バージョン 0.4b22 以降の
.B restore
が必要である。
圧縮を用いて書き込まれたテープは BSD テープフォーマットとは互換性がない。
(省略可能な) パラメータは zlib が使用する圧縮レベルを指定する。
デフォルトの圧縮レベルは 2 である。オプションのパラメータを指定する場合は、
オプション文字とパラメータの間に空白を入れてはならない。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B Dump
.\"O requires operator intervention on these conditions: end of tape, end of dump,
.\"O tape write error, tape open error or disk read error (if there is more than a 
.\"O threshold of nr errors). In addition to alerting all operators implied by the
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O key,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O interacts with the operator on dump's control terminal at times when
.\"O .B dump
.\"O can no longer proceed, or if something is grossly wrong. All questions
.\"O .B dump
.\"O poses
.\"O .I must
.\"O be answered by typing \*(lqyes\*(rq or \*(lqno\*(rq, appropriately.
.PP
.B dump
は以下の場合にオペレータの介在が必要となる:
テープの末尾、ダンプの終了、テープの書き込みエラー、テープのオープンエラー
ディスクの読み出しエラー (nr error の閾値を超えた場合)。
.B \-n
フラグで通知が行われるオペレータ全員への警告に加えて、
.B dump
がこれ以上続行できなくなった場合や何かひどく悪い状況の場合には、
.B dump
は制御端末経由でオペレータとやりとりする。
.B dump
が提示するすべての質問に
\*(lqyes\*(rq か \*(lqno\*(rq で適切に答えなければならない。
.\"O .PP
.\"O Since making a dump involves a lot of time and effort for full dumps,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O checkpoints itself at the start of each tape volume. If writing that volume
.\"O fails for some reason,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O will, with operator permission, restart itself from the checkpoint after the
.\"O old tape has been rewound and removed, and a new tape has been mounted.
.PP
フルダンプの場合、ダンプを作成するのは多大な時間と労力を必要とするので、
各テープボリュームの開始に
.B dump
はチェックポイントを置く。
もし何らかの理由でボリュームの書き込みに失敗したら、
オペレータの許可のもとで、
.B dump
は古いテープを巻戻して除去し、新しいテープをマウントしてから、
チェックポイントから再スタートする。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B Dump
.\"O tells the operator what is going on at periodic intervals, including usually 
.\"O low estimates of the number of blocks to write, the number of tapes it will
.\"O take, the time to completion, and the time to the tape change. The output is
.\"O verbose, so that others know that the terminal controlling
.\"O .B dump
.\"O is busy, and will be for some time.
.PP
.B dump
はオペレータに
進行状況を
周期的に知らせる。
通常、書き込みブロック数、必要なテープ数、完了までの時間、テープ交換までの時間の
低めの見積りが表示される。出力は冗長であるので、
.B dump
に使っている端末がビジーで、しばらくかかることが他の人にもわかる。
.\"O .PP
.\"O In the event of a catastrophic disk event, the time required to restore all the
.\"O necessary backup tapes or files to disk can be kept to a minimum by staggering 
.\"O the incremental dumps. An efficient method of staggering incremental dumps to
.\"O minimize the number of tapes follows:
.PP
増分ダンプを交互配置することによって、
ディスクが壊れた際に、必要なすべてのバックアップテープやバックアップファイル
をディスクに復旧するのに要する時間を最小にできる。
テープ数を最小にする増分ダンプの交互配置の効率的な方法を以下に示す:
.\"O .IP \(em
.\"O Always start with a level 0 backup, for example:
.\"O .RS 14
.\"O .B /sbin/dump -0u -f /dev/st0 /usr/src
.\"O .RE
.\"O .IP
.\"O This should be done at set intervals, say once a month or once every two months,
.\"O and on a set of fresh tapes that is saved forever.
.IP \(em
常にレベル 0 のバックアップから開始する、例えば、
.RS 14
.B /sbin/dump -0u -f /dev/st0 /usr/src
.RE
.IP
これは間隔を開けて行うべきで、一般には 1ヵ月か 2ヵ月に 1度と言われている。
バックアップは新品のテープに行い、ずっと保管する。
.\"O .IP \(em
.\"O After a level 0, dumps of active file systems are taken on a daily basis, using
.\"O a modified Tower of Hanoi algorithm, with this sequence of dump levels:
.\"O .RS 14
.\"O .B 3 2 5 4 7 6 9 8 9 9 ...
.\"O .RE
.\"O .IP
.\"O For the daily dumps, it should be possible to use a fixed number of tapes for
.\"O each day, used on a weekly basis. Each week, a level 1 dump is taken, and the
.\"O daily Hanoi sequence repeats beginning with 3. For weekly dumps, another fixed 
.\"O set of tapes per dumped file system is used, also on a cyclical basis.
.IP \(em
レベル 0 のバックアップの後は、稼働ファイルシステムのダンプを毎日行う。
修正版のハノイの塔アルゴリズムを使い、ダンプレベルを以下のシーケンス
にしたがって設定する:
.RS 14
.B 3 2 5 4 7 6 9 8 9 9 ...
.RE
.IP
毎日のダンプには、一週間の各曜日単位に一定数のテープ一式を用意しておけばよい。
毎週、レベル 1 のダンプを取り、3 から始まる毎日のハノイ・シーケンスを
繰り返す。各週のダンプでは、毎日のバックアップとは別のテープ一式を
ファイルシステム単位に用意して、循環させて使用する。
.\"O .PP
.\"O After several months or so, the daily and weekly tapes should get rotated out
.\"O of the dump cycle and fresh tapes brought in.
.PP
数ヵ月かそれくらい経過したら、各曜日と各週のテープは
ダンプサイクルから外し、新品のテープに入れ替える。
.\"O .PP
.\"O (The 4.3BSD option syntax is implemented for backward compatibility but is not
.\"O documented here.)
.PP
(過去との互換性のために 4.3BSD 形式のオプションが実装されているが、
ここには書かれていない)
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O .TP 
.\"O .B TAPE
.\"O If no 
.\"O .B \-f 
.\"O option was specified,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O will use the device specified via
.\"O .B TAPE
.\"O as the dump device.
.\"O .B TAPE
.\"O may be of the form
.\"O .IR tapename ,
.\"O .IR host:tapename ,
.\"O or
.\"O .IR user@host:tapename .
.TP 
.B TAPE
.B \-f 
オプションを指定しない場合、
.B dump
は
.B TAPE
にて指定したデバイスを
ダンプデバイスとして使う。
.B TAPE
は
.IR tapename ,
.IR host:tapename ,
.I user@host:tapename
のいずれかの形式で指定する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B RMT
.\"O The environment variable
.\"O .B RMT
.\"O will be used to determine the pathname of the remote
.\"O .BR rmt (8)
.\"O program.
.TP
.B RMT
環境変数
.B RMT
は
リモートの
.BR rmt (8)
プログラムのパス名を指定するのに使われる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B RSH
.\"O .B Dump
.\"O uses the contents of this variable to determine the name of the remote shell
.\"O command to use when doing remote backups (rsh, ssh etc.). If this variable is
.\"O not set, 
.\"O .BR rcmd (3)
.\"O will be used, but only root will be able to do remote backups.
.TP
.B RSH
.B dump
はこの変数の内容を使って、
リモートバックアップを行うときに使う
リモートシェルコマンドの名前 (rsh, ssh など) を決定する。
この変数が設定されていない場合、
.BR rcmd (3)
を使うが、root だけがリモートバックアップを実行できる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I /dev/st0
.\"O default tape unit to dump to
.TP
.I /dev/st0
ダンプするデフォルトのテープユニット
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I /etc/dumpdates
.\"O dump date records
.TP
.I /etc/dumpdates
ダンプ日時の記録
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I /etc/fstab
.\"O dump table: file systems and frequency
.TP
.I /etc/fstab
ダンプ表: ファイルシステムと頻度
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I /etc/mtab
.\"O dump table: mounted file systems
.TP
.I /etc/mtab
ダンプ表: マウントされているファイルシステム
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I /etc/group
.\"O to find group
.\"O .I operator
.TP
.I /etc/group
グループ
.I operator
を探すのに使われる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.\"O .BR fstab (5),
.\"O .BR restore (8),
.\"O .BR rmt (8)
.SH 関連項目
.BR fstab (5),
.BR restore (8),
.BR rmt (8)
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.\"O Many, and verbose.
.SH 所見(DIAGNOSTICS)
多数、冗長。
.\"O .SH COMPATIBILITY
.\"O The format of the
.\"O .I /etc/dumpdates
.\"O file has changed in release 0.4b34, however, the file will be read
.\"O correctly with either pre-0.4b34 or 0.4b34 and later versions of
.\"O .B dump
.\"O provided that the machine on which
.\"O .B dump
.\"O is run did not change timezones (which should be a fairly rare occurence).
.SH 移植性
.I /etc/dumpdates
ファイルのフォーマットは
リリース 0.4b34 で変更されたが、
タイムゾーンを変更しないマシン (それはかなり稀だが)では
.B dump
の 0.4b34 より前もしくは 0.4b34 以後のどちらのバージョンでも
正しく読めるはずである。
.\"O .SH EXIT STATUS
.\"O .B Dump
.\"O exits with zero status on success. Startup errors are indicated with an exit
.\"O code of 1; abnormal termination is indicated with an exit code of 3.
.SH 返り値
.B dump
は成功すると 0 で終了する。
開始時のエラーの場合は終了コード 1 が返され、
異常な終了があった場合は終了コード 3 が返される。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O It might be considered a bug that this version of dump can only handle ext2/3
.\"O filesystems.  Specifically, it does not work with FAT filesystems.
このバージョンの dump が ext2/3 ファイルシテスムしか取り扱えないのは、
バグとみなされるかもしれない。特に、FAT ファイルシステムでは動作しない。
.\"O .PP
.\"O Fewer than 32 read errors (change this with 
.\"O .BR \-I )
.\"O on the filesystem are ignored. If noticing read errors is important, the output
.\"O from dump can be parsed to look for lines that contain the text 'read error'.
.PP
ファイルシステムの
32回未満のリードエラー
.RB ( \-I
で変更できる) は無視される。
リードエラーの通知が重要なら、ダンプの出力を解析して、
'read error' という文字列を含む行を探せばよい。
.\"O .PP
.\"O When a read error occurs,
.\"O .B dump
.\"O prints out the corresponding physical disk block and sector number and the
.\"O ext2/3 logical block number. It doesn't print out the corresponing file name or
.\"O even the inode number. The user has to use 
.\"O .BR debugfs (8),
.\"O commands
.\"O .B ncheck
.\"O and
.\"O .B icheck
.\"O to translate the
.\"O .B ext2blk
.\"O number printed out by 
.\"O .B dump
.\"O into an inode number, then into a file name.
.PP
リードエラーが起きたとき、
.B dump
は対応する物理ディスクブロック、セクタ番号、ext2/3 論理ブロック番号を表示する。
対応するファイル名や、そして inode番号さえも表示されない。
.B dump
が表示した
.B ext2blk
番号を inode 番号に、さらにファイル名に変換するには、
ユーザーは
.BR debugfs (8)
を使用し、
コマンド
.B ncheck
や
.B icheck
を実行する必要がある。
.\"O .PP
.\"O Each reel requires a new process, so parent processes for reels already written
.\"O just hang around until the entire tape is written.
.PP
各リール (ボリューム) ごとに新しいプロセスが必要であるため、
テープ全体の書き込みが終わるまでは、
すでに書き込まれたリールの親プロセスはただ単に停止する。
.\"O .PP
.\"O The estimated number of tapes is not correct if compression is on.
.PP
圧縮が有効の場合、推定されるテープの数が正しくない。
.\"O .PP
.\"O It would be nice if
.\"O .B dump
.\"O knew about the dump sequence, kept track of the tapes scribbled on, told the
.\"O operator which tape to mount when, and provided more assistance for the 
.\"O operator running
.\"O .BR restore .
.PP
できればいいのにと思うことは、
.B dump
がダンプシーケンスについて知っていて、
書き出されたテープを追跡し、
オペレータにいつどのテープをマウントするか知らせて、
.BR restore 
を実行するオペレータにもっと手助けをできればよいのに
ということである。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B Dump
.\"O cannot do remote backups without being run as root, due to its security history.
.\"O Presently, it works if you set it setuid (like it used to be), but this might
.\"O constitute a security risk. Note that you can set 
.\"O .B RSH
.\"O to use a remote shell program instead.
.PP
過去のセキュリティの経緯のため、
.B dump
は
root として実行された場合を除いてリモートバックアップはできない。
現在は、(以前そうであったように) setuid ビットをセットすることで
root 以外でも動作するようになるが、セキュリティ上のリスクが発生する
可能性がある。代わりに、
.B RSH
を設定してリモートのシェルプログラムを使うことができる点も
覚えておいてほしい。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O The 
.\"O .B dump/restore
.\"O backup suite was ported to Linux's Second Extended File System by Remy Card 
.\"O <card@Linux.EU.Org>. He maintained the initial versions of 
.\"O .B dump
.\"O (up and including 0.4b4, released in january 1997).
.\"O .PP
.\"O Starting with 0.4b5, the new maintainer is Stelian Pop <stelian@popies.net>.
.SH 著者
.B dump/restore
バックアップソフトは
Remy Card <card@Linux.EU.Org>
によりって Linux の ext2 ファイルシステムに移植された。
彼は
.B dump
の初期バージョンを開発した。
(1997年1月にリリースされた 0.4b4 まで)
.PP
0.4b5 からは、Stelian Pop <stelian@popies.net> が
新しく開発者となった。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.\"O The
.\"O .B dump/restore
.\"O backup suite is available from <http://dump.sourceforge.net>
.SH 入手
.B dump/restore
バックアップソフトは <http://dump.sourceforge.net> から入手できる。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.\"O A
.\"O .B dump
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .B Version 6 AT&T UNIX.
.SH 歴史
.B dump
コマンドは
.B Version 6 AT&T UNIX
で登場した。
