.\" $Id$
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Sergei Viznyuk <sv@phystech.com>
.\"
.\" You can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the
.\" GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
.\" Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111, USA. 
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 Tatsuo SEKINE
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Translated on Thu 09 Dec 1999 17:39:45 JST 1999
.\"	by Tatsuo SEKINE <tsekine@isoternet.org>
.\" Updated & Modified on Sun Sep  9 15:29:08 JST 2001
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified on Sat Feb 14 11:21:59 JST 2004
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: lease time   貸し出し期間
.\"
.TH dhcpcd 8 "31 January 1998" "dhcpcd 1.3" "Linux System Manager's Manual"
.\"O 
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O dhcpcd \- DHCP client daemon
dhcpcd \- DHCP クライアントデーモン
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.in +.5i
.ti -.5i
dhcpcd
\%[\-dknrBCDHNRSTY]
\%[\-t\ <timeout>]
\%[\-c\ <ExecFilePath>]
\%[-h\ <hostname>]
\%[-i\ <vendorClassID>]
\%[-I\ <clientID>]
\%[\-l\ <leasetime>]
\%[\-s\ [ipaddr]]
\%[\-G\ [gateway]]
\%[\-w\ <windowsize>]
\%[\-L\ <ConfigDir>]
\%[interface]
.in -.5i
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O is an implementation of the DHCP client specified in
.\"O .B RFC2131
.\"O (when -r option is not specified) and
.\"O .B RFC1541
.\"O (when -r option is specified).
.B dhcpcd
は
.B RFC2131
(-r オプションが指定されなかった場合) と
.B RFC1541
(-r オプションが指定された場合) に基づく DHCP クライアントの実装である。

.\"O It gets the host information (IP address, netmask, broadcast address,
.\"O etc.) from a DHCP server and configures the network interface of the
.\"O machine on which it is running. It also tries to renew the lease time
.\"O according to
.\"O .B RFC2131
.\"O or
.\"O .B RFC1541
.\"O (obsolete).
DHCP サーバからホストの情報 (IP アドレス、ネットマスク、
ブロードキャストアドレスなど) を取得し、
そのマシンのネットワークインタフェースを設定する。
また、
.B RFC2131
または
.B RFC1541
(obsolete;すでに廃止された) に基づく貸し出し期間 (lease time) を
更新しようと試みる。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-d
.\"O With this flag
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will
.\"O syslog(LOG_DEBUG,...) messages for about every step it does.
このフラグにより
.B dhcpcd
は、各実行ステップごとに syslog(LOG_DEBUG,...) でログを出力する。
.\"O It's recommended to use this option since it doesn't really
.\"O produce too much output but will greatly help in resolving
.\"O a problems if any.
あまり多くの出力は行わないが、
何か問題が起きた場合には解決の大きな助けとなるので、
このオプションの利用が推奨される。
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O uses
.\"O .I LOCAL0
.\"O syslog facility for its output. To catch
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O debugging output add the following line to
.\"O .I /etc/syslog.conf
.\"O file:
.\"O 
.\"O local0.*     /var/log/dhcpcd.log
.\"O 
.\"O and then refresh syslogd daemon:
.\"O 
.\"O kill -1 `cat /var/run/syslogd.pid`
.B dhcpcd
は、その出力に syslog 機能分類 (facility)
.I LOCAL0
を使う。
.B dhcpcd
のデバッグ出力を捕捉するには、
.I /etc/syslog.conf
ファイルに

local0.*     /var/log/dhcpcd.log

という行を追加し、

kill -1 `cat /var/run/syslogd.pid`

によって syslogd デーモンをリフレッシュすること。

.TP
.BI \-k
.\"O Sends
.\"O .B SIGHUP
.\"O signal to the
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O process that is currently running. If
現在動いている
.B dhcpcd
プロセスへ
.B SIGHUP
シグナルを送る。
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O receives
.\"O .B SIGHUP
.\"O it will send
.\"O .B DCHP_RELEASE
.\"O message to the server and destroy dhcpcd cache. In a case
.B SIGHUP
シグナルを
.B dhcpcd
が受け取ると、
.B DHCP_RELEASE
メッセージをサーバへ送り、dhcpcd のキャッシュを破棄する。
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O receives
.\"O .B SIGTERM
.\"O which is normally used by
.\"O .B shutdown(8)
.\"O when rebooting the system
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will not send
.\"O .B DHCP_RELEASE
.\"O and will not destroy cache. When system boots
.B SIGTERM
シグナルは、普通、システムを再起動する時に
.BR shutdown (8)
が送るが、そのシグナルを
.B dhcpcd
が受け取った場合は、
.B dhcpcd
は
.B DHCP_RELEASE
メッセージを送らず、キャッシュを破棄しない。
そしてシステムが起動する時に
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will use cache to request the same IP address
.\"O from DHCP server which was assigned before the
.\"O system went down.
.B dhcpcd
は、システムが落ちる前に DHCP サーバから割り当てられていたのと
同じ IP アドレスを要求するために、キャッシュを用いる。
.TP
.BI \-n
.\"O Sends
.\"O .B SIGALRM
.\"O signal to the
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O process that is currently running which
.\"O forces
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O to try to renew the lease. 
現在動いている
.B dhcpcd
プロセスに
.B SIGALRM
シグナルを送り、貸し出し期間を更新させる。
.\"O If dhcpcd is not running, the flag
.\"O is ignored and
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O follows the normal startup procedure.
.B dhcpcd
が稼働していない場合は、このフラグは無視され、通常の起動手順で 
.B dhcpcd
が起動される。
.TP
.BI \-r
.\"O Makes dhcpcd RFC1541 (obsolete) compliant.
dhcpcd を RFC1541 (obsolete) 準拠で動かす。
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O is RFC2131 compliant unless this option is specified.
.B dhcpcd
はこのオプションが指定されない限り RFC2131 に準拠する。
.TP
.BI \-B
.\"O Requests broadcast response from DHCP server.
DHCP サーバにブロードキャストでの応答を要求する。
.TP
.BI \-C
.\"O Forces dhcpcd to calculate checksum on received packets.
dhcpcd に受信したパケットのチェックサム (checksum) を計算させる。
.TP
.BI \-D
.\"O Forces
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O to set domainname of the host to the domainname option
.\"O supplied by DHCP server. 
.B dhcpcd
に対して、そのマシンのドメイン名を、
DHCP サーバから提供されるドメイン名オプション
(domainname option) に設定させる。
.TP
.BI \-H
.\"O Forces
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O to set hostname of the host to the hostname option supplied by DHCP server.
.B dhcpcd
に対して、そのマシンのホスト名を、
DHCP サーバから提供されるホスト名オプション
(hostname option) に設定させる。
.\"O By default
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will NOT set hostname of the host to the hostname option
.\"O received from DHCP server.
デフォルトでは
.B dhcpcd
はそのマシンのホスト名を、
DHCP サーバから受け取ったホスト名オプションには設定しない。
.TP
.BI \-L \ <ConfigDir>
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will use
.\"O .I <ConfigDir>
.\"O directory instead of default
.\"O .I /etc/dhcpc
.\"O to store configuration information.
.B dhcpcd
は、設定情報を格納するために、デフォルトの
.I /etc/dhcpc
ではなく
.I <ConfigDir>
ディレクトリを使う。
.TP
.BI \-S
.\"O Forces
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O to send second DHCP_DISCOVER message even
.\"O after receiving DHCP_OFFER on the first one. Some DHCP servers
.\"O expect the client to send second DHCP_DISCOVER message
.\"O before replying on DHCP_REQUEST.
.B dhcpcd
が最初の DHCP_DISCOVER メッセージに対して
DHCP_OFFER メッセージを受信した後であっても、
2 回目の DHCP_DISCOVER メッセージを送信させる。
「クライアントは DHCP_REQUEST を返答する前に
2 回目の DHCP_DISCOVER を送信する」と仮定している DHCP サーバもある。
.TP
.BI \-R
.\"O Prevents
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O from replacing existing
.\"O .I /etc/resolv.conf
.\"O file.
すでに存在するファイル
.I /etc/resolv.conf
を
.B dhcpcd
が置き換えないようにする。
.TP
.BI \-Y
.\"O Prevents
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O from replacing existing
.\"O .I /etc/yp.conf
.\"O file. Domainname is not updated unless \fB-D\fP is specified.
.B dhcpcd
が既存の
.I /etc/yp.conf
ファイルを置き換えないようにする。
\fB-D\fP を指定しない限り、ドメイン名は更新されない。
.TP
.BI \-N
.\"O Prevents
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O from replacing existing
.\"O .I /etc/ntp.conf
.\"O file.
.B dhcpcd
が既存の
.I /etc/ntp.conf
ファイルを置き換えないようにする。
.TP
.BI \-T
.\"O Test case, when
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O goes through the DHCP negotiation sequence but
.\"O doesn't actually configure the interface. 
テスト用。
.B dhcpcd
は DHCP ネゴシエーションシーケンスに入るが、
実際にはインターフェースを設定しない。
.\"O It does however
.\"O write the
.\"O .I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd-<interface>.info
.\"O and
.\"O .I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd-<interface>.cache
.\"O files and it does attempt to execute
.\"O .I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd.exe
.\"O script. 
しかし、ファイル
.I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd-<interface>.info
と
.I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd-<interface>.cache
を書き込み、
.I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd.exe
スクリプトを実行しようとする。
.\"O The pathname of
.\"O .I dhcpcd.exe
.\"O executable script can
.\"O be changed with
.\"O .I \-c \ <ExecFilePath>
.\"O option.
実行可能スクリプト
.I dhcpcd.exe
のパス名は、
.I \-c \ <ExecFilePath>
オプションで変更できる。
.\"O .B \-T
.\"O option is used primarily for testing DHCP servers,
.\"O for obtaining multiple IP addresses for the same dummy interface, and/or
.\"O configuring virtual interfaces in conjunction with
.\"O .I \-L \ <ConfigDir>
.\"O and
.\"O .I \-I \ <ClientID>
.\"O options.
.B \-T
オプションは主に DHCP サーバのテストに使われる。
同じダミーインタフェースのための複数の IP アドレスを取得したり、
.I \-L \ <ConfigDir>
や
.I \-I \ <ClientID>
オプション
.TP
.BI \-t \ <timeout>
.\"O Specifies (in seconds ) for how long
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will try to get an IP address. The default is 60 seconds.
どれくらいの時間
.B dhcpcd
が IP アドレスを取得しようと試みるかを (秒数で) 指定する。
デフォルトは 60 秒。
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will not fork into background until it gets a valid IP address
.\"O in which case dhcpcd will return 0 to the parent process.
.B dhcpcd
は使用可能な IP アドレスを取得し、親プロセスへ 0 を返すまでは
バックグラウンドへと fork しない。
.\"O In a case
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O times out before receiving a valid IP address from DHCP server
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will return exit code 1 to the parent process.
.B dhcpcd
が使用可能な IP アドレスを DHCP サーバから受け取る前にタイムアウトした場合は、
.B dhcpcd
は親プロセスへ終了コード 1 を返す。
.TP
.BI \-c \ <ExecFilePath>
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will try to execute 
.\"O .I <ExecFilePath>
.\"O script instead of default
.\"O .I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd.exe
.\"O script every time it configures or brings down the interface. 
.B dhcpcd
はインタフェースが設定または落される度に、
デフォルトの
.I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd.exe
スクリプトではなく、
.I <ExecFilePath>
スクリプトを実行しようとする。
.\"O See the
.\"O description of
.\"O .I dhcpcd.exe
.\"O script in
.\"O .B FILES
.\"O section below.
下記の「\fBファイル\fR」セクションにおけるスクリプト
.I dhcpcd.exe
についての説明を参照すること。
.TP
.BI \-h \ <hostname>
.\"O specifies a string used for the hostname option field when
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O sends DHCP messages. Some DHCP servers, notably those used by
.\"O @Home Networks, require the hostname option
.\"O field containing a specific string in the DHCP messages from clients.
.B dhcpcd
が送る DHCP メッセージのホスト名オプションに使われる文字列を指定する。
クライアントからの DHCP メッセージの中で、
ホスト名オプションが指定されていることを要求する DHCP サーバもある
(特に家庭内ネットワークで使われる DHCP サーバ)。
.TP
.BI \-i \ <vendorClassID>
.\"O Specifies the vendor class identifier string.
ベンダークラス識別子 (vendor class identifier) を指定する。
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O uses the default vendor class identifier string (system name, system release,
.\"O and machine type) if it is not specified.
何も指定されなかった場合、
.B dhcpcd
はデフォルトのベンダークラス識別子 (システム名、システムリリース、
マシンタイプ) を用いる。
.TP
.BI \-I \ <ClientID>
.\"O Specifies the client identifier string.
クライアント識別子 (client identifier) を指定する。
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O uses the default client identifier (MAC address of the network
.\"O interface) if it is not specified.
何も指定されなかった場合、
.B dhcpcd
はデフォルトのクライアント識別子
(ネットワークインタフェースの MAC アドレス) を用いる。
.TP
.BI \-l \ <leasetime>
.\"O Specifies (in seconds) the recommended lease time to the server. (Note
.\"O that the server can override this value if it sees fit). This value is
.\"O used in the
.\"O .B DHCP_DISCOVER
.\"O message. The default is infinite (0xffffffff).
サーバへ推奨する貸し出し時間を (秒数で) 指定する。
(サーバはこの値を、適切な値へと上書きできることに注意)。
この値は
.B DHCP_DISCOVER
メッセージに使われる。デフォルトは無限大 (0xffffffff)。
.TP
.BI \-s \ [ipaddr]
.\"O Sends DHCP_INFORM message to DHCP server using ipaddr. 
.\"O The optional ipaddr parameter must be in
.\"O the form xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx.
.\"O If no ipaddr parameter is given on the command line
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will use the IP address currently assigned to the interface.
DHCP_INFORM メッセージを ipaddr を使って DHCP サーバへ送る。
省略可能なパラメータ ipaddr は xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx という形式でなければならない。
もし、コマンドラインで ipaddr パラメータが与えられなければ、
.B dhcpcd
は現在インタフェースに割り当てられている IP アドレスを用いる。
.\"O If there is no IP address currently assigned
.\"O to the interface
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will use previously obtained IP address stored in
.\"O .I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd-<interface>.cache
.\"O file. 
もし現在、インタフェースに IP アドレスが割り当てられていなければ、
.B dhcpcd
はファイル
.I <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd-<interface>.cache
に記録されている、以前に獲得した IP アドレスを用いる。
.TP
.BI \-G \ [gateway]
.\"O Prevents
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O from installing default routes provided by DHCP server.
DHCP サーバによって提供されたデフォルトの経路を
.B dhcpcd
にインストールさせないようにする。
.\"O If optional gateway ip address parameter
.\"O is supplied then use it for default route.
オプションでゲートウェイ ip アドレスパラメータが指定された場合、
それをデフォルトの経路として使う。
.TP
.BI \-w \ <windowsize>
.\"O Specifies the window size for the gateway route. Default = 32768.
ゲートウェイ経路のウインドウサイズを指定する。
デフォルトは 32768 である。
.TP
.BI interface
.\"O Specifies the network interface name (eth0, eth1, etc.).
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O uses the network interface
.\"O .I eth0
.\"O unless an explicit name is specified.
ネットワークインタフェースの名前 (eth0, eth1 など) を指定する。
名前が明示されなかった場合、
.B dhcpcd
はネットワークインタフェースとして
.I eth0
を用いる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP
.BI /etc/dhcpc
.\"O Default 
.\"O .I <ConfigDir>
.\"O directory used for storing files
.\"O created by
.\"O .B dhcpcd.
.B dhcpcd
によって作成されたファイルを保存するのに用いられるデフォルトの
.I <ConfigDir>
ディレクトリ。
.\"O See option
.\"O .I \-L <ConfigDir>
.\"O above.
上記の
.I \-L <ConfigDir>
オプションを参照すること。
.PD 1
.TP
.BI <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd-<interface>.info
.\"O file in which
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O saves the host information. The word
.\"O .I <interface>
.\"O is actually replaced with the network interface name like
.\"O .I eth0
.\"O to which dhcpcd is attached.
.B dhcpcd
がホスト情報を記録するファイル。
.I interface
は、実際には
.I eth0
のような、dhcpcd で管理されている
ネットワークインタフェースの名前で置き換えられる。
.TP
.BI <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd.exe
.\"O script file, which
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O will try to execute whenever it configures or brings down the interface. The
.\"O path to this executable script can be changed with
.\"O .I \-c \ <ExecFilePath>
.\"O option.
インタフェースを設定または落す度に、
.B dhcpcd
が実行しようとするスクリプトファイル。
この実行可能スクリプトへのパスは、
.I \-c \ <ExecFilePath>
オプションで変更できる。
.\"O .B Dhcpcd
.\"O passes 3 parameters to
.\"O .I dhcpcd.exe
.\"O script:
.B dhcpcd
は
.I dhcpcd.exe
スクリプトに 3 つのパラメータを渡す。
.TP
.I dhcpcd.exe <HostInfoFilePath> <up|down|new> [-d]
.\"O The first parameter
.\"O .I <HostInfoFilePath>
.\"O is path to
.\"O .I dhcpcd-<interface>.info
.\"O file. 
最初のパラメータ
.I <HostInfoFilePath>
は
.I dhcpcd-<interface>.info
ファイルへのパスである。
.\"O The word
.\"O .I <interface>
.\"O is actually replaced with interface name dhcpcd is
.\"O attached to, e.g. "eth0". 
.I <interface>
は、実際には "eth0" のような dhcpcd で管理されている
ネットワークインタフェースの名前で置き換えられる。
.\"O The second parameter values
.\"O .I <up|down|new>
.\"O mean the interface has been brought up with the same IP address as before ("up"), or
.\"O with the new IP address ("new"), or the interface has been brought down ("down"). 
2 番目のパラメータ値
.I <up|down|new>
は、前と同じ IP アドレスでインタフェースを上げる ("up")、
新しい IP アドレスでインタフェースを上げる ("new")、
インタフェースを落す ("down") という意味である。
.\"O Parameter
.\"O .I -d
.\"O is passed in a case
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O has been started with
.\"O .I -d
.\"O debug flag.
パラメータ
.I -d
は、
.B dhcpcd
をデバッグフラグ
.I -d
で起動する場合に渡す。
.TP
.BI <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd-<interface>.cache
.\"O Cache file containing the previously assigned IP address and
.\"O some other things.
以前に割り当てられた IP アドレスなどを含むキャッシュファイル。
.\"O The word
.\"O .I <interface>
.\"O is actually replaced with the network interface name like
.\"O .I eth0
.\"O to which
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O is attached.
.I <interface>
は、実際には
.I eth0
のような、dhcpcd で管理されている
ネットワークインタフェースの名前で置き換えられる。
.TP
.BI /etc/resolv.conf
.\"O file created by
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O when the client receives DNS and domain name options.
クライアントが DNS とドメイン名オプションを受け取った時に
.B dhcpcd
が作成するファイル。
.\"O The old
.\"O .B /etc/resolv.conf
.\"O file is renamed to
.\"O .B /etc/resolv.conf.sv
.\"O and will be restored back when
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O exits for any reason.
既に
.B /etc/resolv.conf
が存在する場合、元のファイルは 
.B /etc/resolv.conf.sv
という名前に変更され、何らかの理由で
.B dhcpcd
が終了した時には元に戻される。
.TP
.BI /etc/yp.conf
.\"O file created by
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O when the client receives NIS options.
クライアントが NIS オプションを受信した場合に、
.B dhcpcd
によって作成されるファイル。
.\"O The old
.\"O .B /etc/yp.conf
.\"O file is renamed to
.\"O .B /etc/yp.conf.sv
.\"O and is restored back when
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O exits for any reason.
既に
.B /etc/yp.conf
が存在する場合、元のファイルは 
.B /etc/yp.conf.sv
という名前に変更され、何らかの理由で
.B dhcpcd
が終了した時には元に戻される。
.TP
.BI /etc/ntp.conf
.\"O file created by
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O when the client receives NTP options.
クライアントが NTP オプションを受信した場合に、
.B dhcpcd
によって作成されるファイル。
.\"O The old
.\"O .B /etc/ntp.conf
.\"O file is renamed to
.\"O .B /etc/ntp.conf.sv
.\"O and is restored back when
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O exits for any reason.
既に
.B /etc/ntp.conf
が存在する場合、元のファイルは 
.B /etc/ntp.conf.sv
という名前に変更され、何らかの理由で
.B dhcpcd
が終了した時には元に戻される。
.TP
.BI <ConfigDir>/dhcpcd-<interface>.pid
.\"O file containing the process id of
.\"O .B dhcpcd.
.B dhcpcd
のプロセス ID を格納するファイル。
.\"O The word
.\"O .I <interface>
.\"O is actually replaced with the network interface name like
.\"O .I eth0
.\"O to which
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O is attached.
.I <interface>
は、実際には
.I eth0
のような、dhcpcd で管理されている
ネットワークインタフェースの名前で置き換えられる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.I Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol,
.\"O RFC2131 and RFC1541 (obsolete)
RFC2131 および RFC1541 (obsolete)
.I DHCP Options and BOOTP Vendor Extensions,
RFC2132
.\"O 
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O .PD 0
.\"O .B dhcpcd
.\"O uses
.\"O .B time(3)
.\"O to calculate the lease expiration time.  If the system time is changed
.\"O while the client is running, the lease expiration time may not be
.\"O predictable.
.B dhcpcd
は貸し出しの終了期限を計算するのに
.B time(3)
を用いる。クライアントの実行中にシステム時刻が変更されると、
貸し出しの終了期限は予測不可能となる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.PD 0
.\"O v.<1.3
バージョン 1.3 未満
.LP
Yoichi Hariguchi <yoichi@fore.com>
.LP
.\"O v.1.3
バージョン 1.3
.LP
Sergei Viznyuk <sv@phystech.com>
