.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 21:43:46 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH AECHO 1 "17 Dec 1991" "netatalk 1.2"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O aecho \- send AppleTalk Echo Protocol packets to network hosts
aecho \- AppleTalk Echo Protocol パケットをネットワーク上のホストに送る
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B aecho
[
.B \-c\fI count
]
(
.I address
|
.I nbpname
)
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B aecho
.\"O repeatedly sends an Apple Echo Protocol (AEP) packet to the host
.\"O specified by the given AppleTalk
.\"O .I address
.\"O or
.\"O .I nbpname
.\"O and reports whether a reply was received.  Requests are sent at the
.\"O rate of one per second.
.B aecho
は、AppleTalk の
.I address
や
.I nbpname
で指定されたホストに対して Apple Echo Protocol (AEP) パケットを繰り返し送り、
応答が受け取れたかを報告する。
リクエストは 1 秒間に 1 回の割合で送られる。
.LP
.\"O .I address
.\"O is parsed by
.\"O .BR atalk_aton (3).
.I address
は
.BR atalk_aton (3)
によって解釈される。
.\"O .I nbpname
.\"O is parsed by
.\"O .BR nbp_name (3).
.I nbpname
は
.BR nbp_name (3)
によって解釈される。
.\"O The nbp type defaults to
.\"O .RB ` Workstation '.
nbp タイプのデフォルトは
.RB ` Workstation '
である。
.LP
.\"O When
.\"O .B aecho
.\"O is terminated, it reports the number of packets sent, the number of
.\"O responses received, and the percentage of packets lost.  If any
.\"O responses were received, the minimum, average, and maximum round trip
.\"O times are reported.
.B aecho
を中断すると、送られたパケット数・受け取った応答の数・
失われたパケットの割合を報告する。
応答を受け取った場合、往復時間の最小値・平均値・最大値を報告する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O Check to see if a particular host is up and responding to AEP packets:
あるホストが起動していて AEP パケットに応答するかを調べる:
.sp
.RS
.nf
	example% aecho bloodsport
	11 bytes from 8195.13: aep_seq=0. time=10. ms
	11 bytes from 8195.13: aep_seq=1. time=10. ms
	11 bytes from 8195.13: aep_seq=2. time=10. ms
	11 bytes from 8195.13: aep_seq=3. time=10. ms
	11 bytes from 8195.13: aep_seq=4. time=10. ms
	11 bytes from 8195.13: aep_seq=5. time=9. ms
	^C
	----8195.13 AEP Statistics----
	6 packets sent, 6 packets received, 0% packet loss
	round-trip (ms)  min/avg/max = 9/9/10
.fi
.RE
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-c\fI count
.\"O Stop after
.\"O .I count
.\"O packets.
.I count
個のパケットを送った後に停止する。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR ping (1),
.BR atalk_aton (3),
.BR nbp_name (3),
.\" .BR aep (4),
.BR atalkd (8).
