.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar 10 00:15:39 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH AFILE 1 "26 Feb 1998" 
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O afile \- display type and creator of Apple Macintosh files (netatalk format)
afile \- Apple Macintosh ファイル (netatalk フォーマット) のタイプとクリエータを表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B afile 
[
.B -a
]
.I file ...

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B afile
.\"O displays the name and Macintosh type and creator of the 
.\"O .I file
.\"O arguments. Tests whether the file is an AppleDouble header,
.\"O in which case it checks the corresponding data fork exists, or assumes
.\"O it is a data fork in which case it looks for the corresponding AppleDouble
.\"O to find the type/creator information.
.B afile
は
.I file
引き数の名前と Macintosh のタイプとクリエータを表示する。
.B afile
は
.I file
が AppleDouble ヘッダであるかを調べて、
そうならば対応するデータフォークが存在するかを調べる。
さもなければ
.I file
がデータフォークであると仮定して、対応する AppleDouble を探し、
タイプとクリエータの情報を見付けようとする。

.LP
.\"O .B afile
.\"O does not look at any of the extension mapping files such
.\"O as AppleVolumes.system.
.B afile
は AppleVolumes.system のような拡張子対応付けファイルを調べない。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -a
.\"O Include directories and data files of unknown type (i.e. without 
.\"O corresponding AppleDouble) in output.
ディレクトリやタイプが不明な (つまり、対応する AppleDoule がない)
データファイルを出力に含める。

.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O returns exit status 0 if all files have a corresponding valid  .AppleDouble header or data fork, or 99 for bad command line options. Otherwise it returns the following error code relating to the last invalid file.
全てのファイルが、対応する有効な .AppleDouble ヘッダや
データフォークを持っている場合、終了状態 0 を返す。
不正なコマンドラインオプションがある場合は 99 を返す。
これ以外の場合は、最後の不正なファイルに関連した以下のエラーコードを返す。
.br

.\"O 1  file doesn't exist
1  ファイルが存在しない。
.br
.\"O 2  file is unreadable
2  ファイルが読めない。
.br
.\"O 3  file is directory
3  ファイルがディレクトリである。
.br
.\"O 4  file is AppleDouble without data fork
4  ファイルは AppleDouble で、データフォークを持たない。 
.br
.\"O 5  file is AppleDouble with unreadable data fork
5  ファイルは AppleDouble で、データフォークが読めない。 
.br
.\"O 6  file is data fork without AppleDouble
6  ファイルはデータフォークで、AppleDouble を持たない。
.br
.\"O 7  file is data fork with unreadable AppleDouble
7  ファイルはデータフォークで、AppleDouble が読めない。
.br
.\"O 8  file is data fork with short AppleDouble
8  ファイルはデータフォークで、短い AppleDouble を持つ。
.br
.\"O 9  bad magic in AppleDouble
9  AppleDouble に不正なマジックナンバーがある。
 
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR achfile (1),
.BR afpd (1)
