.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar  5 22:52:56 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH GETZONES 1 "17 Dec 1991" "netatalk 1.2"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O getzones \- list AppleTalk zone names
getzones \- AppleTalk のゾーン名を一覧表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B getzones
[
.B -m
|
.B -l
] [
.I address
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Getzones
.\"O is used to obtain a list of AppleTalk zone names using the Zone
.\"O Information Protocol (ZIP).  It sends a GetZoneList request to an
.\"O AppleTalk router.  By default, it sends the request to the locally
.\"O running
.\"O .BR atalkd (8).
.B getzones
はゾーン情報プロトコル (Zone Information Protocol, ZIP) を使って
AppleTalk のゾーン名の一覧を取得するために使われる。
GetZoneList リクエストが AppleTalk ルータに送られる。
デフォルトでは、ローカルで稼働している
.BR atalkd (8)
にリクエストが送られる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -m
.\"O List the name of the local zone only; this is accomplished by sending a
.\"O ZIP GetMyZone request.
ローカルゾーンの名前のみを一覧表示する。
ZIP GetMyZone リクエストを送ることで遂行される。
.TP
.B -l
.\"O List the local zones; this is accomplished by sending a GetLocalZones
.\"O request.
ローカルゾーンを一覧表示する。
GetLocalZones リクエストを送ることで遂行される。
.TP
.I address
.\"O Contact the AppleTalk router at
.\"O .I address.
.\"O .I address
.\"O is parsed by
.\"O .BR atalk_aton (3).
アドレス
.I address
の AppleTalk ルータと通信する。
.I address
は
.BR atalk_aton (3)
で解釈される。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR atalk_aton (3),
.\" .BR zip (4),
.BR atalkd (8).
