.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 21:55:21 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH MEGATRON 1 "8 Jan 1992" "netatalk 1.2"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O megatron, unhex, unbin, unsingle, hqx2bin, single2bin, macbinary \- Macintosh file format transformer
megatron, unhex, unbin, unsingle, hqx2bin, single2bin, macbinary \- Macintosh ファイルフォーマットを変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B megatron
[
.I sourcefile...
]
.LP
.B unbin
[
.I sourcefile...
]
.LP
.B unhex
[
.I sourcefile...
]
.LP
.B unsingle
[
.I sourcefile...
]
.LP
.B hqx2bin
[
.I sourcefile...
]
.LP
.B single2bin
[
.I sourcefile...
]
.LP
.B macbinary
[
.I sourcefile...
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B megatron
.\"O is used to transform files from BinHex, MacBinary, AppleSingle, or 
.\"O .B netatalk
.\"O style AppleDouble formats into MacBinary or
.\"O .B netatalk 
.\"O style AppleDouble formats.  
.B megatron
は
BinHex, MacBinary, AppleSingle,
.RB ( netatalk
形式) AppleDouble といったフォーマットのファイルを、MacBinary または
.RB ( netatalk 
形式) AppleDouble フォーマットに変換する。
.\"O The
.\"O .B netatalk
.\"O style AppleDouble format is the file format used by
.\"O .B afpd,
.\"O the
.\"O .B netatalk
.\"O Apple Filing Protocol (AppleShare) server.  
.B netatalk
形式 AppleDouble フォーマットは、
.B netatalk
の Apple Filing Protocol (AppleShare) サーバーである
.B afpd
によって使われるファイルフォーマットである。
.\"O BinHex, MacBinary, and
.\"O AppleSingle are commonly used formats for transferring Macintosh files
.\"O between machines via email or file transfer protocols.
BinHex, MacBinary, AppleSingle は、
E メールやファイル転送プロトコル (FTP) を使って
マシン間で Macintosh のファイルを転送するために
一般に使われるフォーマットである。
.\"O .B megatron
.\"O uses its name to determine what type of tranformation is being asked of
.\"O it.
.B megatron
は、(呼び出された) 名前からどのタイプの変換が求められているかを決定する。
.LP
.\"O If
.\"O .B megatron
.\"O is called as
.\"O .B unhex, unbin,
.\"O or
.\"O .B unsingle,
.\"O it tries to convert file(s) from BinHex, MacBinary, or AppleSingle into
.\"O AppleDouble format.  
.B megatron
が
.BR unhex ,
.BR unbin , 
.B unsingle
として呼び出された場合、
ファイルを BinHex, MacBinary, AppleSingle から
AppleDouble に変換しようとする。
.\"O BinHex is the format most often used to send
.\"O Macintosh files by e-mail.  Usually these files have an extension of
.\"O ".hqx".  
BinHex は、ほとんどの場合、
Macintosh のファイルを E メールで送るために使われる。
通常この形式のファイルには拡張子 ".hqx" が付く。
.\"O MacBinary is the format most often used by terminal emulators
.\"O "on the fly" when transferring Macintosh files in binary mode.
.\"O MacBinary files often have an extension of ".bin".  
MacBinary は、ほとんどの場合、
Macintosh のファイルをバイナリモードで転送するときに、
端末エミュレータが裏で利用する。
MacBinary ファイルには、通常、拡張子 ".bin" が付く。
.\"O Some Macintosh
.\"O LAN-based email packages use uuencoded AppleSingle format to "attach"
.\"O or "enclose" files in email.  AppleSingle files don't have a standard
.\"O filename extension.
Macintosh の LAN ベースの E メールパッケージの中には、
E メールにファイルを「添付」したり「同封」したりするのに
uuencode された AppleSingle フォーマットを使うものもある。
AppleSingle ファイルにはファイル名の標準的な拡張子がない。
.LP
.\"O If
.\"O .B megatron
.\"O is called as
.\"O .B hqx2bin, single2bin,
.\"O or
.\"O .B macbinary,
.\"O it will try to convert the file(s) from BinHex, AppleSingle, or
.\"O AppleDouble into MacBinary.  
.B megatron
が
.BR hqx2bin , 
.BR single2bin ,
.B macbinary
として呼び出された場合、
ファイルを BinHex, AppleSingle, AppleDouble から
MacBinary に変換しようとする。
.\"O This last translation may be useful in
.\"O moving Macintosh files from your
.\"O .B afpd
.\"O server to some other machine when you can't copy them from the server
.\"O using a Macintosh for some reason.
何らかの理由により Macintosh を使って
.B afpd
サーバーから Macintosh ファイルをコピーすることができない場合、
サーバーから他のマシンにファイルを移動するために
最後の (AppleDouble から MacBinary への) 変換が役立つ。
.LP
.\"O If
.\"O .B megatron
.\"O is called with any other name, it uses the default translation, namely
.\"O .B unhex.
.B megatron
が更に別の名前で呼び出された場合、デフォルトの変換、つまり
.B unhex
を使う。
.LP
.\"O If no source file is given, or if
.\"O .I sourcefile
.\"O is
.\"O .RB ` - ',
.\"O and if the conversion is from a BinHex or MacBinary file,
.\"O .B megatron
.\"O will read from standard input.
変換元ファイルが指定されない場合、または
.I sourcefile
が
.RB ` - '
である場合、
BinHex または MacBinary ファイルからの変換が指示されると、
.B megatron
は標準入力を読み込む。
.LP
.\"O The filename used to store any output file is the filename that is
.\"O encoded in the source file.  MacBinary files are created with a ".bin"
.\"O extension.  In the case of conflicts, the old file is overwritten!
出力ファイルを格納するために使われるファイルの名前は、
変換元ファイルにエンコードされているファイル名である。
MacBinary ファイルは拡張子 ".bin" を付けて作成される。
(ファイル名の) 衝突が起こった場合、
古いファイルは上書きされるので注意すること。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR afpd (8)
