.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar 10 00:31:08 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH NBP 1 "17 Dec 1991" "netatalk 1.2"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O nbplkup, nbprgstr, nbpunrgstr \- access NBP database
nbplkup, nbprgstr, nbpunrgstr \- NBP データベースへアクセスする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B nbplkup
[
.B -r
.I nresp
]
[
.I nbpname
]
.sp
.B nbprgstr
[
.B -p
.I port
]
.I nbpname
.sp
.B nbpunrgstr
.I nbpname
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B nbprgstr
.\"O registers
.\"O .I nbpname
.\"O with
.\"O .BR atalkd (8),
.\"O at the given
.\"O .IR port .
.B nbprgstr
は指定された
.IR port
の
.BR atalkd (8)
に
.I nbpname
を登録する。
.\"O .B nbpunrgstr
.\"O informs
.\"O .B atalkd
.\"O that
.\"O .I nbpname
.\"O is no longer to be advertised.
.B nbpunrgstr
は
.B atalkd
に対して、
.I nbpname
をそれ以降広報しないように通知する。
.LP
.\"O .B nbplkup
.\"O displays up to
.\"O .I nresp
.\"O (default 1000) entities registered on the AppleTalk internet.
.B nbplkup
は AppleTalk インターネットに登録されている最大
.I nresp
個 (デフォルトは 1000 個) のエントリを表示する。
.\"O .I nbpname
.\"O is parsed by
.\"O .BR nbp_name (3).
.I nbpname
は
.BR nbp_name (3)
によって解釈される。
.\"O An
.\"O .RB ` = '
.\"O for the
.\"O .I object
.\"O or
.\"O .I type
.\"O matches anything, and an
.\"O .RB ` * '
.\"O for
.\"O .I zone
.\"O means the local zone. 
.I object
や
.I type
の指定で使われる
.RB ` = '
は全てにマッチする。
.I zone
の指定で使われる
.RB ` * '
はローカルゾーンを意味する。
.\"O The default values are taken from the
.\"O .B NBPLKUP
.\"O environment variable, parsed as an
.\"O .IR nbpname .
デフォルトの値は環境変数
.B NBPLKUP
から取得され、
.IR nbpname
として解釈される。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O Find all devices of type
.\"O .B LaserWriter
.\"O in the local zone.
ローカルゾーン内の type が
.B LaserWriter
である全てのデバイスを探す。
.sp
.RS
.nf
example% nbplkup :LaserWriter
               Petoskey:LaserWriter        7942.129:218
             Gloucester:LaserWriter        8200.188:186
                 Rahway:LaserWriter        7942.2:138
             517 Center:LaserWriter        7942.2:132
                  ionia:LaserWriter        7942.2:136
     Evil DEC from Hell:LaserWriter        7942.2:130
              Hamtramck:LaserWriter        7942.2:134
         Iron Mountain :LaserWriter        7942.128:250
example%
.fi
.RE
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR nbp_name (3),
.\" .BR nbp (4),
.\" .BR zip (4),
.BR atalkd (8).
