.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Sep  8 19:17:39 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" 
.TH netatalk\-config 1 "09 June 2001" "netatalk 1.5pre6" "The Netatalk Project"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O netatalk-config - script to get information about the installed version of netatalk
netatalk-config - インストールされている netatalk の情報を取得するためのスクリプト
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B netatalk-config
[\-\-prefix\fI[=DIR]\fP] [\-\-exec_prefix\fI[=DIR]\fP] [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
[\-\-libs] [\-\-libs\-dirs] [\-\-libs\-names] [\-\-cflags] [\-\-macros]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.PP
.\"O \fInetatalk-config\fP is a tool that is used to configure to determine
.\"O the compiler and linker flags that should be used to compile
.\"O and link programs that use the \fInetatalk\fP run-time libraries.
.\"O .
\fInetatalk-config\fP は コンパイラー・リンカのフラグを
設定・決定するためのツールである。
このフラグは \fInetatalk\fP ランタイムライブラリを使う
プログラムをコンパイル・リンクするときに使われる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.l
.\"O \fInetatalk-config\fP accepts the following options:
\fInetatalk-config\fP は以下のオプションを受け付ける:
.TP 8
.B  \-\-help
.\"O Print a short help for this command and exit.
このコマンドの簡単なヘルプを表示して、終了する。
.TP 8
.B  \-\-version
.\"O Print the currently installed version of \fInetatalk\fP on the standard output.
現在インストールされている \fInetatalk\fP のバージョンを標準出力に表示する。
.TP 8
.B  \-\-libs
.\"O Print the linker flags that are necessary to link against the \fInetatalk\fP
.\"O run-time libraries.
\fInetatalk\fP ランタイムライブラリをリンクするのに必要な
リンカフラグを表示する。
.TP 8
.B  \-\-libs-dirs
.\"O Print only the \-l/\-R part of \-\-libs.
\-\-libs のうち \-l と \-R フラグのみを表示する。
.TP 8
.B  \-\-libs-names
.\"O Print only the \-l part of \-\-libs.
\-\-libs のうち \-l フラグのみを表示する。
.TP 8
.B  \-\-cflags
.\"O Print the compiler flags that are necessary to compile a program linked
.\"O against the \fInetatalk\fP run-time libraries.
\fInetatalk\fP ランタイムライブラリにリンクされるプログラムを
コンパイルするのに必要なコンパイラーフラグを表示する。
.TP 8
.B  \-\-macros
.\"O Print the \fInetatalk\fP m4 directory.
\fInetatalk\fP の m4 ディレクトリを表示する。
.TP 8
.B  \-\-prefix=PREFIX
.\"O If specified, use PREFIX instead of the installation prefix that \fInetatalk\fP
.\"O was built with when computing the output for the \-\-cflags and
.\"O \-\-libs options. This option is also used for the exec prefix
.\"O if \-\-exec\-prefix was not specified. This option must be specified
.\"O before any \-\-libs or \-\-cflags options.
このオプションを指定すると、\-\-cflags と \-\-libs を表示する場合に、
\fInetatalk\fP を構築したときに使った
インストール先プレフィックスではなく PREFIX を使う。
このオプションは \-\-exec\-prefix が指定されていない場合の
実行プレフィックスとしても使われる。
このオプションは \-\-libs や \-\-cflags オプションより
前に指定しなければならない。
.TP 8
.B  \-\-exec\_prefix=PREFIX
.\"O If specified, use PREFIX instead of the installation exec prefix that
.\"O \fInetatalk\fP was built with when computing the output for the \-\-cflags
.\"O and \-\-libs options.  This option must be specified before any
.\"O \-\-libs or \-\-cflags options.
このオプションを指定すると、\-\-cflags と \-\-libs を表示する場合に、
\fInetatalk\fP を構築したときに使った
実行プログラムのインストール先プレフィックスではなく PREFIX を使う。
このオプションは \-\-libs や \-\-cflags オプションより
前に指定しなければならない。
.\"O .SH COPYRIGHT
.SH 著作権
Copyright \(co  1998 Owen Taylor

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation.

.\"O Man page adapted for \fInetatalk-config\fP by Sebastian Rittau in 2001.
この man ページは Sebastian Rittau が 2001 年に作成した
\fInetatalk-config\fP に適合している。
