.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Mar 13 19:47:11 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Wed Feb 11 16:50:01 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH PAP 1 "6 May 2002" "netatalk 1.5"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pap, papstatus \- client interface to remote printers using Printer Access Protocol
pap, papstatus \- Printer Access Protocol を使ったリモートプリンタのクライアントインターフェース
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pap
[
.B -A
.I address
] [
.B -c
] [
.B -d
] [
.B -e
] [
.B -E
] [
.B -p
.I nbpname
] [
.B -s
.I statusfile
] [
.B -w
] [
.B -W
] [
.I FILES
]
.sp
.B papstatus
[
.B -p
.I nbpname
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B pap
.\"O is used to connect and send files to an AppleTalk connected printer using
.\"O the Apple Printer Access Protocol (PAP).
.B pap
は Apple Printer Access Protocol (PAP) を使って AppleTalk に接続された
プリンタに接続したりファイルを送ったりするのに使われる。
.\"O When
.\"O .B pap
.\"O starts execution, it
.\"O tries to open a session with the printer using PAP, and
.\"O then downloads the
.\"O .I files
.\"O to the printer.
.B pap
が実行を開始すると、
PAP を使ってプリンタとセッションをオープンしようと試み、
.I files
をプリンタにダウンロードする。
.LP
.\"O If no
.\"O .I files
.\"O are given on the command line,
.\"O .B pap
.\"O begins reading from standard input.
.I files
がコマンドライン上で指定されていない場合、
.B pap
は標準入力を読み込み始める。
.LP
.\"O If no printer is specified on the command line,
.\"O .B pap
.\"O looks for a file called
.\"O .B .paprc
.\"O in the current working directory and reads it to obtain the
.\"O .I nbpname
.\"O of a
.\"O printer.
プリンタがコマンドライン上で指定されていない場合、
.B pap
はカレントワーキングディレクトリ内の
.B .paprc
というファイルを探し、このファイルを読んでプリンタの
.I nbpname
を取得しようとする。
.\"O Blank lines and lines that begin with a
.\"O .RB ` # '
.\"O are ignored.
空行と
.RB ` # '
で始まる行は無視される。
.\"O .I type
.\"O and
.\"O .I zone
.\"O default to
.\"O .B LaserWriter
.\"O and the zone of the local host, respectively.
.I type
と
.I zone
のデフォルトは、それぞれ
.B LaserWriter
とローカルホストのゾーンである。
.LP
.\"O Note that
.\"O .B pap
.\"O is designed to be useful as a communication filter for sending
.\"O .BR lpd (8)
.\"O spooled print jobs to AppleTalk connected printers.  See
.\"O .BR psf (8)
.\"O for hints on how to use it this way.
.B pap
は
.BR lpd (8)
にスプールされる印刷ジョブを AppleTalk で接続されたプリンタに送るための
通信フィルタとして役立つように設計されている点に注意すること。
このように使用するためのヒントについては、
.BR psf (8)
を参照すること。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.HP
.B -A
.I address
.br
.\"O Connect to the printer with Appletalk address
.\"O .I address
.\"O and do not consult the
.\"O .B .paprc
.\"O file to find a printer name.  See
.\"O .BR atalk_aton (3)
.\"O for the syntax of
.\"O .IR address .
Appletalk アドレス
.I address
のプリンタに接続し、プリンタ名を見つけるのに
.B .paprc
ファイルを調べない。
.I address
の書式については
.BR atalk_aton (3)
を参照すること。
.TP
.B -c
.\"O Take cuts.  The PAP protocol specified a simple queuing
.\"O procedure, such that the clients tell the printer how long
.\"O they have been waiting to print.  This option causes
.\"O .B pap
.\"O to lie about how long it has been waiting.
.\"Osato: take cuts の意味が不明。
停止して待たせる。
PAP プロトコルは
「クライアントがプリンタに対して印刷の待ち時間を知らせる」
という簡単なキュー手続きを指定する。
このオプションは、
.B pap
に対して、待っている時間に何もさせないようにする。
.TP
.B -d
.\"O Enable debug output.
デバッグ出力を有効にする。
.TP
.B -e
.\"O Send any message from the printer to stderr instead of stdout.
.\"O .BR psf (8)
.\"O invokes
.\"O .B pap
.\"O with this option.
プリンタからの全てのメッセージを、標準出力ではなく、標準エラー出力に送る。
.BR psf (8)
は、このオプションを付けて
.B pap
を起動する。
.TP
.B -E
.\"O Don't wait for EOF from the printer.  This option is useful
.\"O for printers which don't implement PAP correctly.  In a correct
.\"O implementation, the client side should wait for the printer to
.\"O return EOF before closing the connection.  Some clients don't
.\"O wait, and hence some printers have related bugs in their
.\"O implementation.
プリンタからの EOF を待たない。
このオプションは、PAP を正しく実装していないプリンタに対して役立つ。
正しい実装では、クライアント側は接続を閉じる前に
プリンタが EOF を返すのを待たなければならない。
EOF を待たないクライアントがあるので、
それに関連したバグを持った実装をしているプリンタもある。
.HP
.B -p
.I nbpname
.br
.\"O Connect to the printer named
.\"O .I nbpname
.\"O and do not consult the
.\"O .B .paprc
.\"O file to find a printer name.  See
.\"O .BR nbp_name (3)
.\"O for the syntax of
.\"O .IR nbpname .
.I nbpname
という名前のプリンタに接続する。
プリンタ名を見付けるために
.B .paprc
ファイルを調べない。
.IR nbpname
の書式は
.BR nbp_name (3)
を参照すること。
.HP
.B -s
.I statusfile
.br
.\"O Update the file called
.\"O .I statusfile
.\"O to contain the most recent status message from the printer.
プリンタからの最新状態メッセージが書き込まれている
.I statusfile
という名前のファイルを更新する。
.\"O .B pap
.\"O gets the status from the printer when it is waiting for the printer to
.\"O process input.  
.B pap
は、プリンタが入力を処理しているのを待つ間、プリンタから状態を取得する。
.\"O The
.\"O .I statusfile
.\"O will contain a single line terminated with a newline.  
.I statusfile
には改行で終端された 1 行がある。
.\"O This is useful
.\"O when
.\"O .B pap
.\"O is invoked by
.\"O .BR psf (8)
.\"O within
.\"O .BR lpd 's
.\"O spool directory.
.B pap
が
.BR lpd
のスプールディレクトリ内で
.BR psf (8)
によって起動される場合、
このオプションが便利である。
.TP
.B -w
.\"O Wait for the printer status to contain the word "waiting" before
.\"O sending the job.  This is to defeat printer-side spool available
.\"O on HP IV and V printers.
ジョブを送る前にプリンタ状態に "waiting" という単語が現れるのを待つ。
このオプションは、HP IV, V プリンタのプリンタ側スプールを無効にする。
.TP
.B -W
.\"O Wait for the printer status to contain the word "idle" before
.\"O sending the job.  This is to defeat printer-side spool available
.\"O on HP IV and V printers.
ジョブを送る前にプリンタ状態に "idle" という単語が現れるのを待つ。
このオプションは、HP IV, V プリンタのプリンタ側スプールを無効にする。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP 20
.B .paprc
.\"O file read to obtain printer name if not specified on command line
プリンタ名がコマンドラインから指定されなかった場合に、
プリンタ名を取得するために読み込まれるファイル。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR nbp_name (3),
.BR atalk_aton (3),
.BR lpd (8),
.BR psf (8).
