.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar  5 22:52:56 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PSORDER 1 "17 Dec 1991" "netatalk 1.2"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O psorder \- PostScript pageorder filter
psorder \- PostScript のページ順を変更するフィルタ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B psorder
[
.B -duf
]
.I sourcefile
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B psorder
.\"O is a filter that re-orders the pages of a PostScript document.
.\"O The result is written to the standard output.  By default,
.\"O documents are processed into ascending order (the lowest numbered page
.\"O is printed first).  Some PostScript documents specify that the order of
.\"O their pages should never be changed; the default action of
.\"O .B psorder
.\"O is to follow this specification.
.B psorder
は PostScript 文書のページを並べ変えるフィルタである。
結果は標準出力に書き出される。
デフォルトでは、文書は昇順に処理される
(番号の小さいページが先に印刷される)。
PostScript 文書の中には、
ページの順番を変更できないように指定してあるものが存在する;
.B psorder
のデフォルトの動作は、この仕様に従う。
.LP
.\"O If no source file is given, or if 
.\"O .I sourcefile
.\"O is
.\"O .RB ` - ',
.\"O .B psorder
.\"O reads from the standard input file.
変換元ファイルが指定されない場合、または
.I sourcefile
が
.RB ` - '
である場合、
.B psorder
は標準入力ファイルを読み込む。
.br
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Re-order the pages of the document in downward or descending
.\"O order.  This is typically used to change the order of a document to
.\"O be printed by a printer that stacks pages face-up,
.\"O such as an Apple LaserWriter or LaserWriter Plus.
文書のページを下方順もしくは降順に並べ変える。
このオプションは、Apple LaserWriter や LaserWriter Plus のように
表を上にして重ねるプリンタで文書を印刷する場合に、
文書のページを並べ変えるためによく使われる。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Specifies forward order, and is the default.  It is used to
.\"O try and ensure the correct ordering when a document will be printed
.\"O by a printer that stacks the pages face-down.
昇順を指定する。これがデフォルトである。
表を下にして重ねるプリンタで文書を印刷する場合に、
正しい順番になっているように並べ直し、それを保証するために使われる。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Force
.\"O .B psorder
.\"O to re-order the pages, even if the document claims that its page
.\"O order is not to be trifled with.  This option should only be used 
.\"O experimentally, as it may cause documents to print incorrectly.
文書がページの順番を厳密に扱わなくてはならないと警告を出す場合でも、
.B psorder
に強制的にページを並べ変えさせる。
文書が正しく印刷されなくなるかもしれないので、
このオプションは実験的にのみ使うべきである。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR psf (8),
.BR lpr (1).
