.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Sep  9 15:20:55 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" 
.TH "timeout" "1" "19 Jul 2001" "netatalk 1.5pre7" "The Netatalk Project"

.\"O .SH "NAME"
.SH 名前
.LP 
.\"O timeout \- Send a signal to a program after a certain time
timeout \- 指定した時間の後、プログラムにシグナルを送る

.\"O .SH "SYNTAX"
.SH 書式
.LP 
timeout [\-s \fIsignal\fP] \fIseconds\fP \fIprogram\fP [\fIargs\fP]

.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH 説明
.LP 
.\"O \fBtimeout\fR executes a \fIprogram\fP (with arguments \fIargs\fP) and sends a
.\"O \fIsignal\fP to it after a certain amount of \fIseconds\fP.
\fBtimeout\fR は (引き数 \fIargs\fP をつけて)
プログラム \fIprogram\fP を実行し、
\fIseconds\fP 秒経過したら、そのプログラムにシグナル \fIsignal\fP を送る。

.\"O .SH "OPTIONS"
.SH オプション
.LP 
.TP 
\fB\-s\fR \fIsignal\fP
.\"O Signal to send to the spawned process. This can be a numerical or symbolic ID.
.\"O This defaults to \fBTERM\fR.
生成したプロセスに送るシグナルを指定する。
シグナルは数値 ID でもシンボル ID でもよい。
デフォルトは \fBTERM\fR である。

.\"O .SH "EXAMPLES"
.SH 例
.LP
.TP
timeout 10 pap foo.ps
.\"O Execute "pap foo.ps" and send a \fBSIGTERM\fR if \fBpap\fR doesn't return
.\"O after 10 seconds.
"pap foo.ps" を実行し、10 秒経過しても \fBpap\fR が返ってこない場合には
\fBSIGTERM\fR を送る。
.TP
timeout -s HUP 60 sh
.\"O Spawn a shell and send a hangup signal after one minute.
シェルを生成し、1 分後にハングアップシグナルを送る。
.TP
timeout -s 9 10 evilprog
.\"O Execute a program and \fBKILL\fR it if it doesn't quit after 10 seconds.
プログラムを実行し、10 秒経過しても終了しない場合には \fBKILL\fR を送る。
