.\"
.\"  chfn.1 -- change your finger information
.\"  (c) 1994 by salvatore valente <svalente@athena.mit.edu>
.\"
.\"  this program is free software.  you can redistribute it and
.\"  modify it under the terms of the gnu general public license.
.\"  there is no warranty.
.\"
.\"  $Author: faith $
.\"  $Revision: 1.1 $
.\"  $Date: 1995/03/12 01:29:16 $
.\"
.\"
.\"  Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"  all right reserved,
.\"  Translated Mon Feb 26 16:38:01 JST 2001
.\"  by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.\"
.TH CHFN 1 "October 13 1994" "chfn" "Linux Reference Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O chfn \- change your finger information
chfn \- finger 情報を変更する。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .B chfn
.\"O [\ \-f\ full-name\ ] [\ \-o\ office\ ] [\ \-p\ office-phone\ ]
.\"O [\ \-h\ home-phone\ ] [\ \-u\ ] [\ \-v\ ] [\ username\ ]
.B chfn
[\ \-f\ full-name\ ] [\ \-o\ office\ ] [\ \-p\ office-phone\ ]
[\ \-h\ home-phone\ ] [\ \-u\ ] [\ \-v\ ] [\ username\ ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明 
.\"O .B chfn
.\"O is used to change your finger information.  This information is
.\"O stored in the
.\"O .I /etc/passwd
.\"O file, and is displayed by the
.\"O .B finger
.\"O program.  The Linux
.\"O .B finger
.\"O command will display four pieces of information that can be changed by
.\"O .B chfn
.\"O : your real name, your work room and phone, and your home phone.
.B chfn
は finger 情報を変更するために使用する。
この情報は
.I /etc/passwd
ファイルに記憶されていて、
.B finger
プログラムによって表示される。
Linux
.B finger
コマンドは
.B chfn
によって変更することが出来る
4 つの情報 (実名、勤務先、勤務先電話番号、自宅電話番号) を表示する。
.\"O .SS COMMAND LINE
.\"O Any of the four pieces of information can be specified on the command
.\"O line.  If no information is given on the command line,
.\"O .B chfn
.\"O enters interactive mode.
.SS コマンド行
4 つの情報どれでもコマンド行に指定することができる。
コマンド行に与える情報がない場合、
.B chfn
対話モードに入る。
.\"O .SS INTERACTIVE MODE
.SS　対話モード 
.\"O In interactive mode,
.\"O .B chfn
.\"O will prompt for each field.  At a prompt, you can enter the new information,
.\"O or just press return to leave the field unchanged.  Enter the keyword
.\"O "none" to make the field blank.
対話モードでは、
.B chfn
各フィールド毎にプロンプトが出る。
プロンプトで、新しい情報を入力することができる、
また、ただリターンを押すだけでフィールドを変更せずに出ることができる。
フィールドを空白に設定するには "none" キーワードを入力する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "\-f, \-\-full-name"
.\"O Specify your real name.
.TP
.I "\-f, \-\-full-name"
実名を指定する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "\-o, \-\-office"
.\"O Specify your office room number.
.TP
.I "\-o, \-\-office"
勤務先住所を指定する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "\-p, \-\-office-phone"
.\"O Specify your office phone number.
.TP
.I "\-p, \-\-office-phone"
勤務先電話番号を指定する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "\-h, \-\-home-phone"
.\"O Specify your home phone number.
.TP
.I "\-h, \-\-home-phone"
自宅電話番号を指定する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "\-u, \-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message and exit.
.TP
.I "\-u, \-\-help"
使用法を出力し、終了する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "-v, \-\-version"
.\"O Print version information and exit.
.TP
.I "-v, \-\-version"
バージョン情報を出力し、終了する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O .BR finger (1),
.\"O .BR passwd (5)
.SH 関連項目
.BR finger (1),
.BR passwd (5)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O Salvatore Valente <svalente@mit.edu>
.SH 著者
Salvatore Valente <svalente@mit.edu>





