.\"
.\"  chsh.1 -- change your login shell
.\"  (c) 1994 by salvatore valente <svalente@athena.mit.edu>
.\"
.\"  this program is free software.  you can redistribute it and
.\"  modify it under the terms of the gnu general public license.
.\"  there is no warranty.
.\"
.\"  $Author: ysato $
.\"  $Revision: 1.3 $
.\"  $Date: 2001/02/02 10:21:58 $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"  all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Jan 24 18:46:38 JST 2001
.\"  by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.TH CHSH 1 "7 October 1998" "chsh" "Linux Reference Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O chsh \- change your login shell
chsh \- ログインシェルを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .B chsh
.\"O [\ \-s\ shell\ ] [\ \-l\ ] [\ \-u\ ] [\ \-v\ ] [\ username\ ]
.B chsh
[\ \-s\ shell\ ] [\ \-l\ ] [\ \-u\ ] [\ \-v\ ] [\ username\ ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.B chsh
はログインシェルを変更する。
.\"O .B chsh
.\"O is used to change your login shell.
.B chsh
はログインシェルを変更するために使用する。
.\"O If a shell is not given on the command line,
.\"O .B chsh
.\"O prompts for one.
シェルがコマンド行で指定されなかった場合
.B chsh
はシェルをたずねてくる。
.\"O .SS VALID SHELLS
.SS 有効なシェル
.\"O .B chsh
.\"O will accept the full pathname of any executable file on the system.
.\"O However, it will issue a warning if the shell is not listed in the
.\"O .I /etc/shells
.\"O file.
.B chsh
はシステム上のどのような実行ファイルのフルパス名も受け付ける。
しかし、シェルが
.I /etc/shells
ファイルに記載されていない場合は警告を発する。
.\"O On the other hand, it can also be configured such that it will
.\"O only accept shells listed in this file, unless you are root.
一方で、ルートでない限り、このファイルに記載されているシェルだけを
受け付けるように設定することもできる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "\-s, \-\-shell"
.\"O Specify your login shell.
.SH オプション
.TP
.I "\-s, \-\-shell"
ログインシェルを指定する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "\-l, \-\-list-shells"
.\"O Print the list of shells listed in
.\"O .I /etc/shells
.\"O and exit.
.TP
.I "\-l, \-\-list-shells"
.I /etc/shells
に記載されているシェルの一覧を出力し、終了する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "\-u, \-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message and exit.
.TP
.I "\-u, \-\-help"
使用法を出力し、終了する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I "-v, \-\-version"
.\O Print version information and exit.
.TP
.I "-v, \-\-version"
バージョン情報を出力し、終了する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目 
.BR login (1),
.BR passwd (5),
.BR shells (5)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Salvatore Valente <svalente@mit.edu>
