.\" All Rites Reversed.  This file is in the PUBLIC DOMAIN.
.\" Kallisti.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Feb 11 09:59:17 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	Gregorian	グレゴリオ暦の
.\"WORD:	Discordian	ディスコルディア暦の
.\"
.TH DDATE 1 "59 Bureaucracy 3161" "" "Emperor Norton Utilities"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ddate \- converts Gregorian dates to Discordian dates
ddate \- グレゴリオ暦の日付をディスコルディア暦の日付に変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B ddate [+format] [date]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ddate
.\"O prints the date in Discordian date format.
.B ddate
は日付をディスコルディア暦の日付形式で表示する。
.PP
.\"O If called with no arguments,
.\"O .B ddate 
.\"O will get the current system date, convert this to the Discordian
.\"O date format and print this on the standard output. Alternatively, a
.\"O Gregorian date may be specified on the command line, in the form of a numerical
.\"O day, month and year.
引き数なしで呼び出されると、
.B ddate 
は現在のシステム日付を取得し、ディスコルディア暦の日付形式に変換して、
標準出力に表示する。
反対に、コマンドライン上からグレゴリオ暦の日付を
数字で日・月・年の形式で指定することもできる。
.PP
.\"O If a format string is specified, the Discordian date will be printed in 
.\"O a format specified by the string. This mechanism works similarly to the 
.\"O format string mechanism of
.\"O .B date(1), 
.\"O only almost completely differently. The fields are:
フォーマット文字列が指定された場合、ディスコルディア暦の日付が
この文字列で指定された形式で表示される。
この仕組みは
.B date(1)
のフォーマット文字列の仕組みと同様に動作するが、
フォーマットされた結果はほとんど完全に異なる。
フィールドを以下に示す:
.IP %A
.\"O Full name of the day of the week (i.e., Sweetmorn)
週内日の完全な名前 (すなわち、Sweetmorn のような形式)
.IP %a 
.\"O Abbreviated name of the day of the week (i.e., SM)
週内日の省略した名前 (すなわち、SM のような形式)
.IP %B 
.\"O Full name of the season (i.e., Chaos)
季節の完全な名前 (すなわち、Chaos のような形式)
.IP %b
.\"O Abbreviated name of the season (i.e., Chs)
季節の省略した名前 (すなわち、Chs のような形式)
.IP %d
.\"O Ordinal number of day in season (i.e., 23)
序数表示した季節内通算日数 (すなわち、23 のような形式)
.IP %e
.\"O Cardinal number of day in season (i.e., 23rd)
基数表示した季節内通算日数 (すなわち、23rd のような形式)
.IP %H
.\"O Name of current Holyday, if any
その日が祝日ならば、その祝日名
.IP %N
.\"O Magic code to prevent rest of format from being printed unless today is
.\"O a Holyday.
その日が祝日でない限り、これ以降のフォーマットを表示しないようにする
マジックコード
.IP %n 
.\"O Newline
改行
.IP %t 
.\"O Tab
タブ
.IP %X
.\"O Number of days remaining until X-Day. (Not valid if the SubGenius options
.\"O are not compiled in.)
X-Day までの残り日数 (SubGenius オプションが組み込まれていなければ有効でない)
.IP %{
.IP %}
.\"O Used to enclose the part of the string which is to be replaced with the
.\"O words "St. Tib's Day" if the current day is St. Tib's Day.
その日が聖 Tib の日であった場合に、
"聖 Tib の日" という単語に置き換えられる部分文字列を囲むのに使われる
.IP %\.
.\"O Try it and see.
試して見てみなさい
.bp
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.nf
% ddate
.br
Sweetmorn, Bureaucracy 42, 3161 YOLD
.PP
.\"O % ddate +'Today is %{%A, the %e of %B%}, %Y. %N%nCelebrate %H'
.\"O .br
.\"O Today is Sweetmorn, the 42nd of Bureaucracy, 3161. 
% ddate +'今日は %{%A, the %e of %B%}, %Y 年です。\\
  %N%n%H の日をお祝いしましょう。'
.br
今日は Sweetmorn, the 42nd of Bureaucracy, 3161 年です。
.PP
.\"O % ddate +"It's %{%A, the %e of %B%}, %Y. %N%nCelebrate %H" 26 9 1995
.\"O .br
.\"O It's Prickle-Prickle, the 50th of Bureaucracy, 3161. 
.\"O .br
.\"O Celebrate Bureflux
% ddate +"その日は %{%A, the %e of %B%}, %Y 年です。\\
  %N%n%H の日をお祝いしましょう。" 26 9 1995
.br
その日は Prickle-Prickle, the 50th of Bureaucracy, 3161 年です。
.br
Bureflux の日をお祝いしましょう。
.PP
.\"O % ddate +"Today's %{%A, the %e of %B%}, %Y. %N%nCelebrate %H" 29 2 1996
.\"O .br
.\"O Today's St. Tib's Day, 3162. 
% ddate +"今日は %{%A, the %e of %B%}, %Y 年です。\\
  %N%n%H の日をお祝いしましょう。" 29 2 1996
.br
今日は 聖 Tib の日, 3162 年です。
.br

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ

.\"O .B ddate(1)
.\"O will produce undefined behaviour if asked to produce the date for St. Tib's
.\"O day and its format string does not contain the St. Tib's Day delimiters 
.\"O %{ and %}.
.B ddate(1)
は、聖 Tib の日の日付を表示するように指示されている場合に、
フォーマット文字列に聖 Tib の日を表すデリミタ %{ と %} が含まれていないと、
予期せぬ挙動をする。

.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意

.\"O After `X-Day' passed without incident, the Church of the SubGenius
.\"O declared that it had got the year upside down - X-Day is actually in 8661 AD
.\"O rather than 1998 AD.  Thus, the True X-Day is Cfn 40, 9827.
`X-Day' が無事に過ぎた後、
SubGenius 教会は、その年がさかさまになったことを宣言した。
- つまり、X-Day は西暦 1998 年ではなく、実際には西暦 8661 年である。
したがって、本当の X-Day は Cfn 40, 9827 である。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.nh
.\"O Original program by Druel the Chaotic aka Jeremy Johnson (mpython@gnu.ai.mit.edu)
元々のプログラムは Druel the Chaotic,
aka Jeremy Johnson (mpython@gnu.ai.mit.edu) が書いた。
.br
.\"O Major rewrite by Lee H:. O:. Smith, KYTP, aka Andrew Bulhak (acb@dev.null.org)
Lee H:. O:. Smith, KYTP, 
aka Andrew Bulhak (acb@dev.null.org) が大幅に書き直した。
.br
Five tons of flax.

.\"O .SH DISTRIBUTION POLICY
.SH 配布条件

Public domain. All rites reversed.

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目

date(1),
.br
http://www.subgenius.com/
.br
Malaclypse the Younger, 
.I "Principia Discordia, Or How I Found Goddess And What I Did To Her When I Found Her"
