.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue May 10 04:32:35 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH FLOCK "1" "November 2004" "flock (util-linux)" "User Commands"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O flock \- acquire a file lock and then execute a command with the lock held
flock \- ファイルロックを取得し、そのロックを保持するコマンドを実行する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR flock
[ \fB\-\-shared\fR | \fB\-\-timeout=\fR\fIseconds\fR ] lockfile command ..
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .\" Add any additional description here
.\" 更なる説明は、ここに追加すること。
.PP
.\"O Acquire a file lock using the flock(2) system call and then execute
.\"O the given command with the lock held.  Depending on the options given,
.\"O the lock can be either exclusive or shared, and the behavior in the
.\"O event of lock contention can be specified as either waiting
.\"O indefinitely for the lock to become available (the default), or
.\"O failing if the lock does not become available after a specific time,
.\"O which can be specified as zero to make the command not wait at all.
flock(2) システムコールを使ってファイルロックを取得し、
そのロックを保持する指定されたコマンドを実行する。
指定するオプションにより、排他ロックにも共有ロックにもできる。
また、ロック競合が発生した際の動作は、
ロックが使用可能になるまで無限に待ち続ける (デフォルト) ように指定することも、
指定された時間の後にロックが使用可能にならなければ
失敗するように指定することもできる。
時間を 0 に指定すると、コマンドは (訳註: ロックの取得を) 全く待たない。
.PP
.TP
\fB\-\-shared\fR
.\"O Acquire a shared lock.  Acquiring a shared lock does
.\"O not stop others from acquiring a shared lock, but it will stop others
.\"O from acquiring an exclusive lock.  Conversely, acquiring an exclusive
.\"O lock (the default) stops both exclusive and shared attempts to acquire
.\"O the lock.  Typically, a shared lock is used if a command is just going
.\"O to read the locked data, and an exclusive lock is used if the command
.\"O might write to it.
共有ロックを取得する。
共有ロックの取得は、他者による共有ロックの取得を停止させないが、
他者による排他ロックの取得を停止させる。
逆に、排他ロックの取得 (デフォルト) は、
他者による排他ロックの取得も共有ロックの取得も停止させる。
一般的には、
ロックされたデータをコマンドが単に読み込む場合には共有ロックが使用され、
ロックされたデータにコマンドが書き込みを行う場合には排他ロックが使用される。
.TP
\fB\-\-timeout=n\fR
.\"O Abort if the lock cannot be acquired before \fIn\fR seconds.
.\"O For a completely non-blocking attempt to acquire a lock, specify
.\"O \fB\-\-timeout=0\fR.
.\"O The timer applies only to the attempt to acquire the lock.  As soon
.\"O as the lock is acquired, the timeout is cancelled.  The command to
.\"O be run is not subject to the timeout.
\fIn\fR 秒以内にロックが取得できない場合は、中止 (abort) する。
全くブロックせずにロックを取得したい場合は、
\fB\-\-timeout=0\fR と指定すること。
タイマーはロックの取得にのみ適用される。
ロックが取得されると、タイムアウトは直ちにキャンセルされる。
実行されるコマンドはタイムアウトの対象ではない。
.PP
.\"O .SH "EXAMPLES (invoking some imaginary programs)"
.SH "例 (いくつかの仮想的なプログラムの呼び出し)"
.hl
.PP
flock /etc/passwd read-and-write-to-passwd
.PP
flock \-\-shared /etc/passwd just-read-something-from-passwd
.PP
flock \-\-timeout=0 /sys /usr/local/bin/update-hotplug /sys
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Written by Adam J. Richter
