.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)hexdump.1	8.2 (Berkeley) 4/18/94
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue 11 Jan 1994
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jan 14 00:49:38 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Mar 24 11:54:42 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.Dd April 18, 1994
.Dt HEXDUMP 1
.Os
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm hexdump
.\"O .Nd ascii, decimal, hexadecimal, octal dump
.Nd ASCII, 10 進, 16 進, 8 進でダンプする
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.\"O .Nm ""
.Nm
.Op Fl bcCdovx
.Bk -words
.Op Fl e Ar format_string
.Ek
.Bk -words
.Op Fl f Ar format_file
.Ek
.Bk -words
.Op Fl n Ar length
.Ek
.Bk -words
.Op Fl s Ar skip
.Ek
.Ar file ...
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O The hexdump utility is a filter which displays the specified files, or
.\"O the standard input, if no files are specified, in a user specified
.\"O format.
hexdump ユーティリティは、指定したファイルを
ユーザーが指定したフォーマットで表示するフィルタである。
ファイルが指定されていない場合は、標準入力を読み込んでフォーマットする。
.Pp
.\"O The options are as follows:
オプションとしては以下のものがある:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl b
.\"O .Em One-byte octal display .
.\"O Display the input offset in hexadecimal, followed by sixteen
.\"O space-separated, three column, zero-filled, bytes of input data,
.\"O in octal, per line.
.Em 1 バイト単位の 8 進数表示。
入力オフセットを 16 進数で表示し、
その後に、入力データ 1 バイトずつを
0 で字詰めした 3 桁の 8 進数で表現し、
それを 1 行当たり 16 個、空白で区切って表示する。
.It Fl c
.\"O .Em One-byte character display .
.\"O Display the input offset in hexadecimal, followed by sixteen
.\"O space-separated, three column, space-filled, characters of input
.\"O data per line.
.Em 1 バイト単位のキャラクタ表示。
入力オフセットを 16 進数で表示し、
その後に、入力データのキャラクタを
空白で字詰めした 3 桁 (の ASCII 文字) で表現し、
それを 1 行当たり 16 個、空白で区切って表示する。
.It Fl C
.\"O .Em Canonical hex+ASCII display .
.\"O Display the input offset in hexadecimal, followed by sixteen
.\"O space-separated, two column, hexadecimal bytes, followed by the
.\"O same sixteen bytes in %_p format enclosed in ``|'' characters.
.Em 標準的な 16進数 + ASCII での表示。
入力オフセットを 16 進数で表示し、
その後に、入力データのキャラクタを 2 桁の 16 進数で表現し、
それを 1 行当たり 16 個、空白で区切って表示する。
その後に、``|'' で囲まれた中に同じ 16 バイトを
%_p フォーマットで表示する。
.It Fl d
.\"O .Em Two-byte decimal display .
.\"O Display the input offset in hexadecimal, followed by eight
.\"O space-separated, five column, zero-filled, two-byte units
.\"O of input data, in unsigned decimal, per line.
.Em 2 バイト単位の 10 進数表示。
入力オフセットを 16 進数で表示し、
その後に、入力データ 2 バイト単位を
0 で字詰めした 5 桁の符号なし 10 進数で表現し、
それを 1 行当たり 8 個、空白で区切って表示する。
.It Fl e Ar format_string 
.\"O Specify a format string to be used for displaying data.
データを表示するために使われるフォーマット文字列を指定する。
.It Fl f Ar format_file 
.\"O Specify a file that contains one or more newline separated format strings.
.\"O Empty lines and lines whose first non-blank character is a hash mark
.\"O .Pf ( Cm \&# )
.\"O are ignored.
1 個以上のフォーマット文字列 (改行で区切る) の書かれたファイルを指定する。
空行、または空白を除いた最初の文字がハッシュマーク
.Pf ( Cm \&# )
である行は無視される。
.It Fl n Ar length 
.\"O Interpret only
.\"O .Ar length
.\"O bytes of input.
入力の
.Ar length
バイト分だけを処理する。
.It Fl o
.\"O .Em Two-byte octal display .
.\"O Display the input offset in hexadecimal, followed by eight
.\"O space-separated, six column, zero-filled, two byte quantities of
.\"O input data, in octal, per line.
.Em 2 バイト単位の 8 進数表示。
入力オフセットを 16 進数で表示し、
その後に、入力 2 バイト単位を
0 で字詰めした 6 桁の 8 進数で表現し、
それを 1 行当たり 8 個、空白で区切って表示する。
.It Fl s Ar offset 
.\"O Skip
.\"O .Ar offset
.\"O bytes from the beginning of the input.
入力の先頭から
.Ar offset
バイトを読み飛ばす。
.\"O By default,
.\"O .Ar offset
.\"O is interpreted as a decimal number.
デフォルトでは
.Ar offset
は 10 進数として解釈される。
.\"O With a leading
.\"O .Cm 0x
.\"O or
.\"O .Cm 0X ,
.\"O .Ar offset
.\"O is interpreted as a hexadecimal number,
先頭に
.Cm 0x
または
.Cm 0X
を付けた場合、
.Ar offset
は 16 進数として解釈される。
.\"O otherwise, with a leading
.\"O .Cm 0 ,
.\"O .Ar offset
.\"O is interpreted as an octal number.
先頭に
.Cm 0
を付けた場合、
.Ar offset
は 8 進数として解釈される。
.\"O Appending the character
.\"O .Cm b ,
.\"O .Cm k ,
.\"O or
.\"O .Cm m
.\"O to
.\"O .Ar offset
.\"O causes it to be interpreted as a multiple of
.\"O .Li 512 ,
.\"O .Li 1024 ,
.\"O or
.\"O .Li 1048576 ,
.\"O respectively.
.Ar offset
の後ろに
.Cm b ,
.Cm k ,
.Cm m
を付けた場合、それぞれ
.Li 512 ,
.Li 1024 ,
.Li 1048576
倍であると解釈されるようになる。
.It Fl v
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl v
.\"O option causes hexdump to display all input data.
.Fl v
オプションを指定すると、hexdump に対して全ての入力データを表示させる。
.\"O Without the
.\"O .Fl v
.\"O option, any number of groups of output lines, which would be
.\"O identical to the immediately preceding group of output lines (except
.\"O for the input offsets), are replaced with a line comprised of a
.\"O single asterisk.
.Fl v
オプションを指定しない場合、
直前の出力行と同じ内容の行 (ただし、入力オフセットは除く) は、
何行であっても、
1 個のアスタリスクが書かれた行で置き換えられる。
.It Fl x
.\"O .Em Two-byte hexadecimal display .
.\"O Display the input offset in hexadecimal, followed by eight, space
.\"O separated, four column, zero-filled, two-byte quantities of input
.\"O data, in hexadecimal, per line.
.Em 2 バイト単位の 16 進数表示。
入力オフセットが 16 進数で表示し、
その後に、入力 2 バイト単位を
0 で字詰めした 4 桁の 16 進数で表現し、
それを 1 行当たり 8 個、空白で区切って表示する。
.El
.Pp
.\"O For each input file,
.\"O .Nm
.\"O sequentially copies the input to standard output, transforming the
.\"O data according to the format strings specified by the
.\"O .Fl e
.\"O and
.\"O .Fl f
.\"O options, in the order that they were specified.
各入力ファイルに対して、
.Nm
は、入力ファイルが指定された順番で、
.Fl e
や
.Fl f
オプションで指定されたフォーマット文字列に基づいて変換しながら
続けて標準出力に書き出していく。
.\"O .Ss Formats
.Ss フォーマット
.\"O A format string contains any number of format units, separated by
.\"O whitespace.
.\"O A format unit contains up to three items: an iteration count, a byte
.\"O count, and a format.
フォーマット文字列は、空白で区切られた任意の個数の
フォーマット単位を含んでいる。
フォーマット単位は最大 3 個の要素、つまり、
繰り返し回数・バイト数・フォーマットを含んでいる。
.Pp
.\"O The iteration count is an optional positive integer, which defaults to
.\"O one.
.\"O Each format is applied iteration count times.
繰り返し回数は、オプションとして指定される正の整数である。
デフォルトは 1 である。
各フォーマットは繰り返し回数だけ適用される。
.Pp
.\"O The byte count is an optional positive integer.
.\"O If specified it defines the number of bytes to be interpreted by
.\"O each iteration of the format.
バイト数は、オプションとして指定される正の整数である。
これが指定された場合、
1 つのフォーマットで処理されるバイト数を示す。
.Pp
.\"O If an iteration count and/or a byte count is specified, a single slash
.\"O must be placed after the iteration count and/or before the byte count
.\"O to disambiguate them.
.\"O Any whitespace before or after the slash is ignored.
繰り返し回数とバイト数 (の両方、もしくはどちらか一方) が指定された場合、
どちらの数字かを区別するために、
繰り返し回数の後とバイト数の前にスラッシュを 1 個置かなければならない。
スラッシュの前後の空白は無視される。
.Pp
.\"O The format is required and must be surrounded by double quote
.\"O (" ") marks.
.\"O It is interpreted as a fprintf-style format string (see
.\"O .Xr fprintf 3 ) ,
.\"O with the
.\"O following exceptions:
フォーマットは必須で、ダブルクォートマーク (" ") で囲まなければならない。
このフォーマットは、fprintf 形式のフォーマット文字列
.Ns ( Xr fprintf 3
を参照) として解釈されるが、
以下のような例外がある:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
.\"O An asterisk (*) may not be used as a field width or precision.
フィールドの幅や精度としてアスタリスク (*) を使えない。
.It
.\"O A byte count or field precision
.\"O .Em is
.\"O required for each ``s'' conversion
.\"O character (unlike the
.\"O .Xr fprintf 3
.\"O default which prints the entire string if the precision is unspecified).
個々の変換文字 ``s'' について、バイト数やフィールド精度が必須である
(精度が指定されていない場合に全ての文字列を表示する
.Xr fprintf 3
のデフォルトとは異なる)。
.It
.\"O The conversion characters ``h'', ``l'', ``n'', ``p'' and ``q'' are
.\"O not supported.
変換文字 ``h'', ``l'', ``n'', ``p'', ``q'' がサポートされていない。
.It
.\"O The single character escape sequences
.\"O described in the C standard are supported:
C 言語の標準規格で記述されている
1 文字のエスケープシーケンスがサポートされている:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent -compact
.Bl -column <alert_character>
.\"O .It NUL	\e0
.\"O .It <alert character>	\ea
.\"O .It <backspace>	\eb
.\"O .It <form-feed>	\ef
.\"O .It <newline>	\en
.\"O .It <carriage return>	\er
.\"O .It <tab>	\et
.\"O .It <vertical tab>	\ev
.It NUL	\e0
.It <アラート文字>	\ea
.It <バックスペース>	\eb
.It <フォームフィード>	\ef
.It <改行>	\en
.It <復帰>	\er
.It <タブ>	\et
.It <垂直タブ>	\ev
.El
.Ed
.El
.Pp
.\"O Hexdump also supports the following additional conversion strings:
hexdump は、他にも以下の変換文字列をサポートする:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Cm \&_a Ns Op Cm dox 
.\"O Display the input offset, cumulative across input files, of the
.\"O next byte to be displayed.
次に表示されるバイトのオフセット
(複数の入力ファイルで通算した値) を表示する。
.\"O The appended characters
.\"O .Cm d ,
.\"O .Cm o ,
.\"O and
.\"O .Cm x
.\"O specify the display base
.\"O as decimal, octal or hexadecimal respectively.
文字
.Cm d ,
.Cm o ,
.Cm x
を後ろに付加すると、表示の際の基数がそれぞれ 10, 8, 16 進数に指定される。
.It Cm \&_A Ns Op Cm dox 
.\"O Identical to the
.\"O .Cm \&_a
.\"O conversion string except that it is only performed
.\"O once, when all of the input data has been processed.
変換文字列
.Cm \&_a
とほぼ同じ。
ただし、この変換は全ての入力データが処理された後で 1 回だけ実行される。
.It Cm \&_c
.\"O Output characters in the default character set.
.\"O Nonprinting characters are displayed in three character, zero-padded
.\"O octal, except for those representable by standard escape notation
.\"O (see above),
.\"O which are displayed as two character strings.
デフォルト文字セットの文字で出力する。
表示不能な文字は、0 で字詰めした 3 桁の 8 進数で表示される。
ただし、標準エスケープ表記で表現される文字 (上記を参照) は、
その 2 文字の文字列で表示される。
.It Cm _p
.\"O Output characters in the default character set.
.\"O Nonprinting characters are displayed as a single
.\"O .Dq Cm \&. .
デフォルト文字セットの文字で出力する。
表示不能な文字は、1 個の
.Dq Cm \&.
として表示される。
.It Cm _u
.\"O Output US ASCII characters, with the exception that control characters are
.\"O displayed using the following, lower-case, names.
.\"O Characters greater than 0xff, hexadecimal, are displayed as hexadecimal
.\"O strings.
US ASCII 文字で出力する。
ただし、制御文字は以下のような小文字の名前を使って表示される。
16 進数で 0xff より大きい文字は、
16 進数の文字列として表示される。
.Bl -column \&000_nu \&001_so \&002_st \&003_et \&004_eo
.It \&000\ nul\t001\ soh\t002\ stx\t003\ etx\t004\ eot\t005\ enq
.It \&006\ ack\t007\ bel\t008\ bs\t009\ ht\t00A\ lf\t00B\ vt
.It \&00C\ ff\t00D\ cr\t00E\ so\t00F\ si\t010\ dle\t011\ dc1
.It \&012\ dc2\t013\ dc3\t014\ dc4\t015\ nak\t016\ syn\t017\ etb
.It \&018\ can\t019\ em\t01A\ sub\t01B\ esc\t01C\ fs\t01D\ gs
.It \&01E\ rs\t01F\ us\t0FF\ del
.El
.El
.Pp
.\"O The default and supported byte counts for the conversion characters
.\"O are as follows:
変換文字列で使われるデフォルトのバイト数とサポートされるバイト数は、
以下の通りである。
.Bl -tag -width  "Xc,_Xc,_Xc,_Xc,_Xc,_Xc" -offset indent
.It Li \&%_c , \&%_p , \&%_u , \&%c
.\"O One byte counts only.
1 バイトのみ。
.It Xo
.Li \&%d , \&%i , \&%o ,
.Li \&%u , \&%X , \&%x 
.Xc
.\"O Four byte default, one, two and four byte counts supported.
4 バイトがデフォルト。1, 2, 4 バイトがサポートされている。
.It Xo
.Li \&%E , \&%e , \&%f ,
.Li \&%G , \&%g 
.Xc
.\"O Eight byte default, four byte counts supported.
8 バイトがデフォルト。4 バイトがサポートされている。
.El
.Pp
.\"O The amount of data interpreted by each format string is the sum of the
.\"O data required by each format unit, which is the iteration count times the
.\"O byte count, or the iteration count times the number of bytes required by
.\"O the format if the byte count is not specified.
各フォーマット文字列によって処理されるデータの量は、
各フォーマット単位で必要とされるデータの合計である。
この合計は (繰り返し回数)×(バイト数) である。
また、バイト数が指定されていない場合は、
(繰り返し回数)×(フォーマットが必要としているバイト数) である。
.Pp
.\"O The input is manipulated in ``blocks'', where a block is defined as the
.\"O largest amount of data specified by any format string.
.\"O Format strings interpreting less than an input block's worth of data,
.\"O whose last format unit both interprets some number of bytes and does
.\"O not have a specified iteration count, have the iteration count
.\"O incremented until the entire input block has been processed or there
.\"O is not enough data remaining in the block to satisfy the format string.
入力は「ブロック」ごとに操作される。
ブロックは、フォーマット文字列で指定される
データの塊のうちで最大のもの、と定義される。
入力ブロックのデータより少ないバイト数しか処理していないフォーマット文字列で、
その中の最後のフォーマット単位で数バイトを処理し、
かつ繰り返し回数が指定されていない場合、
入力ブロック全体が処理されるか、
フォーマット文字列に合致するデータがブロックになくなるまで、
繰り返し回数を増加させる。
.Pp
.\"O If, either as a result of user specification or hexdump modifying
.\"O the iteration count as described above, an iteration count is
.\"O greater than one, no trailing whitespace characters are output
.\"O during the last iteration.
ユーザーの指定、
または hexdump が上で説明したように繰り返し回数を変更した結果、
繰り返し回数が 2 回以上になった場合、
最後の繰り返しにおける末尾の空白は出力されない。
.Pp
.\"O It is an error to specify a byte count as well as multiple conversion
.\"O characters or strings unless all but one of the conversion characters
.\"O or strings is
.\"O .Cm \&_a
.\"O or
.\"O .Cm \&_A .
バイト数を複数の変換文字と共に指定すると、
1 つを除いた全ての変換文字が
.Cm \&_a
または
.Cm \&_A
である場合以外は、エラーになる。
.Pp
.\"O If, as a result of the specification of the
.\"O .Fl n
.\"O option or end-of-file being reached, input data only partially
.\"O satisfies a format string, the input block is zero-padded sufficiently
.\"O to display all available data (i.e. any format units overlapping the
.\"O end of data will display some number of the zero bytes).
.Fl n
オプションで指定したバイト数分、またはファイル終端に達したときに、
入力データがフォーマット文字列の一部分にしか満たさない場合、
有効なデータを全て表示するために、入力ブロックには適切な数の 0 が補われる
(すなわち、データの終端にまたがっているフォーマット単位は、
何個かの 0 のバイトを表示する)。
.Pp
.\"O Further output by such format strings is replaced by an equivalent
.\"O number of spaces.
このようなフォーマット文字列によるさらなる出力は、
等数の空白で置き換えられる。
.\"O An equivalent number of spaces is defined as the number of spaces
.\"O output by an
.\"O .Cm s
.\"O conversion character with the same field width
.\"O and precision as the original conversion character or conversion
.\"O string but with any
.\"O .Dq Li \&+ ,
.\"O .Dq \&\ \& ,
.\"O .Dq Li \&#
.\"O conversion flag characters
.\"O removed, and referencing a NULL string.
等数の空白とは、元々の変換文字とフィールド幅と精度は同じで、
変換フラグ文字
.Dq Li \&+ ,
.Dq \&\ \& ,
.Dq Li \&#
を取り除いた
.Cm s
変換文字が NULL 文字列を参照した場合に出力される数の空白である。
.Pp
.\"O If no format strings are specified, the default display is equivalent
.\"O to specifying the
.\"O .Fl x
.\"O option.
フォーマット文字列が指定されない場合、
デフォルトの表示は
.Fl x
オプションを指定した場合と同じである。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm
.\"O exits 0 on success and >0 if an error occurred.
.Nm
は成功すると 0 を返して終了する。
エラーが起こった場合は、1 以上を返して終了する。
.\"O .Sh EXAMPLES
.Sh 例
.\"O Display the input in perusal format:
入力を perusal (詳しく閲覧する) フォーマットで表示する:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
"%06.6_ao "  12/1 "%3_u "
"\et\et" "%_p "
"\en"
.Ed
.Pp
.\"O Implement the \-x option:
\-x オプションを実装する:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
"%07.7_Ax\en"
"%07.7_ax  " 8/2 "%04x " "\en"
.Ed
.\"O .Sh STANDARDS
.Sh 準拠
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O utility is expected to be
.\"O .St -p1003.2
.\"O compatible.
.Nm
ユーティリティは
.St -p1003.2
に適合しているはずである。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
