.\" Copyright 1994 Salvatore Valente (svalente@mit.edu)
.\" Copyright 1992 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Asakawa Satoshi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Dec  2 22:52:40 JST 2000
.\"         by Asakawa Satoshi <rod@i.am>
.\" Updated Tue Arg 21 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" 
.TH KILL 1 "14 October 1994" "Linux Utilities" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O kill \- terminate a process
.SH 名前
kill \- プロセスを終了させる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "kill [ \-s " signal " | \-p ] [ \-a ] [ \-\- ] " "pid ..."
.br
.BI "kill -l [ " signal " ]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The command
.\"O .B kill
.\"O sends the specified signal to the specified process or process group.
.B kill
コマンドは、指定したシグナルを指定したプロセスまたはプロセスグループへ送る。
.\"O If no signal is specified, the TERM signal is sent.  The TERM signal
.\"O will kill processes which do not catch this signal.  For other processes,
.\"O it may be necessary to use the KILL (9) signal, since this signal cannot
.\"O be caught.
シグナルが指定されない場合、TERMシグナルを送る。
TERMシグナルは、このシグナルをキャッチしないプロセスを終了させる。
このシグナルをキャッチしてしまうプロセスを終了させるためには、
KILL (9) シグナルを使う必要がある。
.PP
.\"O Most modern shells have a builtin kill function, with a usage rather similar
.\"O to that of the command described here. The `-a' and `-p' options,
.\"O and the possibility to specify pids by command name is a local extension.
最近のシェルのほとんどには、組み込みのkill機能があり、
ここで説明しているコマンドと同じような使い方をする。
`-a' オプションと `-p' オプション、
そしてコマンド名で PID を指定する方法はローカルな拡張である。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.IR pid ...
.\"O Specify the list of processes that
.\"O .B kill
.\"O should signal.  Each
.\"O .I pid
.\"O can be one of five things:
.B kill
がシグナルを送るプロセスのリストを指定する。
それぞれの
.I pid
に対して、指定方法は次の 5 通り。

.RS
.TP
.\"O .I n
.\"O where
.\"O .I n
.\"O is larger than 0.  The process with pid
.\"O .I n
.\"O will be signaled.
.I n
>0の場合は、pid
.I n
のプロセスへシグナルを送る。
.TP
.B 0
.\"O All processes in the current process group are signaled.
現在のプロセスグループの全てのプロセスにシグナルを送る。
.TP
.B -1
.\"O All processes with pid larger than 1 will be signaled.
PID が 1 より大きい全てのプロセスにシグナルを送る。
.TP
.BI - n
.\"O where 
.\"O .I n 
.\"O is larger than 1.
.\"O All processes in process group
.\"O .I n
.\"O are signaled.  When an argument of the form `-n' is given,
.\"O and it is meant to denote a process group,
.\"O either the signal must be specified first, or the argument must be preceded
.\"O by a `--' option, otherwise it will be taken as the signal to send.
.I -n
(n>1)の場合は、プロセスグループ
.I n
に属する全プロセスへシグナルを送る。
`-n' の形の引数を場合は、シグナルを最初に指定するか、
もしくは引数を `--' オプションの後に指定しなければならない。
そうしないと、シグナルの指定として解釈されてしまう。
.TP
.I commandname
.\"O All processes invoked using that name will be signaled.
この名前で起動された全てのプロセスにシグナルを送る。
.RE
.TP
.BI \-s " signal"
.\"O Specify the signal to send.
.\"O The signal may be given as a signal name or number.
送るシグナルを指定する。
シグナルは名前か、または番号で指定する。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Print a list of signal names.  These are found in
.\"O .I /usr/include/linux/signal.h
シグナル名のリストを表示する。
.I /usr/include/linux/signal.h
の中で定義されている。
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Do not restrict the commandname-to-pid conversion to processes
.\"O with the same uid as the present process.
デフォルトでは、コマンド名から PID への変換は
現在のプロセスと同じ UID を持つものに制限されているが、
その制限を外す。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Specify that
.\"O .B kill
.\"O should only print the process id (pid)
.\"O of the named processes, and not send any signals.
.B kill
に、指定したプロセスのプロセスID (pid)
の表示のみをさせる。何のシグナルも送らない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR bash (1),
.BR tcsh (1),
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigvec (2),
.BR signal (7)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Taken from BSD 4.4.  The ability to translate process names to process
.\"O ids was added by Salvatore Valente <svalente@mit.edu>.
BSD 4.4から入手。
Salvatore Valente <svalente@mit.edu>が、
プロセス名をプロセスIDに変換する機能を追加した。
