.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all right reserved,
.\" Translated Tue Nov  10 18:28:49 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@aisys-jp.com>
.\"
.TH LAST 1 "20 March 1992"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O last \(em indicate last logins by user or terminal
.SH 名前
last \- ユーザまたは端末による最後のログインを示す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.ad l
.B last
.RB [ \-\fP\fInumber\fP ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR filename ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR tty ]
.RB [ \-h
.IR hostname ]
.RB [ \-i
.IR address ]
.RB [ \-l ]
.RB [ \-y ]
.RI [ name ...]
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBLast\fP looks back in the \fBwtmp\fP file which records all logins
.\"O and logouts for information about a user, a teletype or any group of
.\"O users and teletypes.  Arguments specify names of users or teletypes of
.\"O interest.  If multiple arguments are given, the information which
.\"O applies to any of the arguments is printed.  For example ``\fBlast root
.\"O console\fP'' would list all of root's sessions as well as all sessions
.\"O on the console terminal.  \fBLast\fP displays the sessions of the
.\"O specified users and teletypes, most recent first, indicating the times
.\"O at which the session began, the duration of the session, and the
.\"O teletype which the session took place on.  If the session is still
.\"O continuing or was cut short by a reboot, \fBlast\fP so indicates.
\fBlast\fP は \fBwtmp\fP ファイルの末尾を見る。このファイルには、全ての
ログイン・ログアウトにおけるユーザや端末（あるいは、ユーザや端末のグループ）の
情報が記録されている。
引数は、ユーザ名または関係のある端末を指定する。
複数の引数が与えられる場合、引数のうちのどれにでも当てはまる情報が
出力される。
例えば、``\fBlast rootconsole\fP'' は、root による全てのセッションと、
端末で行われた全てのセッションを表示する。
\fBlast\fP は、指定されたユーザと端末のセッションに対し、
セッションの始まった時間・セッションの機関・セッションが行われた端末を
（新しい順に）表示する。
セッションがまだ継続しているか、
リブートによって切られた場合、\fBlast\fP はそのように示す。
.LP
.\"O The pseudo-user \fBreboot\fP logs in at reboots of the system.
システムがリブートすると擬似ユーザ \fBreboot\fP のログインが記録される。
.LP
.\"O \fBLast\fP with no arguments displays a record of all logins and
.\"O logouts, in reverse order.
引数のない \fBlast\fP は、降順にすべてのログインおよびログアウトのレコードを表示する。
.LP
.\"O If \fBlast\fP is interrupted, it indicates how far the search has
.\"O progressed in \fBwtmp\fP.  If interrupted with a quit signal \fBlast\fP
.\"O indicates how far the search has progressed so far, and the search
.\"O continues.
\fBlast\fP が中断される場合、検索が \fBwtmp\fP の中で
どれくらい進んでいたかを示す。quit シグナルで中断されると、\fBlast\fP は
検索が終わったところまでの結果を示し、そして検索を続行する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O .IP \fB\-\fP\fInumber\fP
.\"O limit the number of entries displayed to that specified by \fInumber\fP.
.IP \fB\-\fP\fInumber\fP
表示するエントリの数を
.IP \fB\-\fP\fInumber\fP
で指定した数に制限する。
.\"O .IP "\fB\-f\fP \fIfilename\fP"
.\"O Use \fIfilename\fP as the name of the accounting file instead of
.\"O .BR /var/log/wtmp .
.IP "\fB\-f\fP \fIfilename\fP"
アカウントファイル名として
.BR /var/log/wtmp
の代わりに \fIfilename\fP を使用する。
.\"O .IP "\fB\-h\fP \fIhostname\fP"
.\"O List only logins from \fIhostname\fP.
.IP "\fB\-h\fP \fIhostname\fP"
\fIhostname\fP からのログインだけをリストする。
.\"O .IP "\fB\-i\fP \fIIP address\fP""
.\"O List only logins from \fIIP address\fP.
.IP "\fB\-i\fP \fIIP address\fP""
\fIIP address\fP からのログインだけをリストする。
.\"O .IP "\fB\-l\fP"
.\"O List IP addresses of remote hosts instead of truncated host names.
.IP "\fB\-l\fP"
リモートホストの表示を、ホスト名（末尾切り落とし）ではなく IP アドレス で行う。
.\"O .IP "\fB\-t\fP \fItty\fP"
.\"O List only logins on \fItty\fP.
.IP "\fB\-t\fP \fItty\fP"
\fItty\fP 上のログインだけをリストする。
.\"O .IP "\fB\-y\fP"
.\"O Also report year of dates.
.IP "\fB\-y\fP"
日付も報告する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/var/log/wtmp \(em login data base
