.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)look.1	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/14/93
.\"
.\" Translated Fri Dec 23 JST 1994 by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Thu Apr 13 JST 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.Dd June 14, 1993
.Dt LOOK 1
.Os
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名称
.Nm look
.\"O .Nd display lines beginning with a given string
.Nd 指定した文字列で始まる行を表示する
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm look
.Op Fl dfa
.Op Fl t Ar termchar
.Ar string
.Op Ar file
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O The 
.\"O .Nm look
.\"O utility displays any lines in
.\"O .Ar file
.\"O which contain
.\"O .Ar string
.\"O as a prefix.
.Nm look
は、
.Ar file
の各行のうち、
.Ar string
で指定された文字列で始まっている行を表示する。
.\"O As
.\"O .Nm look
.\"O performs a binary search, the lines in
.\"O .Ar file
.\"O must be sorted (where
.\"O .Xr sort 1
.\"O got the same options \-d and/or \-f that
.\"O .Nm look
.\"O is invoked with).
.Nm look
は二分検索を使っているため、
.Ar file
で指定するファイルはソートしておかなければならない。(
.Nm look
で \-d オプションを使うときにはソートするときの
.Xr sort 1
にも \-d を使い、\-f オプションを使うときは
.Xr sort 1
でも \-f を使うこと)
.Pp
.\"O If
.\"O .Ar file
.\"O is not specified, the file
.\"O .Pa /usr/share/dict/words
.\"O is used, only alphanumeric characters are compared and the case of
.\"O alphabetic characters is ignored.
.Ar file
が指定されなかった場合は
.Pa /usr/share/dict/word
が使用され、
アルファベットと数字だけで比較され、
アルファベットの大文字小文字の違いは無視される。
.Pp
.\"O Options:
オプションとしては以下のものがある:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d
.\"O Dictionary character set and order, i.e. only alphanumeric characters
.\"O are compared.
辞書で使用されているアルファベットと数字だけを比較対象とする。
.It Fl f
.\"O Ignore the case of alphabetic characters.
アルファベットの大文字、小文字を区別しない。
.It Fl a
.\"O Use the alternate dictionary
.\"O .Pa /usr/share/dict/web2
別の辞書
.Pa /usr/share/dict/web2
を使用する。
.It Fl t
.\"O Specify a string termination character, i.e. only the characters
.\"O in
.\"O .Ar string
.\"O up to and including the first occurrence of
.\"O .Ar termchar
.\"O are compared.
文字列の終端文字を指定する。
つまり、
.Ar string
のうち
.Ar termchar
が最初に出てくるところまで(
.Ar termchar
を含む)が比較の対象となる。
.El
.\"O .Pp
.Sh 返り値
.\" argrath: no .Sh in original
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm look
.\"O utility exits 0 if one or more lines were found and displayed,
.\"O 1 if no lines were found, and >1 if an error occurred.
.Nm look
は、
指定の文字列で始まる行が見つかった場合は 0 を、
見つからなかった場合は 1 を、エラーが起きた場合は 2 以上の値を返す。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/dict/words -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/dict/words
.\"O the dictionary
デフォルトで使用される単語ファイル
.It Pa /usr/share/dict/web2
.\"O the alternate dictionary
もう一つの単語ファイル
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr grep 1 ,
.Xr sort 1
.\"O .Sh COMPATIBILITY
.Sh 互換性
.\"O The original manual page stated that tabs and blank characters participated
.\"O in comparisons when the
.\"O .Fl d
.\"O option was specified.
.\"O This was incorrect and the current man page matches the historic
.\"O implementation.
元の man ページでは
.Fl d
オプションを指定した時にタブと空白が比較の対象になるとしている。
これは誤りであり、現在の man ページは歴史的な実装と一致している。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 歴史
.\"O .Nm Look
.\"O appeared in Version 7 AT&T Unix.
.Nm look
は Version 7 AT&T Unix
から登場した。

