.\" mcookie.1 -- 
.\" Public Domain 1995 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan  8 15:18:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	X authority	X 認可
.\"
.TH MCOOKIE 1 "25 September 1995" "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mcookie \- generate magic cookies for xauth
mcookie \- xauth のためのマジッククッキーを生成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "mcookie [\-v] [\-f " filename " ]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B mcookie
.\"O generates a 128-bit random hexadecimal number for use with the X authority
.\"O system.  Typical usage:
.B mcookie
は X 認可システムで使われる 128 ビットの 16 進数の乱数を生成する。
典型的な使い方は以下の通りである:
.RS
xauth add :0 . `mcookie`
.RE
.PP
.\"O The "random" number generated is actually the output of the MD5 message
.\"O digest fed with various piece of random information: the current time, the
.\"O process id, the parent process id, the contents of an input file (if
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O is specified), and several bytes of information from the first of the
.\"O following devices which is present:
.\"O .IR /dev/random ,
.\"O .IR /dev/urandom ,
.\"O files in
.\"O .IR /proc ,
.\"O .IR /dev/audio .
ここで生成される「乱数」は、実際には無作為な情報を与えて作られる
MD5 メッセージダイジェストの出力である。
この情報には、現在時刻・プロセス ID・親プロセスの ID・
.RB ( \-f
が指定された場合は) 入力ファイルの内容・
.IR /dev/random ,
.IR /dev/urandom ,
.IR /proc
にあるファイル,
.IR /dev/audio
といったデバイスが存在するならば、
そのデバイスから読み込んだ最初の数バイトの情報が含まれる。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The entropy in the generated 128-bit is probably quite small (and,
.\"O therefore, vulnerable to attack) unless a non-pseudorandom number generator
.\"O is used (e.g.,
.\"O .I /dev/random
.\"O under Linux).
生成された 128 ビットのエントロピーは、
疑似乱数生成器でないもの (Linux では
.IR /dev/random ) 
を使わない限り、多分とても小さいだろう
(そのため、攻撃に対して弱い)。
.PP
.\"O It is assumed that none of the devices opened will block.
このコマンドは、オープンされたデバイスが
ブロックされていないことを仮定している。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /dev/random
.br
.I /dev/urandom
.br
.I /dev/audio
.br
.I /proc/stat
.br
.I /proc/loadavg
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR X (1),
.BR xauth (1),
.BR md5sum (1)
