.\" Copyright (c) 1987, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)mesg.1	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/6/93
.\"
.\" Fri Mar 10 20:31:02 1995, modified for standard man macros,
.\" faith@cs.unc.edu
.\"
.\"
.\" "
.\" %FreeBSD: src/usr.bin/mesg/mesg.1,v 1.7 1999/08/28 01:03:59 peter Exp %
.\" $FreeBSD: doc/ja_JP.eucJP/man/man1/mesg.1,v 1.6 2001/05/14 01:07:26 horikawa Exp $
.\" Updated Wed May 11 JST 2005 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH MESG 1 "10 March 1995" "Linux 1.2" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名称
.\"O mesg \- display (do not display) messages from other users
mesg \- 他ユーザからのメッセージを表示する (表示しない)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mesg [ n ] [ y ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 解説
.\"O The
.\"O .B mesg
.\"O utility is invoked by a users to control write access others have to the
.\"O terminal device associated with the standard error output.  If write access
.\"O is allowed, then programs such as
.\"O .BR talk (1)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR write (1)
.\"O may display messages on the terminal.
.B mesg
は、他ユーザからのメッセージの書き込みを許すかどうかを
決めるためのユーティリティです。
メッセージは、標準エラー出力と結びついている端末デバイスに出力されます。
書き込みが許可されていれば、
.BR talk (1)
や
.BR write (1)
などのプログラムを使って端末にメッセージを送ることができます。
.PP
.\"O Traditionally, write access is allowed by default.  However, as users
.\"O become more conscious of various security risks, there is a trend to remove
.\"O write access by default, at least for the primary login shell.  To make
.\"O sure your ttys are set the way you want them to be set,
.\"O .B mesg
.\"O should be executed in your login scripts.
伝統的に、デフォルトでは書き込みは許可されています。
しかし、ユーザーが様々なセキュリティリスクに敏感になるにつれ、
少なくとも最初のログインシェルではデフォルトでは書き込みを許可しない傾向があります。
自分の端末の設定を確実に行うためには、
.B mesg
をログインスクリプトで実行するべきです。
.PP
.\"O Options available:
オプションは以下のとおりです。
.TP
.B n
.\"O Disallows messages.
メッセージを表示しません。
.B y
.\"O Permits messages to be displayed.
メッセージを表示します。
.PP
.\"O If no arguments are given,
.\"O .B mesg
.\"O displays the present message status to the standard error output.
引数なしで起動された場合、
.B mesg
は現在のメッセージ表示の許可・不許可についての設定を、
標準エラー出力に出力します。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B mesg
.\"O utility exits with one of the following values:
.TP
.B mesg
は以下のうちのいずれかを戻り値として返します。
.PP
.I "\ 0"
.\"O Messages are allowed.
メッセージを表示します。
.I "\ 1"
.\"O Messages are not allowed.
メッセージを表示しません。
.I "\>1"
.\"O An error has occurred.
エラーが発生しました。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH 関連ファイル
.I /dev/[pt]ty[pq]?
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR biff (1),
.BR talk (1),
.BR write (1),
.BR wall (1),
.BR login (1),
.BR xterm (1)
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 歴史
.\"O A
.\"O .B mesg
.\"O command appeared in Version 6 AT&T UNIX.
.B mesg
コマンドは Version 6 AT&T UNIX から登場しました。
