.\" 
.\" Version 1.4 of namei
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan  8 16:42:28 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH NAMEI 1 "Local"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O namei - follow a pathname until a terminal point is found
namei - 終端が見つかるまでパス名を辿る
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B namei
.I [-mx]
.I pathname
.I "[ pathname ... ]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I Namei
.\"O uses its arguments as pathnames to any type
.\"O of Unix file (symlinks, files, directories, and so forth). 
.I namei
は、引き数を (シンボリックリンク・ファイル・ディレクトリなどの)
任意タイプの Unix ファイルへのパス名として使う。 
.\"O .I Namei
.\"O then follows each pathname until a terminal 
.\"O point is found (a file, directory, char device, etc).
.I namei
は、(ファイル・ディレクトリ・キャラクタデバイスなどの)
終端が見つかるまでパス名を辿る。
.\"O If it finds a symbolic link, we show the link, and start
.\"O following it, indenting the output to show the context.
シンボリックリンクが見つかった場合、
リンクを表示して、内容をインデントしながら出力してリンクを辿り始める。
.PP
.\"O This program is useful for finding a "too many levels of
.\"O symbolic links" problems.
このプログラムは
「シンボリックリンクのレベルが深すぎる」という問題を
見付けるために役立つ。
.PP
.\"O For each line output,
.\"O .I namei
.\"O outputs a the following characters to identify the file types found:
出力の各行について、
.I namei
は見つかったファイルタイプを識別するための以下の文字を出力する:
.LP
.nf
.\"O    f: = the pathname we are currently trying to resolve
.\"O     d = directory
.\"O     l = symbolic link (both the link and it's contents are output)
.\"O     s = socket
.\"O     b = block device
.\"O     c = character device
.\"O     - = regular file
.\"O     ? = an error of some kind
   f: = 解決するために入力したバス名
    d = ディレクトリ
    l = シンボリックリンク (リンクとリンクの内容の両方を出力する)
    s = ソケット
    b = ブロックデバイス
    c = キャラクタデバイス
    - = 通常のファイル
    ? = 何かのエラー
.fi
.PP
.\"O .I Namei
.\"O prints an informative message when
.\"O the maximum number of symbolic links this system can have has been exceeded.
.I namei
は、システムで許容されているシンボリックリンクの最大数を超えている場合、
情報メッセージを表示する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP 8
.B -x
.\"O Show mount point directories with a 'D', rather than a 'd'.
マウントポイントになっているディレクトリを
\&'d' ではなく 'D' を使って示す。
.TP 8
.B -m
.\"O Show the mode bits of each file type in the style of ls(1),
.\"O for example 'rwxr-xr-x'.
各ファイルタイプのモードを
\&'rwxr-xr-x' のような ls(1) の形式で表示する。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Roger Southwick  (rogers@amadeus.wr.tek.com)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O To be discovered.
見つかるだろう。
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 放棄宣言
.\"O .I Namei
.\"O will follow an infinite loop of symbolic links forever.  To escape, use
.\"O SIGINT (usually ^C).
.I namei
はシンボリックリンクの無限ループを永久に辿り続ける。
これから抜けるには、SIGINT (通常は ^C) を使うこと。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
ls(1), stat(1)
