.\" Original author unknown.  This man page is in the public domain.
.\" Modified Sat Oct  9 17:46:48 1993 by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"  all right reserved,
.\" Translated Tue Feb 27 10:52:16 JST 2001
.\"  by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.\"
.TH NEWGRP 1 "9 October 1993" "Linux 1.2" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O newgrp \- log in to a new group
.SH 名前
newgrp \-　新たなグループへのログイン
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.\"O .BI "newgrp [ " group " ]"
.SH 書式
.BI "newgrp [ " group " ]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O .B Newgrp
.\"O changes the group identification of its caller, analogously to
.\"O .BR login (1).
.\"O The same person remains logged in, and the current directory
.\"O is unchanged, but calculations of access permissions to files are performed
.\"O with respect to the new group ID.
.\"O .LP
.\"O If no group is specified, the GID is changed to the login GID.
.\"O .LP
.SH 説明
.B newgrp
は呼出し側のグループIDを変更する、
.BR login (1)
に類似している。
同じ人がログイン状態のままであり、またカレントディレクトリも変わらない。
しかしファイルのアクセス権の計算は新しいグループIDについて実行される。
.LP
グループが指定されなかった場合、GIDはログイン時のGIDを変更する。
.LP
.\"O .SH FILES
.\"O .I /etc/group
.\"O .br
.\"O .I /etc/passwd
.\"O 
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/group
.br
.I /etc/passwd

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O .BR login "(1), " group (5)
.\"O 
.SH 関連項目
.BR login "(1), " group (5)

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O Originally by Michael Haardt. Currently maintained by 
.\"O Peter Orbaek (poe@daimi.aau.dk).
.SH 著者
原文はMichael Haardtによる。
現在のメンテナンスはPeter Orbaek (poe@daimi.aau.dk)による。





