.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"     This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"     California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" @(#)whereis.1 from UCB 4.2
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 17 03:19:58 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH WHEREIS 1 "8 May 1994"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O whereis \- locate the binary, source, and manual page files for a command
whereis \- コマンドのバイナリ・ソース・man ページの場所を示す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B whereis
[
.B \-bmsu
] [
.B \-BMS
.IR directory .\|.\|.
.B \-f
]
\fIfilename\fP\|
\&.\|.\|.
.IX  "whereis command"  ""  "\fLwhereis\fP \(em find program"
.IX  find "program \(em \fLwhereis\fP"
.IX  "locate program"  ""   "locate program \(em \fLwhereis\fP"
.IX  command  locate  ""   "locate \(em \fLwhereis\fP"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B whereis
.\"O locates source/binary and manuals sections for specified
.\"O files.
.B whereis
は指定したファイルのソース・バイナリ・man ページセクションの場所を示す。
.\"O The supplied names are first stripped of leading pathname components
.\"O and any (single) trailing extension of the form
.\"O .BI . ext,
.\"O for example,
.\"O .BR .c .
与えられた名前は、最初に始めのパス名の部分が取り除かれ、次に
.BR .c
のような
.BI . ext
という形式の拡張子が取り除かれる。
.\"O Prefixes of
.\"O .B s.
.\"O resulting from use of source code control are also dealt with.
ソースコード管理に使われている
.B s.
というプレフィックスがついたファイルも表示される。
.\"O .B whereis
.\"O then attempts to locate the desired program in
.\"O a list of standard Linux places.
.B whereis
は、標準的な Linux ファイル階層中で指定したプログラムを探す。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
\fB\-b
.\"O Search only for binaries.
バイナリのみを探す。
.TP
.B \-m
.\"O Search only for manual sections.
man ページセクションのみを探す。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Search only for sources.
ソースのみを探す。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Search for unusual entries.  A file is said to be unusual if it does
.\"O not have one entry of each requested type.
.\"O Thus
.\"O .RB ` "whereis\ \ \-m\ \ \-u\ \ *" '
.\"O asks for those files in the current
.\"O directory which have no documentation.
通常とは異なるエントリを探す。
要求されるタイプの 1 つのエントリがファイルにない場合、
通常とは異なるファイルと呼ばれる。
よって、
.RB ` "whereis\ \ \-m\ \ \-u\ \ *" '
は、カレントディレクトリのファイルから man ページがないものを探す。
.TP
.B \-B
.\"O Change or otherwise limit the places where
.\"O .B whereis
.\"O searches for binaries.
.B whereis
がバイナリを探すディレクトリを変更または制限する。
.TP
.B \-M
.\"O Change or otherwise limit the places where
.\"O .B whereis
.\"O searches for
.\"O manual sections.
.B whereis
が man ページセクションを探すディレクトリを変更または制限する。
.TP
.B \-S
.\"O Change or otherwise limit the places where
.\"O .B whereis
.\"O searches for sources.
.B whereis
がソースを探すディレクトリを変更または制限する。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Terminate the last directory list and signals the start of file names,
.\"O and
.\"O .I must
.\"O be used when any of the
.\"O .BR \-B ,
.\"O .BR \-M ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-S
.\"O options are used.
直前のディレクトリリストを終了させ、
ファイル名指定の開始であることを示す。
.BR \-B ,
.BR \-M ,
.B \-S
オプションのいずれかを使う場合は、
このオプションを
.IR 使わなければならない 。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O Find all files in
.\"O .B /usr/bin
.\"O which are not documented
.\"O in
.\"O .B /usr/man/man1
.\"O with source in
.\"O .BR /usr/src :
.B /usr/bin
にあるファイルから
.B /usr/man/man1
に man ページがなく
.BR /usr/src
にソースがあるようなもの探す。
.IP
.nf
.ft B
example% cd /usr/bin
example% whereis \-u \-M /usr/man/man1 \-S /usr/src \-f *
.fi
.ft R
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP 20
.B /{bin,sbin,etc}
.TP
.B /usr/{lib,bin,old,new,local,games,include,etc,src,man,sbin,
.B X386,TeX,g++-include}
.TP
.B /usr/local/{X386,TeX,X11,include,lib,man,etc,bin,games,emacs}
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR chdir (2V)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Since
.\"O .B whereis
.\"O uses
.\"O .BR chdir (2V)
.\"O to run faster, pathnames given with the
.\"O .BR \-M ,
.\"O .BR \-S ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-B
.\"O must be full; that is, they must begin with a
.\"O .RB ` / '.
.B whereis
は実行を速くするために
.BR chdir (2V)
を使うので、
.BR \-M ,
.BR \-S ,
.B \-B
に指定するパス名はフルパスでなければならない;
つまりパス名は
.RB ` / '
で始まっていなければならない。
.PP
.\"O .B whereis
.\"O has a hard-coded path, so may not always find what
.\"O you're looking for.
.B whereis
はハードコードされたパスを持っているので、
探しているものとは違うものが見つかるかもしれない。
