.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999,2000 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"     $Id: ftpconversions.5,v 1.2 2001/07/12 03:04:43 jm Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"  all right reserved,
.\" Translated Tue Jun 26 09:05:33 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.\"
.TH ftpconversions 5 
.\"O .SH Name
.\"O ftpconversions \- ftpd conversions database
.SH 名前
ftpconversions \- ftpd 変換データベース
.\"O .SH Description
.SH 説明
.\"O The conversions known by 
.\"O .BR ftpd(8)
.\"O and their attributes are stored in an ASCII file that
.\"O is structured as below.
.\"O Each line in the file provides a description for a single
.\"O .IR conversion.
.\"O Fields are separated by colons (:).
.\"O .PP
.\"O     %s:%s:%s:%s:%s:%s:%s:%s
.\"O      1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8
.\"O 
.\"O     Field          Description
.\"O       1             strip prefix
.\"O       2             strip postfix
.\"O       3             addon prefix
.\"O       4             addon postfix
.\"O       5             external command
.\"O       6             types
.\"O       7             options
.\"O       8             description
.NXR "conversions file" "format"
変換は
.BR ftpd(8)
によって認識される変換規則とその属性は
アスキー形式のファイルに保存されており、
その形式は以下に示すとおりである。
.IR 変換の説明を提供する。
フィールドはコロン(:)によって区切られている。
.PP
    %s:%s:%s:%s:%s:%s:%s:%s
     1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8

    フィールド         説明 
      1             strip prefix
      2             strip postfix
      3             addon prefix
      4             addon postfix
      5             external command
      6             types
      7             options
      8             description

.\"O .SH Known Problems
.\"O The conversions mechanism does not currently support the strip prefix
.\"O and addon prefix fields.
.SH 既知の問題
変換規則は現在 strip prefix と addon prefix フィールドを
サポートしていない。
.\"O .SH Files
.\"O .PN FTPLIB/ftpconversions
.SH ファイル
.PN FTPLIB/ftpconversions
.\"O .SH See Also
.\"O ftpd(8), ftpaccess(5)
.\"O 
.\"O 
.SH 関連項目
ftpd(8), ftpaccess(5)
