.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999,2000 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"     $Id: ftphosts.5,v 1.3 2001/05/23 03:04:18 jm Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed May 16 16:24:38 JST 2001
.\"     by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.\"
.TH ftphosts 5 
.\"O .SH Name
.\"O ftphosts \- ftpd individual user host access file
.SH 名前
ftphosts \- ftpd 個別ユーザホストアクセスファイル
.\"O .SH Description
.\"O The ftphosts file is used to allow or deny access to certain
.\"O accounts from various hosts.
.SH 説明
ftphostsファイルは様々なホストからの特定のアカウントによる
アクセスを許可もしくは拒否する。
.\"O .SH Access Capabilities
.\"O .TP 0.5i
.\"O .B allow <username> <addrglob> [<addrglob> ...]
.\"O Only allow host(s) matching <addrglob> to log in as <username>.
.\"O .TP 0.5i
.\"O .B deny <username> <addrglob> [<addrglob> ...]
.\"O Always deny host(s) matching <addrglob> to log in as <username>.
.\"O .PP
.\"O A username of
.\"O .B anonymous
.\"O or
.\"O .B ftp
.\"O specifies the anonymous user.
.\"O .PP
.\"O The <addrglob> may be also be specified as address/cidr or address:netmask.  For example:
.\"O 10.0.0.0/8 or 10.0.0.0:255.0.0.0
.SH アクセス機能
.TP 0.5i
.B allow <username> <addrglob> [<addrglob> ...]
<username>としてログインするユーザに対し<addrglob>に合致するホストのみ
許可する。
.TP 0.5i
.B deny <username> <addrglob> [<addrglob> ...]
常に<username>としてログインするユーザに対し<addrglob>に合致するホスト
は拒否する。
.PP
ユーザ名
.B anonymous
もしくは
.B ftp
ユーザ名は匿名ユーザ名を指定する。
<addrglob>はアドレス/CIDR 形式や アドレス:ネットマスク 形式も
指定可能である。
例：10.0.0.0/8もしくは10.0.0.0:255.0.0.0
.\"O .SH Files
.\"O FTPLIB/ftphosts
.SH ファイル
FTPLIB/ftphosts
.\"O .SH See Also
.\"O .BR ftpd(8) ,
.\"O .BR ftpaccess(5) ,
.\"O .BR ftplog(5) ,
.\"O .BR ftpconversions(5) ,
.\"O .BR ftpshut(8)
.\"O 
.SH 関連項目
.BR ftpd(8) ,
.BR ftpaccess(5) ,
.BR ftplog(5) ,
.BR ftpconversions(5) ,
.BR ftpshut(8)
