.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999,2000 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"     $Id: ftpservers.5,v 1.2 2001/07/04 03:04:22 jm Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"  all right reserved,
.\" Translated Wed Jun 27 18:26:29 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.TH ftpservers 5
.\"O .SH Name
.\"O ftpservers \- ftpd virtual hosting configuration specification file 
.SH 名前
ftpservers \- ftpd 仮想ホスティング設定仕様ファイル

.\"O .SH Description
.SH 説明

.\"O The ftpservers file is used to tell which set of virtual domain configuration 
.\"O files the 
.\"O .BR ftpd(8) 
.\"O server should use. When compiled with VIRTUAL support, wu-ftpd has the
.\"O ability to use separate configuration files for each virtual domain.
.\"O 
ftpservers ファイルは
.BR ftpd(8)
サーバが使用するべき仮想ドメイン設定の設定を通知するために
使用される。VIRTUALサポートでコンパイルされると、wu-ftpd は各々
の仮想ドメインに対して個々の設定ファイルを使用することができる。

.\"O Currently, configuration files are placed into a separate virtual domain 
.\"O directory. The directory path and the IP address that is to use those 
.\"O configuration files is listed in the ftpservers file.  The actual 
.\"O configuration files put into the virtual domain directory MUST be 
.\"O named:
.\"O .PP
.\"O 
.\"O     ftpaccess      - virtual domain's access file
.\"O     ftpusers       - restrict the accounts that can use the 
.\"O                      web server,
.\"O     ftpgroups      - SITE GROUP and SITE GPASS support,
.\"O     ftphosts       - allow or deny usernames access to that 
.\"O                      virtual server,
.\"O     ftpconversions - customize conversions available in the 
.\"O                      virtual domain.
.\"O 
現在、設定ファイルは仮想ドメイン毎のディレクトリに置かれる。
それらの設定ファイルが使用するディレクトリパスとIPアドレスは
ftpservers ファイルにリストされている。
仮想ドメインディレクトリに置く実際の設定ファイルは次の名前を
付けなければならない:
.PP

    ftpaccess      - 仮想ドメインのアクセスファイル
    ftpusers       - ウェブサーバを使用できるアカウントの制限
    ftpgroups      - SITE GROUP と SITE GPASS をサポート
    ftphosts       - 仮想サーバへの許可または拒否するユーザ名 
    ftpconversions - 仮想ドメインで可能な変換をカスタマイズ 

.\"O You do not need to put every file in each of the virtual domain 
.\"O directories. If you want a set of domains to use the master copy
.\"O of a file, for example, the ftpconversions file, then do not include
.\"O that file in those virtual domain directories. In that case the
.\"O default master copy will be used.
.\"O  
全てのファイルを仮想ドメインディレクトリに置く必要はない。
例えば、ftpconversions ファイルのように、ファイルのマスターコピーを
使用するためにドメインの設定を必要とする場合、
仮想ドメインディレクトリにそれらのファイルを含めないこと。
そのような場合、デフォルトのマスターコピーが使用される。

.\"O .B NOTE!!!: 
.\"O The file names must match those listed above. If you misspell any of 
.\"O them or name them something else, the server WILL NOT find them and 
.\"O the master copy of them will be used instead.
.\"O 
.B 注意!!!: 
ファイル名は上記にリストされたものと一致しなければならない。
もしスペルを間違えたりその他の名前にした場合、サーバはそれらを
発見することが出来ず、代わりにそれらのマスターコピーが使用される。

.\"O .SH ftpservers file format
.SH ftpservers　ファイルフォーマット

.\"O There are two fields to each entry.
各エントリに2つのフィールドがある。

.B ipaddr/hostname   directory-containing-configuration-files

.\"O For example:
例:
    10.196.145.10    /etc/ftpd/ftpaccess.somedomain/
    10.196.145.200   /etc/ftpd/ftpaccess.someotherdomain/
    some.domain      INTERNAL

.\"O When an ftp client connects to the server, ftpd tries to match the IP 
.\"O address the ftp client connected to with one found in the ftpservers file.  
.\"O 
ftp クライアントがサーバに接続する時、ftpd はftpservers ファイルに
あるftp クライアントが接続したIPアドレスに一致させようとする。

.\"O If a match is found the path to the specified directory containing
.\"O the configuration files for that specific domain is returned. The 
.\"O ftpd server uses any configuration files in that directory.  
.\"O 
もし一致することがわかった場合、特定のドメインへの設定ファイルを含む
特定のディレクトリへのパスが返される。
ftp サーバはそのディレクトリのすべての設定ファイルを使用する。

.\"O If a match is not found, or an invalid directory path is encountered,
.\"O default paths to the configuration files are used.  The use of INTERNAL 
.\"O in the example above fails the check for a specific directory and the 
.\"O master configuration files will be used. 
.\"O 
もし一致しなかった場合、もしくは不正なディレクトリパスに遭遇した場合、
設定ファイルへのデフォルトのパスが使用される。上記の例のINTERNAL の
使用は特定のディレクトリの検査に失敗し、マスターの設定ファイルが使用される。

.\"O Either the actual IP address or a specific hostname can be used to
.\"O specify the virtual domain.  It is better to specify the actual IP
.\"O of the virtual domain as it reduces the need for a domain lookup
.\"O and eliminates DNS security related naming issues.
.\"O 
実際のIPアドレスか特定のホスト名のどちらかを仮想ドメインを
特定するために使用することができる。
ドメイン名の検索の必要性を軽減し、名前に関するDNSセキュリティ問題を
なくすことができるので、仮想ドメインの実際のIPアドレスを用いて
指定を行うほうがよい。

    10.196.145.20     /etc/ftpd/config/faqs.org/
    ftp.some.domain   /etc/ftpd/config/faqs.org/

.\"O As usual, comment lines are depicted with a # sign. Both comment lines 
.\"O and blanklines are ignored.
.\"O .P
例により、コマンド行は# 記号によって記述する。コメント行と空白行は
無視される。
.P
.\"O .SH See Also
.SH 関連項目
.BR ftpd(8) ,
.BR ftpaccess(5)
.BR ftplog(5) ,
.BR ftpconversions(5) ,
.BR ftphosts(5)
