.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999,2000 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"     $Id: xferlog.5,v 1.2 2001/07/12 03:04:43 jm Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"		all right reserved,
.\" Translated Wed Jun 27 18:25:22 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.TH XFERLOG 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O xferlog \- FTP server logfile
.SH 名前
xferlog \- FTP サーバログファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .LP
.\"O The
.\"O .B xferlog
.\"O file contains logging information from the FTP server daemon,
.\"O .BR ftpd (8).
.\"O This file usually is found in /usr/adm, but can be located anywhere by using a
.\"O option to
.\"O .BR ftpd (8).
.\"O Each server entry is composed of a single line of the following form, 
.\"O with all fields being separated by spaces.
.LP
.B xferlog
ファイルはFTP サーバデーモン、
.BR ftpd (8)
からのログ情報を含んでいる。
このファイルは通常 /usr/adm にあることがわかるが、
.BR ftpd (8)
のオプションを使用することによりどこにでも置くことができる。
各々のサーバエントリは次の形式の単一行で構成されていて、
全てのフィールドはスペースによって区切られている。
.IP
.I
current-time\ \  transfer-time\ \  remote-host\ \  file-size\ \  filename\ \  transfer-type\ \  special-action-flag\ \  direction\ \  access-mode\ \  username\ \  service-name\ \  authentication-method\ \  authenticated-user-id\ \  completion-status
.LP
.TP 20
.I current-time
.\"O is the current local time in the form "DDD MMM dd hh:mm:ss YYYY". Where DDD
.\"O is the day of the week, MMM is the month, dd is the day of the month,
.\"O hh is the hour, mm is the minutes, ss is the seconds, and YYYY is the year.
は"DDD MMM dd hh:mm:ss YYYY"形式の現在の地域時間である。
DDD は週の日、MMM は月、dd は月の日、
hh は時間、mm は分、ss は秒、そしてYYYY は年である。
.TP 
.I transfer-time
.\"O is the total time in seconds for the transfer.
は秒単位での転送の総合時間である。
.TP
.I remote-host
.\"O is the remote host name.
はリモートホスト名である。
.TP
.I file-size
.\"O is the size of the transferred file in bytes.
はバイト単位での転送されたファイルのサイズである。
.TP
.I filename
.\"O is the name of the transferred file.
は転送されたファイルの名前である。
.TP
.I transfer-type
.\"O is a single character indicating the type of transfer. Can be one of:
には転送の種類を示す文字（一文字）を指定する。
指定できるのは次のどちらかである:
.RS
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B a
.\"O for an ascii transfer
アスキー転送
.TP
.B b
.\"O for a binary transfer
バイナリ転送
.PD
.RE
.RE
.TP
.I special-action-flag
.\"O is one or more single character flags indicating any special action taken. 
.\"O Can be one or more of: 
には特殊な操作が行われたことを示す文字（一文字以上）を指定する。
指定できるのは次のどれかである。一文字以上指定してもよい:
.RS
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B C
.\"O file was compressed
ファイルは圧縮された
.TP
.B U
.\"O file was uncompressed
ファイルは解凍された
.TP
.B T
.\"O file was tar'ed
ファイルは tar された
.TP
.B _
.\"O no action was taken
なにも行われていない
.PD
.RE
.RE
.TP
.I direction
.\"O is the direction of the transfer. Can be one of:
は転送の方向である。
指定できるのは次のどちらかである:
.RS
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B o
.\"O outgoing
出て行く方向
.TP
.B i
.\"O incoming
入ってくる方向
.PD
.RE
.RE
.TP
.I access-mode
.\"O is the method by which the user is logged in. Can be one of:
はどのユーザがログインしているかのメソッドである。
指定できるのは次のうちの一つである:
.RS
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B a
.\"O (anonymous) is for an anonymous guest user. 
(anonymous)は匿名なゲストユーザである。
.TP
.B g
.\"O (guest) is for an passworded guest user (see the
.\"O .BR guestgroup
.\"O command in
.\"O .BR ftpaccess(5)
.\"O ). 
(guest)はパスワード設定されたゲストユーザである(
.BR ftpaccess(5)
の
.BR guestgroup
コマンドを参照)。
.TP
.B r
.\"O (real) is for a local authenticated user.
(real)はローカルで認証されたユーザである。
.PD
.RE
.RE
.TP
.I username
.\"O is the local username, or if guest, the ID string given. 
はローカルユーザ名、またはゲストであるならば、ID文字列が与えられる。
.TP
.I service-name
.\"O is the name of the service being invoked, usually FTP.
は起動しているサービス名で、たいていFTP である。
.TP
.I authentication-method
.\"O is the method of authentication used. Can be one of:
は使用された認証のメソッドである。
指定できるのは次のどちらかである:
.RS
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B 0
.\"O none
なし
.TP
.B 1
.\"O RFC931 Authentication
RFC931 認証
.PD
.RE
.RE
.TP
.I authenticated-user-id
.\"O is the user id returned by the authentication method. 
.\"O A * is used if an authenticated user id is not available.
は認証メソッドにより復帰したユーザIDである。
* は認証されたユーザIDが使用不可の場合に使用される。
.TP
.I completion-status
.\"O is a single character indicating the status of the transfer.  Can be one of:
には転送の状態を示す文字を指定する。
指定できるのは次のどちらかである:
.RS
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B c
.\"O complete transfer
転送完了
.TP
.B i
.\"O incomplete transfer
転送未完了
.PD
.RE
.RE
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B /usr/adm/xferlog
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ftpd(8),
.BR ftpaccess(5)
