.\" Hey emacs, this is -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" This file is part of locale(1) which displays the settings of the
.\" current locale.
.\" Copyright (C) 1994  Jochen Hein (Hein@Student.TU-Clausthal.de)
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Feb  5 21:12:56 JST 1998
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Wed Jan  9 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH CHARMAP 5 1994-11-28 "" "Linux User Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O charmap \- character symbols to define character encodings
charmap \- 文字符号化を定義するための文字シンボル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 書式
.\"O A character set description (charmap) defines a character set of
.\"O available characters and their encodings.
.\"O All supported character
.\"O sets should have the
.\"O .B portable character set
.\"O as a proper subset.
.\"O .\" Not true anymore:
.\"O .\" The portable character set is defined in the file
.\"O .\" .I /usr/lib/nls/charmap/POSIX
.\"O .\" .I /usr/share/i18n/charmap/POSIX
.\"O .\" for reference purposes.
文字集合記述 (charmap) は使用できる文字集合とその符号化を定義する。
サポートされる全ての文字集合は妥当なサブセットとして
.B "共通文字集合 (portable character set)"
を持たなければならない。
.\" 以下はもはや正しくない:
.\" 共通文字集合は参照用に
.\" .I /usr/lib/nls/charmap/POSIX
.\" .I /usr/share/i18n/charmap/POSIX
.\" ファイルに定義されている。
.\"O .SS Syntax
.SS 文法
.\"O The charmap file starts with a header, that may consist of the
.\"O following keywords:
charmap ファイルは以下のキーワードからなるヘッダーで始まる:
.TP
.\"O .I <codeset>
.\"O is followed by the name of the codeset.
.I <codeset>
はコードセットの名前を指定する。
.TP
.\"O .I <mb_cur_max>
.\"O is followed by the max number of bytes for a multibyte-character.
.\"O Multibyte characters are currently not supported.
.\"O The default value
.\"O is 1.
.I <mb_cur_max>
は複数バイト文字の一文字あたりの最大バイト数を指定する。
複数バイト文字は現在のところサポートされていない。デフォルトは 1 である。
.TP
.\"O .I <mb_cur_min>
.\"O is followed by the min number of bytes for a character.
.\"O This
.\"O value must be less or equal than
.\"O .BR mb_cur_max .
.\"O If not specified, it defaults to
.\"O .BR mb_cur_max .
.I <mb_cur_min>
は一文字あたりの最低バイト数を指定する。この値は
.B mb_cur_max
以下でなければならない。
もし指定されなければデフォルトは
.B mb_cur_max
と同じである。
.TP
.\"O .I <escape_char>
.\"O is followed by a character that should be used as the
.\"O escape-character for the rest of the file to mark characters that
.\"O should be interpreted in a special way.
.\"O It defaults to
.\"O the backslash (
.\"O .B \\\\
.\"O ).
.I <escape_char>
ファイルの残りの部分でエスケープ・キャラクターとして使用する文字
を指定する。これで特殊な意味に解釈される文字をエスケープする。
デフォルトはバックスラッシュ
.RB ( \e )
である。
.TP
.I <comment_char>
はファイルの残りの部分でコメント・キャラクターとして使用する文字
を指定する。デフォルトではシャープ
.RB ( # )
である。
.PP
.\"O The charmap-definition itself starts with the keyword
.\"O .B CHARMAP
.\"O in column 1.
charmap の定義そのものは第一カラムにキーワード
.B CHARMAP
を置くことで始める。

.\"O The following lines may have one of the two following forms to
.\"O define the character-encodings:
以下の行は文字の符号化を定義するための二つの方法である:
.TP
.I <symbolic-name> <encoding> <comments>
.\"O This form defines exactly one character and its encoding.
これは一つの文字とその符号化を定義する。
.TP
.I <symbolic-name>...<symbolic-name> <encoding> <comments>
.\"O This form defines a couple of characters.
.\"O This is only useful for
.\"O multibyte-characters, which are currently not implemented.
この形式は複数の文字を定義する。これは複数バイト文字 (現在は実装されていない)
のみで有用である。
.PP
.\"O The last line in a charmap-definition file must contain
.\"O .B END CHARMAP.
charmap の定義の最後の行は
.B END CHARMAP
を置く。
.\"O .SS "Symbolic Names"
.SS シンボル名
.\"O A
.\"O .B symbolic name
.\"O for a character contains only characters of the
.\"O .B portable character set.
.\"O The name itself is enclosed between angle brackets.
文字の
.B シンボル名 (symbolic name)
は
.B 共通文字集合(portable character set)
の文字のみを含んでいる。
この名前はかぎかっこ < > で挟む。
.\"O Characters following an
.\"O .B <escape_char>
.\"O are interpreted as itself; for example, the sequence
.\"O .B "<\\\\\\\\\\\\>>"
.\"O represents the symbolic name
.\"O .B "\\\\>"
.\"O enclosed in angle brackets.
.B <escape_char>
に続く文字はそれ自身として解釈される。例えば
.B "<\e\e\e>>"
のような文字列は
.B "\e>"
というシンボル名をかぎかっこで狭んで表現している。
.\"O .SS "Character Encoding"
.SS 文字符号化
.\"O The
.\"O encoding may be in each of the following three forms:
符号化は以下の三つの形式のどれかで表す:
.TP
.\"O .I <escape_char>d<number>
.\"O with a decimal number
.I <escape_char>d<数字>
は 10 進の数値を表す。
.TP
.\"O .I <escape_char>x<number>
.\"O with a hexadecimal number
.I <escape_char>x<数字>
は 16 進の数値を表す。
.TP
.\"O .I <escape_char><number>
.\"O with an octal number.
.I <escape_char><数字>
は 8 進の数値を表す。
.\" FIXME comments
.\" FIXME char ... char
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /usr/share/i18n/charmaps/*
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHOR
.\" .SH 著者
.\" Jochen Hein (jochen.hein@delphi.central.de)
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.2.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR locale (1),
.BR localedef (1),
.BR localeconv (3),
.BR setlocale (3),
.BR locale (5)
