.\"
.\" manpage for /etc/dir_colors, config file for dircolors(1)
.\" extracted from color-ls 3.12.0.3 dircolors(1) manpage
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Dec 22 22:25:33 2001 by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.org>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul  4 18:44:50 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Apr 24 21:49:43 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan  5 22:25:30 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.\"WORD:	configuration	設定
.\"WORD:	terminal	端末
.\"WORD:	orphan		孤立
.\"WORD:	caret		キャレット
.\"
.TH DIR_COLORS 5 2001-12-26 "GNU" "Linux User Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O dir_colors \- configuration file for dircolors(1)
dir_colors \- dircolors(1) の設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The program
.\"O .BR ls (1)
.\"O uses the environment variable
.\"O .B LS_COLORS
.\"O to determine the colors in which the filenames are to be displayed.
プログラム
.BR ls (1)
は、環境変数
.B LS_COLORS
を使い、ファイル名を何色で表示するかを決定する。
.\"O This environment variable is usually set by a command like
.\"O
.\"O .RS
.\"O eval \`dircolors some_path/dir_colors\`
.\"O .RE
.\"O
.\"O found in a system default shell initialization file, like
.\"O .I /etc/profile
.\"O or
.\"O .IR /etc/csh.cshrc .
.\"O (See also
.\"O .BR dircolors (1).)
この環境変数は、通常

.RS
eval \`dircolors some_path/dir_colors\`
.RE

のようなコマンドで設定される。
このコマンドは
.I /etc/profile
や
.I /etc/csh.cshrc
といったシステムのシェル初期化ファイルにある。
.RB ( dircolors (1)
を参照すること。)
.\"O Usually, the file used here is
.\"O .I /etc/DIR_COLORS
.\"O and can be overridden by a
.\"O .I .dir_colors
.\"O file in one's home directory.
通常、ここで使われるファイルは
.I /etc/DIR_COLORS
であるが、ホームディレクトリの
.I .dir_colors
ファイルで上書きすることができる。
.PP
.\"O This configuration file consists of several statements, one per line.
.\"O Anything right of a hash mark (#) is treated as a comment, if the
.\"O hash mark is at the beginning of a line or is preceded by at least one
.\"O whitespace.
.\"O Blank lines are ignored.
設定ファイルは 1 行毎に書かれたステートメントで構成される。
ハッシュマーク (#) が行の始めにある場合や、
ハッシュマークの前に少なくとも 1 つの空白がある場合、
ハッシュマークの後ろはコメントとして扱われる。
空行は無視される。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I global
.\"O section of the file consists of any statement before the first
.\"O .B TERM
.\"O statement.
.\"O Any statement in the global section of the file is
.\"O considered valid for all terminal types.
.\"O Following the global section
.\"O is one or more
.\"O .I terminal-specific
.\"O sections, preceded by one or more
.\"O .B TERM
.\"O statements which specify the terminal types (as given by the
.\"O .B TERM
.\"O environment variable) the following declarations apply to.
.\"O It is always possible to override a global declaration by a subsequent
.\"O terminal-specific one.
このファイルの
.I グローバル
セクションは、
最初の
.B TERM
ステートメントより前にある任意のステートメントからなる。
グローバルセクションにあるステートメントは、
すべての端末タイプについて有効であるとみなされる。
グローバルセクションの次には、
.I 端末固有
セクションが続く。
各端末固有セクションの先頭には、1 つ以上の
.B TERM
ステートメントが置かれる。
.B TERM
ステートメントは、その後に続く宣言が適用される (環境変数
.B TERM
で与えられる) 端末タイプを指定する。
グローバル宣言をその後に続く端末固有の宣言で上書きすることが常に可能である。
.PP
.\"O The following statements are recognized; case is insignificant:
次のステートメントが認識される。大文字と小文字は区別されない。
.TP
.B TERM \fIterminal-type\fR
.\"O Starts a terminal-specific section and specifies which terminal it
.\"O applies to.
.\"O Multiple
.\"O .B TERM
.\"O statements can be used to create a section which applies for several
.\"O terminal types.
端末固有セクションを開始し、どの端末に適用するかを指定する。
複数の端末タイプに適用するため、複数の
.B TERM
ステートメントを使うことができる。
.TP
.B COLOR yes|all|no|none|tty
.\"O (Slackware only; ignored by GNU
.\"O .BR dircolors (1).)
(Slackware のみ; GNU
.BR dircolors (1)
では無視される。)
.\"O Specifies that colorization should always be enabled (\fIyes\fR or
.\"O \fIall\fR), never enabled (\fIno\fR or \fInone\fR), or enabled only if
.\"O the output is a terminal (\fItty\fR).
.\"O The default is \fIno\fR.
カラー表示を常に有効にするのか (\fIyes\fR または \fIall\fR)、
常に無効にするのか (\fIno\fR または \fInone\fR)、
出力先が端末の場合にのみ有効にするのか (\fItty\fR) を指定する。
デフォルトは \fIno\fR である。
.TP
.B EIGHTBIT yes|no
.\"O (Slackware only; ignored by GNU
.\"O .BR dircolors (1).)
(Slackware のみ; GNU
.BR dircolors (1)
では無視される。)
.\"O Specifies that eight-bit ISO 8859 characters should be enabled by
.\"O default.
.\"O For compatibility reasons, this can also be specified as 1 for
.\"O \fIyes\fR or 0 for \fIno\fR.
.\"O The default is \fIno\fR.
デフォルトで 8 ビットの ISO 8859 文字を有効にするかを指定する。
互換性のため、1 で \fIyes\fR を、0 で \fIno\fR を指定することができる。
デフォルトは \fIno\fR である。
.TP
.B OPTIONS \fIoptions\fR
.\"O (Slackware only; ignored by GNU
.\"O .BR dircolors (1).)
(Slackware のみ; GNU
.BR dircolors (1)
では無視される。)
.\"O Adds command-line options to the default
.\"O .B ls
.\"O command line.
.\"O The options can be any valid
.\"O .B ls
.\"O command-line options, and should include the leading minus sign.
.\"O Note that
.\"O .B dircolors
.\"O does not verify the validity of these options.
コマンドラインオプションをデフォルトの
.B ls
コマンドラインに追加する。
このオプションには、すべての有効な
.B ls
のコマンドラインオプションを指定できる。
オプションの前にはマイナス記号を置かなければならない。
.B dircolors
がオプションの有効性を検証しない点に注意すること。
.TP
.B NORMAL \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for normal (nonfilename) text.
(ファイル名でない) 通常のテキストに使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B FILE \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for a regular file.
通常のファイルに使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B DIR \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for directories.
ディレクトリに使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B LINK \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for a symbolic link.
シンボリックリンクに使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B ORPHAN \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for an orphaned symbolic link (one which
.\"O points to a nonexistent file).
.\"O If this is unspecified,
.\"O .B ls
.\"O will use the
.\"O .B LINK
.\"O color instead.
孤立した (存在しないファイルを指している)
シンボリックリンクに使われる色を指定する。
指定されない場合、
.B ls
は
.B LINK
の色を代わりに使う。
.TP
.B MISSING \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for a missing file (a nonexistent file which
.\"O nevertheless has a symbolic link pointing to it).
.\"O If this is unspecified,
.\"O .B ls
.\"O will use the
.\"O .B FILE
.\"O color instead.
行方不明のファイル (存在しないにもかかわらず
シンボリックリンクが指しているファイル) に使われる色を指定する。
指定されない場合、
.B ls
は
.B FILE
の色を代わりに使う。
.TP
.B FIFO \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for a FIFO (named pipe).
FIFO (名前付きパイプ) に使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B SOCK \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for a socket.
ソケットに使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B DOOR \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O (Supported since fileutils 4.1)
.\"O Specifies the color used for a door (Solaris 2.5 and later).
(fileutils 4.1 以降でサポートされる)
door (Solaris 2.5 以降) で使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B BLK \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for a block device special file.
ブロックデバイススペシャルファイルに使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B CHR \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for a character device special file.
キャラクターデバイススペシャルファイルに使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B EXEC \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for a file with the executable attribute set.
実行属性が設定されているファイルに使われる色を設定する。
.TP
.B LEFTCODE \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the
.\"O .I "left code"
.\"O for non-ISO\ 6429 terminals (see below).
ISO\ 6429 端末 (下記参照) 以外で
.I "left code"
に使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B RIGHTCODE \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the
.\"O .I "right code"
.\"O for non-ISO\ 6429 terminals (see below).
ISO\ 6429 端末 (下記参照) 以外で
.I "right code"
に使われる色を指定する。
.TP
.B ENDCODE \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the
.\"O .I "end code"
.\"O for non-ISO\ 6429 terminals (see below).
ISO\ 6429 端末 (下記参照) 以外で
.I "end code"
に使われる色を指定する。
.TP
\fB*\fIextension\fR \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Specifies the color used for any file that ends in \fIextension\fR.
\fIextension\fR で終るすべてのファイルに使われる色を指定する。
.TP
\fB .\fIextension\fR \fIcolor-sequence\fR
.\"O Same as \fB*\fR.\fIextension\fR.
.\"O Specifies the color used for any file that
.\"O ends in .\fIextension\fR.
.\"O Note that the period is included in the
.\"O extension, which makes it impossible to specify an extension not
.\"O starting with a period, such as
.\"O .B ~
.\"O for
.\"O .B emacs
.\"O backup files.
.\"O This form should be considered obsolete.
\fB*\fR.\fIextension\fR と同じ。
\fIextension\fR で終るすべてのファイルに使われる色を指定する。
ピリオドは拡張子に含まれ、
.B emacs
のバックアップファイル
.B ~
のようなピリオドで始まらない拡張子を指定することができない点に注意すること。
この形式は古いものと考えられている。
.\"O .SS "ISO 6429 (ANSI) Color Sequences"
.SS "ISO 6429 (ANSI) カラーシーケンス"
.\"O Most color-capable ASCII terminals today use ISO 6429 (ANSI) color sequences,
.\"O and many common terminals without color capability, including
.\"O .B xterm
.\"O and the widely used and cloned DEC VT100, will recognize ISO 6429 color
.\"O codes and harmlessly eliminate them from the output or emulate them.
.\"O .B ls
.\"O uses ISO 6429 codes by default, assuming colorization is enabled.
.\"O
.\"O ISO 6429 color sequences are composed of sequences of numbers
.\"O separated by semicolons.
.\"O The most common codes are:
最近のカラー表示可能な ASCII 端末の大部分は、
ISO 6429 (ANSI) カラーシーケンスを用いる。
.B xterm
や広く使われている DEC VT100 クローンを含む
カラー表示できない一般的な端末の多くは、
ISO 6429 カラーコードを認識し、出力から実害なく削除するか、エミュレートする。
.B ls
は、カラー表示が有効であることを仮定し、ISO 6429 コードをデフォルトで使う。

ISO 6429 カラーシーケンスは、セミコロンで区切られた数字のシーケンスで作られる。
最も一般的なコードを示す。
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.0i
.nf
.\"O  0     to restore default color
.\"O  1     for brighter colors
.\"O  4     for underlined text
.\"O  5     for flashing text
.\"O 30     for black foreground
.\"O 31     for red foreground
.\"O 32     for green foreground
.\"O 33     for yellow (or brown) foreground
.\"O 34     for blue foreground
.\"O 35     for purple foreground
.\"O 36     for cyan foreground
.\"O 37     for white (or gray) foreground
.\"O 40     for black background
.\"O 41     for red background
.\"O 42     for green background
.\"O 43     for yellow (or brown) background
.\"O 44     for blue background
.\"O 45     for purple background
.\"O 46     for cyan background
.\"O 47     for white (or gray) background
 0     デフォルトカラーを保存
 1     明るい色
 4     アンダーラインされたテキスト
 5     フラッシュするテキスト
30     前景色：黒
31     前景色：赤
32     前景色：緑
33     前景色：黄 (もしくは茶)
34     前景色：青
35     前景色：紫
36     前景色：シアン
37     前景色：白 (もしくは灰)
40     背景色：黒
41     背景色：赤
42     背景色：緑
43     背景色：黄 (もしくは茶)
44     背景色：青
45     背景色：紫
46     背景色：シアン
47     背景色：白 (もしくは灰)
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O Not all commands will work on all systems or display devices.
システムと表示デバイスによっては、動作しないコマンドもある。
.PP
.\"O .B ls
.\"O uses the following defaults:
.B ls
は以下をデフォルトとして使う。
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.0i 2.5i
.nf
.\"O \fBNORMAL\fR   0       Normal (nonfilename) text
.\"O \fBFILE\fR     0       Regular file
.\"O \fBDIR\fR      32      Directory
.\"O \fBLINK\fR     36      Symbolic link
.\"O \fBORPHAN\fR   undefined       Orphaned symbolic link
.\"O \fBMISSING\fR  undefined       Missing file
.\"O \fBFIFO\fR     31      Named pipe (FIFO)
.\"O \fBSOCK\fR     33      Socket
.\"O \fBBLK\fR      44;37   Block device
.\"O \fBCHR\fR      44;37   Character device
.\"O \fBEXEC\fR     35      Executable file
\fBNORMAL\fR   0       (ファイル名でない) 通常のテキスト
\fBFILE\fR     0       通常のファイル
\fBDIR\fR      32      ディレクトリ
\fBLINK\fR     36      シンボリックリンク
\fBORPHAN\fR   未定義  孤立したシンボリックリンク
\fBMISSING\fR  未定義  行方不明のファイル
\fBFIFO\fR     31      名前付きパイプ (FIFO)
\fBSOCK\fR     33      ソケット
\fBBLK\fR      44;37   ブロックデバイス
\fBCHR\fR      44;37   キャラクターデバイス
\fBEXEC\fR     35      実行ファイル
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O A few terminal programs do not recognize the default
.\"O properly.
.\"O If all text gets colorized after you do a directory
.\"O listing, change the
.\"O .B NORMAL
.\"O and
.\"O .B FILE
.\"O codes to the numerical codes for your normal foreground and background
.\"O colors.
デフォルトの設定を完全に認識できない端末プログラムも少数存在する。
ディレクトリをリストした後にすべてのテキストがカラー表示されたなら、
.B NORMAL
と
.B FILE
のコードを通常の前景色と背景色のための数値コードに変更すること。
.\"O .SS "Other Terminal Types (Advanced Configuration)"
.SS "その他の端末タイプ (高度な設定)"
.\"O If you have a color-capable (or otherwise highlighting) terminal (or
.\"O printer!) which uses a different set of codes, you can still generate
.\"O a suitable setup.
.\"O To do so, you will have to use the
.\"O .BR LEFTCODE ,
.\"O .BR RIGHTCODE ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B ENDCODE
.\"O definitions.
カラー表示可能 (またはハイライト表示可能) だが、
異なるコードセットを使う端末 (あるいはプリンター!) を持っている場合でも、
それに適した設定を作ることができる。
そのためには、
.BR LEFTCODE ,
.BR RIGHTCODE ,
.B ENDCODE
定義を使う必要がある。
.PP
.\"O When writing out a filename,
.\"O .B ls
.\"O generates the following output sequence:
.\"O .B LEFTCODE
.\"O .I typecode
.\"O .B RIGHTCODE
.\"O .I filename
.\"O .BR ENDCODE ,
.\"O where the
.\"O .I typecode
.\"O is the color sequence that depends on the type or name of file.
.\"O If the
.\"O .B ENDCODE
.\"O is undefined, the sequence
.\"O .B "LEFTCODE NORMAL RIGHTCODE"
.\"O will be used instead.
.\"O The purpose of the left- and rightcodes is
.\"O merely to reduce the amount of typing necessary (and to hide ugly
.\"O escape codes away from the user).
.\"O If they are not appropriate for
.\"O your terminal, you can eliminate them by specifying the respective
.\"O keyword on a line by itself.
ファイル名を出力する場合、
.B ls
は "
.B LEFTCODE
.I typecode
.B RIGHTCODE
.I filename
.B ENDCODE
" という出力シーケンスを生成する。
ここで、
.I typecode
はファイルのタイプや名前に依存したカラーシーケンスである。
.B ENDCODE
が未定義の場合、シーケンス
.B "LEFTCODE NORMAL RIGHTCODE"
が代わりに使われる。
leftcode と rightcode の目的は、単に必要な打ち込む回数を減らす
(さらに、見苦しいエスケープコードをユーザーに隠す) ことにある。
シーケンスがその端末にとって適切でない場合、
行内のそれぞれのキーワード自身を指定して削除することができる。
.PP
.\"O .B NOTE:
.\"O If the
.\"O .B ENDCODE
.\"O is defined in the global section of the setup file, it
.\"O .I cannot
.\"O be undefined in a terminal-specific section of the file.
.\"O This means any
.\"O .B NORMAL
.\"O definition will have no effect.
.\"O A different
.\"O .B ENDCODE
.\"O can, however, be specified, which would have the same effect.
.B 注意：
.B ENDCODE
が設定ファイルのグローバルセクションで定義されている場合、
ファイルの端末固有セクションで未定義にすることは
.IR できない 。
これは、
.B NORMAL
の定義が何も影響を及ぼさないことを意味する。
しかし、異なった
.B ENDCODE
を指定することで同じ効果を得ることができる。
.\"O .SS "Escape Sequences"
.SS エスケープシーケンス
.\"O To specify control- or blank characters in the color sequences or
.\"O filename extensions, either C-style \e-escaped notation or
.\"O .BR stty \-style
.\"O ^-notation can be used.
.\"O The C-style notation
.\"O includes the following characters:
カラーシーケンスやファイル名の拡張子で制御文字やブランク文字を指定するために、
C 言語スタイルの \e エスケープ表記と
.B stty
スタイルの ^ 表記の両方を使うことができる。
C 言語スタイルの表記には以下の文字が含まれる。
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.0i
.nf
.\"O \fB\ea\fR      Bell (ASCII 7)
.\"O \fB\eb\fR      Backspace (ASCII 8)
.\"O \fB\ee\fR      Escape (ASCII 27)
.\"O \fB\ef\fR      Form feed (ASCII 12)
.\"O \fB\en\fR      Newline (ASCII 10)
.\"O \fB\er\fR      Carriage Return (ASCII 13)
.\"O \fB\et\fR      Tab (ASCII 9)
.\"O \fB\ev\fR      Vertical Tab (ASCII 11)
.\"O \fB\e?\fR      Delete (ASCII 127)
.\"O \fB\e\fInnn\fR Any character (octal notation)
.\"O \fB\ex\fInnn\fR        Any character (hexadecimal notation)
.\"O \fB\e_\fR      Space
.\"O .\"O \fB\e\e\fR     Backslash (\e)
.\"O \fB\e^\fR      Caret (^)
.\"O \fB\e#\fR      Hash mark (#)
\fB\ea\fR      ベル (ASCII 7)
\fB\eb\fR      バックスペース (ASCII 8)
\fB\ee\fR      エスケープ (ASCII 27)
\fB\ef\fR      フォームフィード (ASCII 12)
\fB\en\fR      改行 (ASCII 10)
\fB\er\fR      キャリッジリターン (ASCII 13)
\fB\et\fR      タブ (ASCII 9)
\fB\ev\fR      垂直タブ (ASCII 11)
\fB\e?\fR      デリート (ASCII 127)
\fB\e\fInnn\fR    (8 進数表記の) 任意の文字
\fB\ex\fInnn\fR   (16 進数表記の) 任意の文字
\fB\e_\fR      スペース
\fB\e\e\fR      バックスラッシュ (\e)
\fB\e^\fR      キャレット (^)
\fB\e#\fR      ハッシュマーク (#)
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O Please note that escapes are necessary to enter a space, backslash,
.\"O caret, or any control character anywhere in the string, as well as a
.\"O hash mark as the first character.
ハッシュマークを始めの文字として入力するときと同様に、
スペース・バックスラッシュ・キャレット・制御文字を文字列の任意の部分に
入力するためには、エスケープが必要であることに注意すること。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.I /etc/DIR_COLORS
.\"O System-wide configuration file.
システム全体の設定ファイル。
.TP
.I ~/.dir_colors
.\"O Per-user configuration file.
ユーザー毎の設定ファイル。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O This page describes the
.\"O .B dir_colors
.\"O file format as used in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly.
このページは fileutils-4.1 パッケージで使われている
.B dir_colors
のファイル形式について説明している。
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかも知れない。
.PP
.\"O The default
.\"O .B LEFTCODE
.\"O and
.\"O .B RIGHTCODE
.\"O definitions, which are used by ISO 6429 terminals are:
ISO 6429 端末で使われる
.B LEFTCODE
と
.B RIGHTCODE
のデフォルトの定義は、次のようになっている。
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.0i
.nf
\fBLEFTCODE\fR  \ee[
\fBRIGHTCODE\fR m
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O The default
.\"O .B ENDCODE
.\"O is undefined.
.B ENDCODE
のデフォルトは定義されていない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR dircolors (1),
.BR ls (1),
.BR stty (1),
.BR xterm (1)
