.\" Copyright 1996 Daniel Quinlan (Daniel.Quinlan@linux.org)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 2007-12-14 mtk Added Reiserfs, XFS, JFS.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Ueyama Rui
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Aug 19 21:56:35 JST 1997
.\"         by Ueyama Rui <rui@campus.or.jp>
.\" Modified Wed Oct 10 11:07:33 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Dec 21 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"WORD:	extended file system		拡張ファイルシステム
.\"WORD:	second extended file system	第二拡張ファイルシステム
.\"WORD:	RAM disk			RAMディスク
.\"WORD:	High Sierra			ハイシェラ
.\"WORD:	Rock Ridge			ロックリッジ
.\"
.TH FILESYSTEMS 5 2007-12-14 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.nh
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O filesystems \- Linux file-system types: minix, ext, ext2, ext3, Reiserfs,
.\"O XFS, JFS, xia, msdos,
.\"O umsdos, vfat, proc, nfs, iso9660, hpfs, sysv, smb, ncpfs
filesystems \- Linux のファイルシステム: minix, ext, ext2, ext3, Reiserfs,
XFS, JFS, xia, msdos,
umsdos, vfat, proc, nfs, iso9660, hpfs, sysv, smb, ncpfs
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O When, as is customary, the
.\"O .B proc
.\"O file system is mounted on
.\"O .IR /proc ,
.\"O you can find in the file
.\"O .I /proc/filesystems
.\"O which file systems your kernel currently supports.
.\"O If you need a currently unsupported one, insert the corresponding
.\"O module or recompile the kernel.
.B proc
ファイルシステムが慣習どおりに
.I /proc
にマウントされている場合、
現在のカーネルがどのファイルシステムをサポートしているか
知るためにはファイル
.I /proc/filesystems
を見ればよい。
必要なファイルシステムが現在のカーネルにサポートされて
いない場合、適切なモジュールを組み込むか、それもだめならば
カーネルを再コンパイルすること。

.\"O In order to use a file system, you have to
.\"O .I mount
.\"O it; see
.\"O .BR mount (8).
ファイルシステムを使うためには、
.I マウント
する必要がある。
.BR mount (8)
を参照のこと。

.\"O Below a short description of a few of the available file systems.
以下は利用可能なファイルシステムのうち、いくつかの簡単な説明である。
.TP 10
.B "minix"
.\"O is the file system used in the Minix operating system, the first to run
.\"O under Linux.
.\"O It has a number of shortcomings: a 64MB partition size
.\"O limit, short filenames, a single timestamp, etc.
Minix オペレーティングシステムのファイルシステム。
Linux で動いた最初のファイルシステムでもある。これにはいくつか欠点がある。
まず、パーティションのサイズが最大 64MB であること。他にも、短いファイル名
しか使えない、タイムスタンプが一つだけである、などなど。
.\"O It remains useful for floppies and RAM disks.
フロッピーや RAM ディスクに便利なのでまだ残っている。
.TP
.B ext
.\"O is an elaborate extension of the
.\"O .B minix
.\"O file system.
.\"O It has been completely superseded by the second version
.\"O of the extended file system
.\"O .RB ( ext2 )
.\"O and has been removed from the kernel (in 2.1.21).
.B minix
ファイルシステムの手の込んだ拡張である。これは第二拡張ファイルシステム
(second extended file system :
.BR ext2 )
に完全にとって代わられ、カーネル 2.1.21 で取り除かれた。
.TP
.B ext2
.\"O is the high performance disk file system used by Linux for fixed disks
.\"O as well as removable media.
Linux の高性能なファイルシステムである。これは固定ディスクだけではなく
リムーバブルディスクにもよく使われる。
.\"O The second extended file system was designed as an extension of the
.\"O extended file system
.\"O .RB ( ext ).
.\"O .B ext2
.\"O offers the best performance (in terms of speed and CPU usage) of
.\"O the file systems supported under Linux.
拡張ファイルシステム
.RB ( ext )
の発展として第二拡張ファイルシステム
.RB ( ext2 )
が設計された。この
.B ext2
は Linux のファイルシステムの中で (スピードおよび CPU の使用量の面で) 最も
よいパフォーマンスを発揮する。
.TP
.B ext3
.\"O is a journaling version of the ext2 file system.
.\"O It is easy to
.\"O switch back and forth between ext2 and ext3.
ext2 ファイルシステムにジャーナル機能をつけたものである。
ext2 と ext3 は簡単に行きつ戻りつできる。
.TP
.B Reiserfs
.\"O is a journaling file system, designed by Hans Reiser,
.\"O that was integrated into Linux in kernel 2.4.1.
Hans Reiser によって設計されたジャーナリングファイルシステムである。
カーネル 2.4.1 で Linux に統合された。
.TP
.B XFS
.\"O is a journaling file system, developed by SGI,
.\"O that was integrated into Linux in kernel 2.4.20.
SGI により開発されたジャーナリングファイルシステムである。
カーネル 2.4.20 で Linux に統合された。
.TP
.B JFS
.\"O is a journaling file system, developed by IBM,
.\"O that was integrated into Linux in kernel 2.4.24.
IBM により開発されたジャーナリングファイルシステムである。
カーネル 2.4.24 で Linux に統合された。
.TP
.\"O .B xiafs
.\"O was designed and implemented to be a stable, safe file system by
.\"O extending the Minix file system code.
.\"O It provides the basic most
.\"O requested features without undue complexity.
.B xiafs
は Minix ファイルシステムの拡張で、より安定し安全なファイルシステムとして
設計、実装された。これは、いらない複雑さは避けつつ必要な基本的機能を
備えている。
.\"O The
.\"O .B xia
.\"O file system is no longer actively developed or maintained.
.\"O It was removed from the kernel in 2.1.21.
.B xia
ファイルシステムは、もはや開発もメンテナンスも行われていない。
カーネル 2.1.21 で取り除かれた。
.TP
.\"O .B msdos
.\"O is the file system used by DOS, Windows, and some OS/2 computers.
.\"O .B msdos
.\"O filenames can be no longer than 8 characters, followed by an
.\"O optional period and 3 character extension.
.B msdos
は DOS や Windows、いくらかの OS/2 コンピュータが使っているファイル
システムである。
この
.B msdos
ファイルシステムでは「8 文字の名前＋ピリオド＋3 文字の拡張子」より
長いファイル名はつけることができない。
.TP
.\"O .B umsdos
.\"O is an extended DOS file system used by Linux.
.\"O It adds capability for
.\"O long filenames, UID/GID, POSIX permissions, and special files
.\"O (devices, named pipes, etc.)  under the DOS file system, without
.\"O sacrificing compatibility with DOS.
.B umsdos
は DOS ファイルシステムを拡張した Linux のファイルシステムである。
これは DOS ファイルシステムのもとで、長いファイル名や UID/GID、POSIX 形式の
パーミッション、(デバイスファイルや名前付きパイプなどの) 特殊ファイルを
使えるようにしたものである。DOS との互換性がある。
.TP
.\"O .B vfat
.\"O is an extended DOS file system used by Microsoft Windows95 and Windows NT.
.\"O VFAT adds the capability to use long filenames under the MSDOS file system.
.B vfat
は Microsoft Windows95 と Windows NT が使う DOS ファイルシステムの拡張である。
長いファイル名が使えるようになっている。
.TP
.\"O .B proc
.\"O is a pseudo file system which is used as an interface to kernel data
.\"O structures rather than reading and interpreting
.\"O .IR /dev/kmem .
.\"O In particular, its files do not take disk space.
.\"O See
.\"O .BR proc (5).
.B proc
はカーネルデータ構造へのインターフェイスとなる疑似ファイルシステムである。
これは
.I /dev/kmem
を読んで解釈することの代わりとして使うことができる。
このファイルシステムのファイルはディスクスペースを使用しない。
.BR proc (5)
を参照のこと。
.TP
.\"O .B iso9660
.\"O is a CD-ROM file system type conforming to the ISO 9660 standard.
.B iso9660
は ISO 9660 標準に沿った CD-ROM のファイルシステムである。
.RS
.TP
.B "High Sierra"
.\"O Linux supports High Sierra, the precursor to the ISO 9660 standard for
.\"O CD-ROM file systems.
.\"O It is automatically recognized within the
.\"O .B iso9660
.\"O file-system support under Linux.
Linux はハイシェラ (High Sierra) をサポートしている。これは ISO 9660 標準が
決まるより前に使われていた CD-ROM ファイルシステムである。Linux の
.B iso9660
ファイルシステムサポートがハイシェラファイルシステムを自動で
認識することができる。
.TP
.B "Rock Ridge"
.\"O Linux also supports the System Use Sharing Protocol records specified
.\"O by the Rock Ridge Interchange Protocol.
.\"O They are used to further describe the files in the
.\"O .B iso9660
.\"O file system to a UNIX host, and provide information such as long
.\"O filenames, UID/GID, POSIX permissions, and devices.
.\"O It is automatically recognized within the
.\"O .B iso9660
.\"O file-system support under Linux.
Linux はロックリッジ (Rock Ridge) 変換プロトコルで規定された
システム使用共有プロトコルもサポートしている。これは UNIX ホ
ストのファイルを
.B iso9660
ファイルシステムでより詳しく記述するために使用され、
長いファイル名や UID/GID、POSIX 形式のパーミッション、デバイスファイル
などの情報を提供する。Linux の
.B iso9660
ファイルシステムサポートがロックリッジファイルシステムを自動で
認識することができる。
.RE
.TP
.\"O .B hpfs
.\"O is the High Performance Filesystem, used in OS/2.
.\"O This file system is
.\"O read-only under Linux due to the lack of available documentation.
.B hpfs
は OS/2 で使われる高性能ファイルシステム(High Performance Filesystem)である。
このファイルシステムはドキュメントが入手できないため、
Linux では読み込み専用 (Read-only) でしか使用できない。
.TP
.\"O .B sysv
.\"O is an implementation of the SystemV/Coherent file system for Linux.
.\"O It implements all of Xenix FS, SystemV/386 FS, and Coherent FS.
.B sysv
は SystemV/Coherent ファイルシステムの Linux での実装である。
Xenix, SystemV/386, Coherent 各ファイルシステムを使うことができる。
.TP
.\"O .B nfs
.\"O is the network file system used to access disks located on remote computers.
.B nfs
はネットワークファイルシステムである。
離れたコンピュータのディスクを使うことができる。
.TP
.\"O .B smb
.\"O is a network file system that supports the SMB protocol, used by
.\"O Windows for Workgroups, Windows NT, and Lan Manager.
.B smb
は SMB プロトコルをサポートしたネットワークファイルシステムである。
Windows for Workgroups, Windows NT, Lan Manager が使っている。
.sp
.\"O To use
.\"O .B smb
.\"O fs, you need a special mount program, which can be found in the ksmbfs
.\"O package, found at
.\"O .IR ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/Linux/system/Filesystems/smbfs .
.B smb
ファイルシステムを使うためには ksmbfs パッケージに含まれる
特殊なマウントプログラムが必要である。
ksmbfs は
.I ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/Linux/system/Filesystems/smbfs
にある。
.TP
.\"O .B ncpfs
.\"O is a network file system that supports the NCP protocol, used by
.\"O Novell NetWare.
.B ncpfs
は NCP プロトコルをサポートしたファイルシステムである。Novell NetWare が
使っている。
.sp
.\"O To use
.\"O .BR ncpfs ,
.\"O you need special programs, which can be found at
.\"O .IR ftp://linux01.gwdg.de/pub/ncpfs .
.B ncpfs
を使うためには
.I ftp://linux01.gwdg.de/pub/ncpfs
にある特殊なプログラムが必要である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR proc (5),
.BR fsck (8),
.BR mkfs (8),
.BR mount (8)
