.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Christoph J. Thompson <obituary@linuxbe.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri 16 Feb 2001 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH FTPUSERS 5 2000-08-27 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ftpusers \- list of users that may not log in via the FTP daemon
.SH 名前
ftpusers \- FTP デーモン経由でのログインを許さないユーザーのリスト
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The text file
.\"O .B ftpusers
.\"O contains a list of users that may not log in using the
.\"O File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server daemon.
.\"O This file is used not merely for
.\"O system administration purposes but for improving security within a TCP/IP
.\"O networked environment.
.\"O It will typically contain a list of the users that
.\"O either have no business using ftp or have too many privileges to be allowed
.\"O to log in through the FTP server daemon.
.\"O Such users usually include root, daemon, bin, uucp, and news.
.\"O If your FTP server daemon doesn't use
.\"O .B ftpusers
.\"O then it is suggested that you read its documentation to find out how to
.\"O block access for certain users.
.\"O Washington University FTP server Daemon
.\"O (wuftpd) and Professional FTP Daemon (proftpd) are known to make use of
.\"O .BR ftpusers .
.B ftpusers
はテキストファイルで、File Transfer Protocol (FTP) サーバーデーモン
を利用してのログインを許さないユーザーをリストしたものである。
このファイルは単にシステム管理のためだけでなく、
TCP/IP ネットワーク環境でのセキュリティを向上させるのにも利用できる。
通常は、ftp を用いた作業を行わないユーザーや、
FTP サーバーデーモン経由でのログインを許すには
権限が大きすぎるユーザーをリストしておく。
このようなユーザーには、例えば root, daemon, bin, uucp, news などが含まれる。
お使いの FTP サーバーデーモンが
.B ftpusers
を用いない場合は、そのデーモンのドキュメントを読んで、
特定のユーザーのアクセスをブロックするやり方を学んでおくことをすすめる。
Washington University FTP サーバーデーモン (wuftpd) と
Professional FTP デーモン (proftpd) とは、
.B ftpusers
を利用することがわかっている。
.\"O .SS Format
.SS フォーマット
.\"O The format of
.\"O .B ftpusers
.\"O is very simple.
.\"O There is one account name (or username) per line.
.\"O Lines starting with a # are ignored.
.B ftpusers
のフォーマットは非常に単純であり、
アカウント名 (またはユーザー名) を各行に書くだけである。
# で始まる行は無視される。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/ftpusers
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR passwd (5),
.BR proftpd (8),
.BR wuftpd (8)
