.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Peter Tobias <tobias@et-inf.fho-emden.de>
.\" This file may be distributed under the GNU General Public License.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2000-03-12, NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified 2005-02-20, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH HOSTS.EQUIV 5 2003-08-24 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O /etc/hosts.equiv \- list of hosts and users that are granted "trusted"
.\"O \fBr\fP command access to your system
.SH 名前
/etc/hosts.equiv \- 「信頼された」\fBr\fP コマンドによるシステムへの
アクセスを許可するホストおよびユーザのリスト
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The \fBhosts.equiv\fP file allows or denies hosts and users to use
.\"O the \fBr\fP-commands (e.g., \fBrlogin\fP, \fBrsh\fP or \fBrcp\fP) without
.\"O supplying a password.
.B hosts.equiv
ファイルは \fBr\fP-コマンド
.RB ( rlogin ", " rsh ", " rcp
など) によるパスワードなしでの利用を
許可/拒否するホスト/ユーザを設定する。
.PP
.\"O The file uses the following format:
このファイルでは以下の書式を用いる。
.TP
\fI[ + | \- ]\fP \fI[hostname]\fP \fI[username]\fP
.PP
.\"O The \fIhostname\fP is the name of a host which is logically equivalent
.\"O to the local host.
.\"O Users logged into that host are allowed to access
.\"O like-named user accounts on the local host without supplying a password.
.\"O The \fIhostname\fP may be (optionally) preceded by a plus (+) sign.
.\"O If the plus sign is used alone it allows any host to access your system.
.\"O You can explicitly deny access to a host by preceding the \fIhostname\fP
.\"O by a minus (\-) sign.
.\"O Users from that host must always supply a password.
.\"O For security reasons you should always use the FQDN of the hostname and
.\"O not the short hostname.
.I hostname
は、ローカルホストと論理的に等価なホストの名前である。
そのホストにログインしているユーザは、パスワードなしで
ローカルホストの同じ名前のユーザアカウントにアカウントできる。
.I hostname
の前にはプラス記号 (+) を置いてもよい。プラス記号が単独で置かれた場合は、
このシステムへのアクセスをあらゆるホストに対して許可したことになる。
アクセスを明示的に拒否するには、
.I hostname
の前にマイナス記号 (\-) を付ける。そのホストからのユーザは
常にパスワードを要求される。セキュリティ上、ホスト名は
短い名前ではなく常に FQDN を使って指定すべきである。
.PP
.\"O The \fIusername\fP entry grants a specific user access to all user
.\"O accounts (except root) without supplying a password.
.\"O That means the
.\"O user is NOT restricted to like-named accounts.
.\"O The \fIusername\fP may
.\"O be (optionally) preceded by a plus (+) sign.
.\"O You can also explicitly
.\"O deny access to a specific user by preceding the \fIusername\fP with
.\"O a minus (\-) sign.
.\"O This says that the user is not trusted no matter
.\"O what other entries for that host exist.
.I username
エントリは、特定のユーザに対して、 (root 以外の) あらゆるユーザアカウント
へのアクセスをパスワードなしで許可する。すなわち、そのユーザは同じ名前の
アカウント以外にもアクセスできる。
.I username
の前にはプラス記号 (+) を置いてもよい。
特定のユーザからのアクセスを明示的に拒否するには、
.I username
の前にマイナス記号 (\-) を付ける。こうすると、
ホストのエントリがなんと言おうとも、そのユーザは信頼されないことになる。
.PP
.\"O Netgroups can be specified by preceding the netgroup by an @ sign.
netgroup を指定することもでき、その場合は @ 記号を前につける。
.PP
.\"O Be extremely careful when using the plus (+) sign.
.\"O A simple typographical
.\"O error could result in a standalone plus sign.
.\"O A standalone plus sign is
.\"O a wildcard character that means "any host"!
プラス記号 (+) を利用する際にはくれぐれも注意すること。
単純なミスタイプで、単独のプラス記号を置いてしまうことがある。
単独のプラス記号は「すべてのホスト」を表すワイルドカードになってしまう!
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/hosts.equiv
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Some systems will only honor the contents of this file when it has owner
.\"O root and no write permission for anybody else.
.\"O Some exceptionally
.\"O paranoid systems even require that there be no other hard links to the file.
システムによっては、このファイルの内容が効力を持つのは、
このファイルの所有者が root で、
かつそれ以外に書き込み権限がない場合に限定されていることもある。
また、非常に制限がきついシステムでは、このファイルに対する他の
ハードリンクがないことが要求される場合もある。
.PP
.\"O Modern systems use the Pluggable Authentication Modules library (PAM).
.\"O With PAM a standalone plus sign is only considered a wildcard
.\"O character which means "any host" when the word
.\"O .I promiscuous
.\"O is added to the auth component line in your PAM file for
.\"O the particular service
.\"O .RB "(e.g., " rlogin ).
最近のシステムでは Pluggable Authentication Modules library (PAM) が
使われている。PAM では、単独のプラス記号が「すべてのホスト」を表す
ワイルドカードとして扱われるのは、特定のサービス (例えば
.BR rlogin )
用の PAM ファイルで auth 行にキーワード
.I promiscuous
が追加されている場合のみである。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR rhosts (5),
.BR rlogind (8),
.BR rshd (8)
