.\" Hey, Emacs! This is an -*- nroff -*- source file.
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Manoj Srivastava <srivasta@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Minor polishing, aeb
.\" Modified, 2002-06-16, Mike Coleman
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Sep 24 05:53:22 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Aug 31 05:49:00 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH HOSTS 5 2002-06-16 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O hosts \- The static table lookup for hostnames
hosts \- ホスト名の静的なルックアップテーブル
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /etc/hosts
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This manual page describes the format of the
.\"O .I /etc/hosts
.\"O file.
.\"O This file is a simple text file that associates IP addresses
.\"O with hostnames, one line per IP address.
.\"O For each host a single
.\"O line should be present with the following information:
このマニュアルページは、
.I /etc/hosts
ファイルのフォーマットについて記述している。
このファイルは簡単なテキストファイルで、1 行に 1 つの IP アドレスがあり、
IP アドレスとホスト名を関連づけている。
各ホストについて、次のような情報が 1 行で与えられる。
.RS
.PP
.\"O IP_address canonical_hostname [aliases...]
IPアドレス 正式なホスト名 [エイリアス...]
.RE
.PP
.\"O Fields of the entry are separated by any number of blanks and/or
.\"O tab characters.
.\"O Text from a "#" character until the end of the line is
.\"O a comment, and is ignored.
.\"O Host names may contain only alphanumeric
.\"O characters, minus signs ("\-"), and periods (".").
.\"O They must begin with an
.\"O alphabetic character and end with an alphanumeric character.
.\"O Optional aliases provide for name changes, alternate spellings,
.\"O shorter hostnames, or generic hostnames (for example,
.\"O .IR localhost ).
エントリのフィールドは、空白またはタブ (複数でも可) で区切られる。
"#" 文字から行末までのテキストはコメントとして無視される。
ホスト名は英数字・マイナス記号 ("\-")・ピリオド (".") を含むことができる。
ホスト名は英文字 (alphabetic character) で始まって、
英数字 (alphanumeric characte) で終わらなければならない。
エイリアスはオプションであり、名前の変更、別のスペル、
短いホスト名、一般的に使われるホスト名 (例えば
.IR localhost )
などのために用意されている。
.PP
.\"O The Berkeley Internet Name Domain (BIND) Server implements the
.\"O Internet name server for Unix systems.
.\"O It augments or replaces the
.\"O .I /etc/hosts
.\"O file or hostname lookup, and frees a host from relying on
.\"O .I /etc/hosts
.\"O being up to date and complete.
Berkeley Internet Name Domain (BIND) サーバは、
Unix システムのためのインターネットネームサーバを実装している。
これは、
.I /etc/hosts
ファイルやホスト名ルックアップを拡張したり置き換えたりするものである。
これにより各ホストは
.I /etc/hosts
を最新かつ完全に保たなくてもよくなる。
.PP
.\"O In modern systems, even though the host table has been superseded by
.\"O DNS, it is still widely used for:
ホストテーブルは、DNS にとって代わられたにもかかわらず、
現在のシステムにおいて次のような用途で広く使われている。
.TP
.\"O .B bootstrapping
.B ブート時
.\"O Most systems have a small host table containing the name and address
.\"O information for important hosts on the local network.
.\"O This is useful
.\"O when DNS is not running, for example during system bootup.
大部分のシステムは、ローカルネットワークにおいて重要なホストの
名前とアドレスが含まれた小さなホストテーブルを持っている。
これは、システムのブート時などの DNS が稼働していないときに役立つ。
.TP
.B NIS
.\"O Sites that use NIS use the host table as input to the NIS host
.\"O database.
.\"O Even though NIS can be used with DNS, most NIS sites still
.\"O use the host table with an entry for all local hosts as a backup.
NIS を使用しているサイトは、ホストテーブルを
NIS ホストデータベースの入力として用いる。
NIS を DNS と共に使用できるにもかかわらず、
大部分の NIS サイトは未だに、
全てのローカルホストのエントリをもつホストテーブルを
バックアップとして使用している。
.TP
.\"O .B isolated nodes
.B 隔絶されたノード
.\"O Very small sites that are isolated from the network use the host table
.\"O instead of DNS.
.\"O If the local information rarely changes, and the
.\"O network is not connected to the Internet, DNS offers little
.\"O advantage.
ネットワークから隔絶された非常に小さなサイトは、
DNS の代わりにホストテーブルを使用している。
ローカル情報が稀にしか変更されず、
ネットワークがインターネットと接続されていない場合、
DNS にそれほどの利点はない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/hosts
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Modifications to this file normally take effect immediately,
.\"O except in cases where the file is cached by applications.
このファイルへの変更は通常すぐに反映される。但し、アプリケーション
によりファイルの内容がキャッシュされている場合はこの限りではない。
.\"O .SS "Historical Notes"
.SS 歴史的な経緯
.\"O RFC\ 952 gave the original format for the host table, though it has
.\"O since changed.
ホストテーブルのフォーマットはその後変更されているが、
元々のフォーマットは RFC\ 952 には記載されている。

.\"O Before the advent of DNS, the host table was the only way of resolving
.\"O hostnames on the fledgling Internet.
.\"O Indeed, this file could be
.\"O created from the official host data base maintained at the Network
.\"O Information Control Center (NIC), though local changes were often
.\"O required to bring it up to date regarding unofficial aliases and/or
.\"O unknown hosts.
.\"O The NIC no longer maintains the hosts.txt files,
.\"O though looking around at the time of writing (circa 2000), there are
.\"O historical hosts.txt files on the WWW.
.\"O I just found three, from 92,
.\"O 94, and 95.
DNS の登場以前、ホストテーブルは、駆け出したばかりのインターネットにおける
ホスト名解決の唯一の方法であった。
実際、このファイルは Network Information Control Center (NIC) によって
管理される公式ホストデータベースから作成することができた。
しかし、非公式なエイリアスや不明なホストを扱えるように、
最新に保つためのローカルな変更が頻繁に必要とされた。
NIC は既に hosts.txt を管理していないが、
これを書いている (2000 年頃の) 時点で調べてみると、
WWW 上に歴史的な hosts.txt が存在する。
92, 94, 95 年のものが見つかった。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.nf
127.0.0.1       localhost
192.168.1.10    foo.mydomain.org       foo
192.168.1.13    bar.mydomain.org       bar
146.82.138.7    master.debian.org      master
209.237.226.90  www.opensource.org
.fi
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR hostname (1),
.BR resolver (3),
.BR resolver (5),
.BR hostname (7),
.BR named (8),
Internet RFC\ 952
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHOR
.\" .SH 著者
.\"O .\" This manual page was written by Manoj Srivastava <srivasta@debian.org>,
.\"O .\" for the Debian GNU/Linux system.
.\" このマニュアルページは、Debian GNU/Linux システムのために
.\" Manoj Srivastava <srivasta@debian.org> によって書かれた。
