.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 11:06:34 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Corrected Mon Oct 21 17:47:19 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond (esr@thyrsus.com)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Ueyama Rui
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Aug 25 14:30:24 JST 1997
.\"         by Ueyama Rui <rui@campus.or.jp>
.\"
.TH NOLOGIN 5 1992-12-29 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O nologin \- prevent unprivileged users from logging into the system
nologin \- 非特権ユーザのログインを禁止する
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O If the file \fI/etc/nologin\fP exists,
.\"O .BR login (1)
.\"O will allow access only to root.
.\"O Other users will
.\"O be shown the contents of this file and their logins will be refused.
\fI/etc/nologin\fP というファイルがあると
.BR login (1)
はルートのみにアクセスを許可するようになる。他のユーザーがログインしようと
しても拒否し、そのときこのファイルの内容を表示する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/etc/nologin
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1),
.BR shutdown (8)
