.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (c) 1999, 2000 SuSE GmbH Nuernberg, Germany
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the
.\" License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not,
.\" write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
.\" Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2001-06-09, Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated 2006-07-19, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.36
.\"
.TH NSCD.CONF 5 1999-10-01 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O /etc/nscd.conf \- name service cache daemon configuration file
/etc/nscd.conf \- ネームサービスキャッシュデーモンの設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The file
.\"O .I /etc/nscd.conf
.\"O is read from
.\"O .BR nscd (8)
.\"O at startup.
.\"O Each line specifies either an attribute and a value, or an
.\"O attribute, service, and a value.
.\"O Fields are separated either by SPACE
.\"O or TAB characters.
.\"O A \(aq#\(aq (number sign) indicates the beginning of a
.\"O comment; following characters, up to the end of the line,
.\"O are not interpreted by nscd.
.BR nscd (8)
は起動時にファイル
.I /etc/nscd.conf
を読み込む。
各行には「属性・値」または「属性・サービス・値」を指定する。
フィールドはスペース文字またはタブ文字で区切られる。
\(aq#\(aq (ナンバー記号) はコメントの始まりを表す。
この記号から行末までは nscd によって解釈されない。
.\"O Valid services are \fIpasswd\fP, \fIgroup\fP, or \fIhosts\fP.
指定可能なサービスは \fIpasswd\fP, \fIgroup\fP, \fIhosts\fP である。

.B logfile
.I debug-file-name
.RS
.\"O Specifies name of the file to which debug info should be written.
デバッグ情報が書き込まれるファイルの名前を指定する。
.RE

.B debug-level
.I value
.RS
.\"O Sets the desired debug level.
希望するデバッグレベルを設定する。
.RE

.B threads
.I number
.RS
.\"O This is the number of threads that are started to wait for
.\"O requests.
.\"O At least five threads will always be created.
スレッドをいくつ起動してリクエストを待つのかを指定する。
少なくとも 5 つのスレッドが常に作成される。
.RE

.B server-user
.I user
.RS
.\"O If this option is set, nscd will run as this user and not as root.
.\"O If a separate cache for every user is used (\-S parameter), this
.\"O option is ignored.
このオプションが設定されると、
nscd は root ではなく、この user として実行される。
(\-S パラメータにより) 各ユーザー毎に別々のキャッシュが使われる場合、
このオプションは無視される。
.RE

.B enable-cache
.I service
.I <yes|no>
.RS
.\"O Enables or disables the specified
.\"O .I service
.\"O cache.
指定した
.I service
のキャッシュを有効または無効にする。
.RE

.B positive-time-to-live
.I service
.I value
.RS
.\"O Sets the TTL (time-to-live) for positive entries (successful queries)
.\"O in the specified cache for
.\"O .IR service .
.\"O .I Value
.\"O is in seconds.
.\"O Larger values increase cache hit rates and reduce mean
.\"O response times, but increase problems with cache coherence.
指定した
.I service
のキャッシュにあるポジティブエントリ (成功した問い合わせ) の
TTL (time-to-live) を設定する。
.I value
の単位は秒である。
値を大きくすると、ヒット率が高くなり平均応答時間を短くできるが、
キャッシュのコヒーレンス (coherence,
キャッシュが実際のデータと一致していること) に問題が生じる。
.RE

.B negative-time-to-live
.I service
.I value
.RS
.\"O Sets the TTL (time-to-live) for negative entries (unsuccessful queries)
.\"O in the specified cache for
.\"O .IR service .
.\"O .I Value
.\"O is in seconds.
.\"O Can result in significant performance improvements if there
.\"O are several files owned by UIDs (user IDs) not in system databases (for
.\"O example untarring the linux kernel sources as root); should be kept small
.\"O to reduce cache coherency problems.
指定した
.I service
のキャッシュにあるネガティブエントリ (失敗した問い合わせ) の
TTL (time-to-live) を設定する。
.I value
の単位は秒である。
システムデータベースにない UID (ユーザーID) で所有されるファイル
(たとえば root で tar を展開した linux カーネルのソース) が少ないと、
顕著な性能の向上が見られる。
キャッシュのコヒーレンス問題を少なくするために小さな値にすべきである。
.RE

.B suggested-size
.I service
.I value
.RS
.\"O This is the internal hash table size,
.\"O .I value
.\"O should remain a prime number for optimum efficiency.
内部ハッシュテーブルの大きさを指定する。
効率を最適にするために
.I value
は素数にしておくべきである。
.RE

.B check-files
.I service
.I <yes|no>
.RS
.\"O Enables or disables checking the file belonging to the specified
.\"O .I service
.\"O for changes.
.\"O The files are
.\"O .IR /etc/passwd ,
.\"O .IR /etc/group ,
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /etc/hosts .
指定した
.I service
に関連するファイルの変更のチェックを有効または無効にする。
ファイルは
.IR /etc/passwd ,
.IR /etc/group ,
.I /etc/hosts
である。
.RE

.B max-threads
.I threads
.RS
.\"O Specifies the maximum number of threads to be started.
開始するスレッドの最大数を指定する。
.RE

.B stat-user
.I username
.RS
.\"O Specifies the user who is allowed to request statistics.
統計情報の参照を許可するユーザを指定する。
.RE

.B reload-count
unlimited |
.I number
.RS
.\"O Limit on the number of times a cached entry gets reloaded without being used
.\"O before it gets removed.
.\"O The default is 5.
キャッシュされたエントリが使用されなかったときに、
削除される前に何回リロードされるかを設定する。
.RE

.B paranoia
.I <yes|no>
.RS
.\"O Enabling paranoia mode causes nscd to restart itself periodically.
パラノイアモードを有効にする。
パラノイアモードでは nscd を定期的に再起動する。
.RE

.B restart-interval
.I time
.RS
.\"O Sets the restart interval to
.\"O .I time
.\"O seconds
.\"O if periodic restart is enabled by enabling
.\"O .B paranoia
.\"O mode.
パラノイアモードが有効で定期的に再起動する場合の、
再起動間隔を
.I time
秒に設定する。
.RE

.B persistent
.I service
.I <yes|no>
.RS
.\"O Keep the content of the cache for
.\"O .I service
.\"O over server restarts; useful when
.\"O .B paranoia
.\"O mode is set.
サーバの再起動の前後で
.I service
のキャッシュ内容を保持する。
.B paranoia
モードが有効の場合に便利である。
.RE

.B shared
.I service
.I <yes|no>
.RS
.\"O The memory mapping of the nscd databases for
.\"O .I service
.\"O is shared with the clients so
.\"O that they can directly search in them instead of having to ask the
.\"O daemon over the socket each time a lookup is performed.
.I service
の nscd データベースのメモリ・マッピングをクライアント間で共有する。
これにより、検索を実行する度にソケット経由でデーモンに問い合わせを
行わずに、直接データベースを検索できるようになる。
.RE
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR nscd (8)
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHOR
.\" .SH 著者
.\"O .\" .B nscd
.\"O .\" was written by Thorsten Kukuk and Ulrich Drepper.
.\" .B nscd
.\" は Thorsten Kukuk と Ulrich Drepper によって書かれた。
