.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 1996 Austin Donnelly <and1000@cam.ac.uk>,
.\" with additional material Copyright (c) 1995 Martin Schulze
.\"     <joey@infodrom.north.de>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\"   This manpage was made by merging two independently written manpages,
.\"   one written by Martin Schulze (18 Oct 95), the other written by
.\"   Austin Donnelly, (9 Jan 96).
.\"
.\" Thu Jan 11 12:14:41 1996 Austin Donnelly  <and1000@cam.ac.uk>
.\"   * Merged two services(5) manpages
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 MOTOKI Akihiro
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Aug 20 08:32:26 JST 1997
.\"       by MOTOKI Akihiro <motoki@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SERVICES 5 2010-05-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O services \- Internet network services list
services \- インターネット ネットワークサービス リスト
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B services
.\"O is a plain ASCII file providing a mapping between human-friendly textual
.\"O names for internet services, and their underlying assigned port
.\"O numbers and protocol types.
.\"O Every networking program should look into
.\"O this file to get the port number (and protocol) for its service.
.B services
は、人が分かりやすい形のインターネットサービスの名前と、
それらのサービスに割り当てられたポート番号や
プロトコル種別の対応関係が書かれているテキストファイルである。
ネットワーク上で動作するプログラムはすべて、
そのサービスに対応するポート番号 (とプロトコル) を得るために、
このファイルを調べる必要がある。
.\"O The C library routines
.\"O .BR getservent (3),
.\"O .BR getservbyname (3),
.\"O .BR getservbyport (3),
.\"O .BR setservent (3),
.\"O and 
.\"O .BR endservent (3)
.\"O support querying this file from programs.
C ライブラリ関数である
.BR getservent (3),
.BR getservbyname (3),
.BR getservbyport (3),
.BR setservent (3),
.BR endservent (3)
を利用することで、プログラムはこのファイルを調べることができる。

.\"O Port numbers are assigned by the IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers
.\"O Authority), and their current policy is to assign both TCP and UDP
.\"O protocols when assigning a port number.
.\"O Therefore, most entries will
.\"O have two entries, even for TCP-only services.
ポート番号は、IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority) によって
割り当てられており、現在はポート番号を割り当てる際に
TCP と UDP の両方のプロトコルを割り当てることになっている。
そのため、ほとんどのサービスに対して、
たとえ TCP だけのサービスの場合であっても、対応する項目が二つあることになる。

.\"O Port numbers below 1024 (so-called "low numbered" ports) can only be
.\"O bound to by root (see
.\"O .BR bind (2),
.\"O .BR tcp (7),
.\"O and 
.\"O .BR udp (7)).
.\"O This is so clients connecting to low numbered ports can trust
.\"O that the service running on the port is the standard implementation,
.\"O and not a rogue service run by a user of the machine.
.\"O Well-known port numbers specified by the IANA are normally
.\"O located in this root-only space.
1024 より小さいポート番号 (いわゆる "low numbered" ポート) は
管理者 (root) 権限によってのみ使用することができる
.RB ( bind (2), 
.BR tcp (7),
.BR udp (7)
参照)。
これは、これらのポートに接続するクライアントに対して、
そのポートで動いているサービスが標準的な実装であり、
その計算機のユーザーが動かしている
不正なサービスではないことを保証するためである。
IANA に明記されているよく使用されるポート番号は、
通常このような管理者だけが使用できる範囲に配置される。

.\"O The presence of an entry for a service in the 
.\"O .B services
.\"O file does not necessarily mean that the service is currently running
.\"O on the machine.
.\"O See
.\"O .BR inetd.conf (5)
.\"O for the configuration of Internet services offered.
.\"O Note that not all
.\"O networking services are started by
.\"O .BR inetd (8),
.\"O and so won't appear in
.\"O .BR inetd.conf (5).
.B services
ファイルにあるサービスに対する項目があっても、必ずしもそのサービスが現
在その計算機で動いている訳ではない。利用可能なインターネットサービスの設定に
ついては
.BR inetd.conf (5)
に記述されている。ただし、すべてのサービスが
.BR inetd (8)
によって起動されるわけではないので、
.BR inetd.conf (5)
には書かれていないサービスもあることに注意する必要がある。
.\"O In particular, news (NNTP) and mail (SMTP) servers are often
.\"O initialized from the system boot scripts.
特に、ネットニュース (NNTP) や メール (SMTP) のサーバーは、システム起動時の
スクリプトから起動されることが多い。

.\"O The location of the
.\"O .B services
.\"O file is defined by
.\"O .B _PATH_SERVICES
.\"O in
.\"O .IR <netdb.h> "."
.\"O This is usually set to
.\"O .IR /etc/services "."
.B services
ファイルの場所は、
.I <netdb.h>
中の
.B _PATH_SERVICES
によって定義されている。
この値は通常
.I /etc/services
に設定されている。

.\"O Each line describes one service, and is of the form:
 1 行につき 1 サービスが記述されており、その形式は以下の通りである。
.IP
\f2service-name\ \ \ port\f3/\f2protocol\ \ \ \f1[\f2aliases ...\f1]
.TP
.\"O where:
.TP 10
.I service-name
.\"O is the friendly name the service is known by and looked up under.
.\"O It is case sensitive.
.\"O Often, the client program is named after the
.\"O .IR service-name "."
サービスを表す分かりやすい名前であり、検索の際にも使用される。
大文字と小文字は区別される。
クライアントプログラムは
.I service-name
にちなんで名付けられることが多い。
.TP
.I port
.\"O is the port number (in decimal) to use for this service.
サービスに対して使用されるポート番号。10 進数で指定する。
.TP
.I protocol
.\"O is the type of protocol to be used.
.\"O This field should match an entry
.\"O in the
.\"O .BR protocols (5)
.\"O file.
.\"O Typical values include
.\"O .B tcp
.\"O and
.\"O .BR udp .
使用されるプロトコルの種類。この欄は、
.BR protocols (5)
ファイルの中の項目と一致している必要がある。
通常使用される値は、
.B tcp
と
.B udp 
である。
.TP
.I aliases
.\"O is an optional space or tab separated list of other names for this
.\"O service.
.\"O Again, the names are case
.\"O sensitive.
サービスに対する別名のリスト (区切はスペースまたはタブ) で、この欄は
必要にならば書くことができる。
また、別名は大文字と小文字は区別される。
.PP
.\"O Either spaces or tabs may be used to separate the fields.
それぞれの欄の区切りには、スペースまたはタブが使用される。

.\"O Comments are started by the hash sign (#) and continue until the end
.\"O of the line.
.\"O Blank lines are skipped.
コメントはシャープ (#) で始まり、その行の終わりまでがコメントとみなされる。
空行は飛ばされる。

.\"O The
.\"O .I service-name
.\"O should begin in the first column of the file, since leading spaces are
.\"O not stripped.
行の始めのスペースは無視されないので、
.I service-name
は、行頭から書かなければならない。
.\"O .I service-names
.\"O can be any printable characters excluding space and tab.
.\"O However, a conservative choice of characters should be used to minimize
.\"O compatibility problems.
.\"O E.g., a\-z, 0\-9, and hyphen (\-) would seem a
.\"O sensible choice.
.I service-names
は、スペースとタブ以外の印字可能な文字なら何でもよいが、しかしながら
互換性の問題を少なくするような文字を選択すべきである。
例えば、a\-z 、0\-9 、ハイフォン (\-) を使用するのが無難と思われる。

.\"O Lines not matching this format should not be present in the
.\"O file.
.\"O (Currently, they are silently skipped by
.\"O .BR getservent (3),
.\"O .BR getservbyname (3),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR getservbyport (3).
.\"O However, this behavior should not be relied on.)
指定された形式に合わない行はあってはならない (現在は、そのような行は
.BR getservent (3),
.BR getservbyname (3),
.BR getservbyport (3)
によって無視される。しかし、その場合の挙動は信頼できない)。

.\" The following is not true as at glibc 2.8 (a line with a comma is
.\" ignored by getservent()); it's not clear if/when it was ever true.
.\"O .\"   As a backward compatibility feature, the slash (/) between the
.\"O .\"   .I port
.\"O .\"   number and
.\"O .\"   .I protocol
.\"O .\"   name can in fact be either a slash or a comma (,).
.\"O .\"   Use of the comma in
.\"O .\"   modern installations is deprecated.
.\"   古いバージョンとの整合性の問題から、実際には
.\"   .I port
.\"   番号と
.\"   .I protocol
.\"   の間のスラッシュ (/) は、スラッシュかコンマ (,) のどちらでも構わない。
.\"   しかしながら、今なおコンマを使用するのは望ましいことではない。
.\"   
.\"O This file might be distributed over a network using a network-wide
.\"O naming service like Yellow Pages/NIS or BIND/Hesiod.
このファイルは、Yellow Pages/NIS や BIND/Hesiod のようなネットワーク上の名前
サービスを用いて、ネットワークを通じて配布される可能性もある。

.\"O A sample
.\"O .B services
.\"O file might look like this:
.B services
ファイルの見本を以下に示す。
.RS
.nf
.sp
.ta 3i
netstat         15/tcp
qotd            17/tcp          quote
msp             18/tcp          # message send protocol
msp             18/udp          # message send protocol
chargen         19/tcp          ttytst source
chargen         19/udp          ttytst source
ftp             21/tcp
# 22 \- unassigned
telnet          23/tcp
.fi
.RE
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.I /etc/services
.\"O The Internet network services list
インターネット ネットワークサービスのリスト
.TP
.I <netdb.h>
.\"O Definition of
.\"O .B _PATH_SERVICES
.B _PATH_SERVICES
の定義
.\"O .\" .SH BUGS
.\" .SH バグ
.\" It's not clear when/if the following was ever true;
.\" it isn't true for glibc 2.8:
.\"O .\"    There is a maximum of 35 aliases, due to the way the
.\"O .\"    .BR getservent (3)
.\"O .\"    code is written.
.\"O .\"
.\"    .BR getservent (3)
.\"    のコードの書き方の問題で、35 個までしか別名を付けることができない。
.\"
.\" It's not clear when/if the following was ever true;
.\" it isn't true for glibc 2.8:
.\"O .\"   Lines longer than
.\"O .\"   .B BUFSIZ
.\"O .\"   (currently 1024) characters will be ignored by
.\"O .\"   .BR getservent (3),
.\"O .\"   .BR getservbyname (3),
.\"O .\"   and
.\"O .\"   .BR getservbyport (3).
.\"O .\"   However, this will also cause the next line to be mis-parsed.
.\"   .B BUFSIZ
.\"   (現在は 1024) 文字より長い行は、
.\"   .BR getservent (3),
.\"   .BR getservbyname (3),
.\"   .BR getservbyport (3)
.\"   により無視される。さらに、このことは次の行が正しく解釈されない原因となる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR listen (2),
.BR endservent (3),
.BR getservbyname (3),
.BR getservbyport (3),
.BR getservent (3),
.BR setservent (3),
.BR inetd.conf (5),
.BR protocols (5),
.BR inetd (8)

.\"O Assigned Numbers RFC, most recently RFC\ 1700, (AKA STD0002)
ポート番号の割り当てを定めている RFC (最新版は RFC\ 1700、別名 STD0002)
