.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Andreas Dilger (adilger@turbolinux.com)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Aug 16 2001 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SLABINFO 5 2007-09-30 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O /proc/slabinfo \- Kernel slab allocator statistics
.SH 名前
/proc/slabinfo \- カーネル slab アロケータの統計
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B cat /proc/slabinfo
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Frequently used objects in the Linux kernel
.\"O (buffer heads, inodes, dentries, etc.)
.\"O have their own cache.
.\"O The file
.\"O .I /proc/slabinfo
.\"O gives statistics.
.\"O For example:
Linux カーネルの内部で良く利用されるオブジェクト
(バッファヘッド、i-ノード、ディレクトリ・エントリなど)
は、それぞれ自分用のキャッシュを備えている。ファイル
.I /proc/slabinfo
はこれらの統計を与える。例を示す。
.LP
.in +4n
.nf
% cat /proc/slabinfo
slabinfo \- version: 1.1
kmem_cache            60     78    100    2    2    1
blkdev_requests     5120   5120     96  128  128    1
mnt_cache             20     40     96    1    1    1
inode_cache         7005  14792    480 1598 1849    1
dentry_cache        5469   5880    128  183  196    1
filp                 726    760     96   19   19    1
buffer_head        67131  71240     96 1776 1781    1
vm_area_struct      1204   1652     64   23   28    1
\&...
size-8192              1     17   8192    1   17    2
size-4096             41     73   4096   41   73    1
\&...
.fi
.in
.LP
.\"O For each slab cache, the cache name, the number of currently
.\"O active objects, the total number of available objects, the
.\"O size of each object in bytes, the number of pages with at
.\"O least one active object, the total number of allocated pages,
.\"O and the number of pages per slab are given.
それぞれの slab キャッシュごとに、キャッシュの名前、
現在アクティブなオブジェクトの数、利用可能なオブジェクトの総数、
各オブジェクトのサイズ (バイト単位)、少なくとも一つのアクティブな
オブジェクトを有するページの数、アロケートされたページの総数、
slab あたりのページ数、が与えられている。

.\"O Note that because of object alignment and slab cache overhead,
.\"O objects are not normally packed tightly into pages.
.\"O Pages with even one in-use object are considered in-use and cannot be
.\"O freed.
なお、
オブジェクトのアラインメントと slab キャッシュのオーバーヘッドとにより、
オブジェクトは通常ページの内部にきっちりとは収められていない。
利用中のオブジェクトをひとつでも保持しているページは、
利用中であるとみなされ、解放できない。

.\"O Kernels compiled with slab cache statistics will also have
.\"O "(statistics)" in the first line of output, and will have 5
.\"O additional columns, namely: the high water mark of active
.\"O objects; the number of times objects have been allocated;
.\"O the number of times the cache has grown (new pages added
.\"O to this cache); the number of times the cache has been
.\"O reaped (unused pages removed from this cache); and the
.\"O number of times there was an error allocating new pages
.\"O to this cache.
.\"O If slab cache statistics are not enabled
.\"O for this kernel, these columns will not be shown.
slab キャッシュ統計の機能を有効にしてコンパイルされたカーネルでは、
出力の最初の行に "(statistics)" と表示され、 5 つのカラムが追加される。
それぞれ、アクティブなオブジェクトの瞬間最大値、
.\"nakano でいいのかなあ > high water mark
オブジェクトがアロケートされた回数、
キャッシュの大きさが拡張された
(新しいページがこのキャッシュに追加された) 回数、
キャッシュの大きさが縮小された
(使っていないページがこのキャッシュから削除された) 回数、
新たなページをこのキャッシュにアロケートする際に起きたエラーの回数、である。
slab キャッシュ統計が使えないカーネルでは、これらのカラムは表示されない。

.\"O SMP systems will also have "(SMP)" in the first line of
.\"O output, and will have two additional columns for each slab,
.\"O reporting the slab allocation policy for the CPU-local
.\"O cache (to reduce the need for inter-CPU synchronization
.\"O when allocating objects from the cache).
.\"O The first column is the per-CPU limit: the maximum number of objects that
.\"O will be cached for each CPU.
.\"O The second column is the
.\"O batchcount: the maximum number of free objects in the
.\"O global cache that will be transferred to the per-CPU cache
.\"O if it is empty, or the number of objects to be returned
.\"O to the global cache if the per-CPU cache is full.
SMP システムでは、出力の最初の行に "(SMP)" と表示され、
各 slab ごとに 2 つのカラムが追加される。
これらは各 CPU が持つローカルなキャッシュ (per-CPU キャッシュ) の
slab アロケーションポリシーを表示する
(per-CPU キャッシュは、
オブジェクトをキャッシュからアロケートする際に
CPU 間での同期を減少させるために設けられている)。
最初のカラムは per-CPU 制限、
すなわち各 CPU ごとにキャッシュできるオブジェクトの最大数である。
二番目のカラムはバッチカウント、
すなわち per-CPU キャッシュが空だったり一杯だったりした場合に、
グローバルなキャッシュと受け渡しできるフリーなオブジェクトの最大数である。

.\"O If both slab cache statistics and SMP are defined, there
.\"O will be four additional columns, reporting the per-CPU
.\"O cache statistics.
.\"O The first two are the per-CPU cache
.\"O allocation hit and miss counts: the number of times an
.\"O object was or was not available in the per-CPU cache
.\"O for allocation.
.\"O The next two are the per-CPU cache free
.\"O hit and miss counts: the number of times a freed object
.\"O could or could not fit within the per-CPU cache limit,
.\"O before flushing objects to the global cache.
slab キャッシュ統計と SMP が両方有効になっている場合は、
per-CPU キャッシュの統計を表示する 4 つのカラムがさらに追加される。
最初の 2 つは per-CPU キャッシュの
アロケーションヒットカウントとアロケーションミスカウントである。
すなわち、あるオブジェクトをアロケートしたときに、
それが per-CPU キャッシュの内部に あった/なかった 回数である。
続く 2 つは、per-CPU キャッシュのフリーヒットカウントとミスカウントである。
すなわち解放されたオブジェクトをグローバルなキャッシュにフラッシュする前に、
per-CPU キャッシュの制限の範囲に 収まった/収まらなかった 回数である。

.\"O It is possible to tune the SMP per-CPU slab cache limit
.\"O and batchcount via:
SMP において per-CPU slab キャッシュの制限値や
バッチカウントを変更するには、以下のようにすればよい:

.in +4n
.nf
echo "\fIcache_name limit batchcount\fP" > /proc/slabinfo
.fi
.in
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I <linux/slab.h>
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O .I /proc/slabinfo
.\"O exists since Linux 2.1.23.
.\"O SMP per-CPU caches exist since Linux 2.4.0-test3.
.I /proc/slabinfo
は Linux 2.1.23 以降に存在する。
SMP における CPU ごとのキャッシュは Linux 2.4.0-test3 以降に存在する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Since Linux 2.6.16 the file
.\"O .I /proc/slabinfo
.\"O is only present if the
.\"O .B CONFIG_SLAB
.\"O kernel configuration option is enabled.
Linux 2.6.16 以降では、
.I /proc/slabinfo
ファイルは、カーネル設定オプション
.B CONFIG_SLAB
を有効にした場合のみ存在する。

