.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified formatting Sat Jul 24 17:13:38 1993, Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified (extensions and corrections)
.\"   Sun May  1 14:21:25 MET DST 1994 Michael Haardt
.\"   If mistakes in the capabilities are found, please send a bug report to:
.\"   michael@moria.de
.\" Modified Mon Oct 21 17:47:19 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond (esr@thyrsus.com)
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NOKUBI Takatsugu
.\" 	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Jan 29 13:09:56 JST 1999
.\"	by NOKUBI Takatsugu <knok@daionet.gr.jp>
.\" Proofed & Modified Thu 12 Oct 2000
.\"     by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH TERMCAP 5 2020\-08\-13 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
termcap \- 端末機能のデータベース
.SH 説明
The termcap database is an obsolete facility for describing the capabilities
of character\-cell terminals and printers.  It is retained only for
compatibility with old programs; new programs should use the \fBterminfo\fP(5)
database and associated libraries.
.PP
\fI/etc/termcap\fP は、多くの異なる種類の端末に関する機能を列記したアスキーファイル (データベースマスター) である。 プログラムは
termcap を読み込んで、 実際に使用している端末に個別のエスケープコード群を取得する。
これを用いると、その端末の視覚的な性質を制御することができる (端末の他の性質は \fBstty\fP(1)  で制御する)。 termcap
データベースは、環境変数 \fBTERM\fP の値で引かれる。
.PP
termcap のエントリーは、単一の論理行でなければならない。 ただし、行末に \(aq\e\(aq を用いればそこでの改行を抑制することができる。
フィールドは \(aq:\(aq で分割される。 各エントリーの最初のフィールドは左側先頭から始まり、
内容はその端末の名前のリストである。名前の区切りには \(aq|\(aq が用いられる。
.PP
The first subfield may (in BSD termcap entries from versions 4.3 and
earlier) contain a short name consisting of two characters.  This short name
may consist of capital or small letters.  In 4.4BSD, termcap entries this
field is omitted.
.PP
2 番目 (最新の 4.4BSD フォーマットでは 1 番目) のサブフィールドには、 環境変数 \fBTERM\fP で用いられる名称が入る。
このフィールドには小文字しか使えない。 選択可能なハードウェア機能は、ハイフンと接尾語 (suffix)
を名称の後に追加することによって示す必要がある。以下の例を見よ。 慣習的な接尾語には、w (80 文字以上の幅がある)、 am (automatic
margins: 自動的な行の折り返し)、 nam (non automatic margins: 自動的でない行の折り返し)、 rv (reverse
video display: 反転ビデオ表示)  などがある。 3番目のサブフィールドには、
このtermcapエントリーに対する長い説明的な名称が入る。
.PP
この後に続くフィールドには、端末の機能を記述する。 機能を記述する行が継続する場合は、 左端から1つのタブをおいてインデントしなければならない。
.PP
順序については定義されていないが、 大文字小文字は区別せずにアルファベット順にならべ、
始めはブール値の、次は数値の、最後は文字列の機能を書くことが推奨されている。 同じような働きをする機能は 1 行にまとめて書くと良い。
.PP
Example for:
.nf
.PP
Head line: vt|vt101|DEC VT 101 terminal in 80 character mode:\e
Head line: Vt|vt101\-w|DEC VT 101 terminal in (wide) 132 character mode:\e
Boolean: :bs:\e
Numeric: :co#80:\e
String: :sr=\eE[H:\e
.fi
.SS ブール値で指定する機能
.nf
5i	Printer will not echo on screen
am	Automatic margins which means automatic line wrap
bs	Control\-H (8 dec.) performs a backspace
bw	Backspace on left margin wraps to previous line and right margin
da	Display retained above screen
db	Display retained below screen
eo	A space erases all characters at cursor position
es	Escape sequences and special characters work in status line
gn	Generic device
hc	This is a hardcopy terminal
HC	The cursor is hard to see when not on bottom line
hs	Has a status line
hz	Hazeltine bug, the terminal can not print tilde characters
in	Terminal inserts null bytes, not spaces, to fill whitespace
km	Terminal has a meta key
mi	Cursor movement works in insert mode
ms	Cursor movement works in standout/underline mode
NP	No pad character
NR	ti does not reverse te
nx	No padding, must use XON/XOFF
os	Terminal can overstrike
ul	Terminal underlines although it can not overstrike
xb	Beehive glitch, f1 sends ESCAPE, f2 sends \fB\(haC\fP
xn	Newline/wraparound glitch
xo	Terminal uses xon/xoff protocol
xs	Text typed over standout text will be displayed in standout
xt	Teleray glitch, destructive tabs and odd standout mode
.fi
.SS 数値で指定する機能
.nf
co	端末の行数
dB	ハードコピー端末において、バックスペースに必要な遅延時間 (ミリ秒単位)
dC	ハードコピー端末において、復帰に必要な遅延時間 (ミリ秒単位)
dF	ハードコピー端末において、頁送りに必要な遅延時間 (ミリ秒単位)
dN	ハードコピー端末において、改行に必要な遅延時間 (ミリ秒単位)
dT	ハードコピー端末において、タブストップに必要な遅延時間 (ミリ秒単位)
dV	ハードコピー端末において、垂直タブに必要な遅延時間 (ミリ秒単位)
it	タブ位置間の文字数
lh	ソフトラベルの高さ
lm	画面メモリーに収容できる行数
lw	ソフトラベルの幅
li	行数
Nl	ソフトラベルの数
pb	パディングが必要となる最低のボーレート
sg	強調表示の不具合 (強調表示に切替えたときに表示されるスペースの数)
ug	下線表示の不具合 (強調表示に切替えたときに表示されるスペースの数)
vt	仮想端末番号
ws	ステータス行の幅 (画面幅と異なる場合)
.fi
.SS 文字列で指定する機能
.nf
!1	shifted save key
!2	shifted suspend key
!3	shifted undo key
#1	shifted help key
#2	shifted home key
#3	shifted input key
#4	shifted cursor left key
%0	redo key
%1	help key
%2	mark key
%3	message key
%4	move key
%5	next\-object key
%6	open key
%7	options key
%8	previous\-object key
%9	print key
%a	shifted message key
%b	shifted move key
%c	shifted next key
%d	shifted options key
%e	shifted previous key
%f	shifted print key
%g	shifted redo key
%h	shifted replace key
%i	shifted cursor right key
%j	shifted resume key
&0	shifted cancel key
&1	reference key
&2	refresh key
&3	replace key
&4	restart key
&5	resume key
&6	save key
&7	suspend key
&8	undo key
&9	shifted begin key
*0	shifted find key
*1	shifted command key
*2	shifted copy key
*3	shifted create key
*4	shifted delete character
*5	shifted delete line
*6	select key
*7	shifted end key
*8	shifted clear line key
*9	shifted exit key
@0	find key
@1	begin key
@2	cancel key
@3	close key
@4	command key
@5	copy key
@6	create key
@7	end key
@8	enter/send key
@9	exit key
al	Insert one line
AL	Insert %1 lines
ac	Pairs of block graphic characters to map alternate character set
ae	End alternative character set
as	Start alternative character set for block graphic characters
bc	Backspace, if not \fB\(haH\fP
bl	Audio bell
bt	Move to previous tab stop
cb	Clear from beginning of line to cursor
cc	Dummy command character
cd	Clear to end of screen
ce	Clear to end of line
ch	Move cursor horizontally only to column %1
cl	Clear screen and cursor home
cm	Cursor move to row %1 and column %2 (on screen)
CM	Move cursor to row %1 and column %2 (in memory)
cr	Carriage return
cs	Scroll region from line %1 to %2
ct	Clear tabs
cv	Move cursor vertically only to line %1
dc	Delete one character
DC	Delete %1 characters
dl	Delete one line
DL	Delete %1 lines
dm	Begin delete mode
do	Cursor down one line
DO	Cursor down #1 lines
ds	Disable status line
eA	Enable alternate character set
ec	Erase %1 characters starting at cursor
ed	End delete mode
ei	End insert mode
ff	Formfeed character on hardcopy terminals
fs	Return character to its position before going to status line
F1	The string sent by function key f11
F2	The string sent by function key f12
F3	The string sent by function key f13
\&...	\&...
F9	The string sent by function key f19
FA	The string sent by function key f20
FB	The string sent by function key f21
\&...	\&...
FZ	The string sent by function key f45
Fa	The string sent by function key f46
Fb	The string sent by function key f47
\&...	\&...
Fr	The string sent by function key f63
hd	Move cursor a half line down
ho	Cursor home
hu	Move cursor a half line up
i1	Initialization string 1 at login
i3	Initialization string 3 at login
is	Initialization string 2 at login
ic	Insert one character
IC	Insert %1 characters
if	Initialization file
im	Begin insert mode
ip	Insert pad time and needed special characters after insert
iP	Initialization program
K1	upper left key on keypad
K2	center key on keypad
K3	upper right key on keypad
K4	bottom left key on keypad
K5	bottom right key on keypad
k0	Function key 0
k1	Function key 1
k2	Function key 2
k3	Function key 3
k4	Function key 4
k5	Function key 5
k6	Function key 6
k7	Function key 7
k8	Function key 8
k9	Function key 9
k;	Function key 10
ka	Clear all tabs key
kA	Insert line key
kb	Backspace key
kB	Back tab stop
kC	Clear screen key
kd	Cursor down key
kD	Key for delete character under cursor
ke	turn keypad off
kE	Key for clear to end of line
kF	Key for scrolling forward/down
kh	Cursor home key
kH	Cursor hown down key
kI	Insert character/Insert mode key
kl	Cursor left key
kL	Key for delete line
kM	Key for exit insert mode
kN	Key for next page
kP	Key for previous page
kr	Cursor right key
kR	Key for scrolling backward/up
ks	Turn keypad on
kS	Clear to end of screen key
kt	Clear this tab key
kT	Set tab here key
ku	Cursor up key
l0	Label of zeroth function key, if not f0
l1	Label of first function key, if not f1
l2	Label of first function key, if not f2
\&...	\&...
la	Label of tenth function key, if not f10
le	Cursor left one character
ll	Move cursor to lower left corner
LE	Cursor left %1 characters
LF	Turn soft labels off
LO	Turn soft labels on
mb	Start blinking
MC	Clear soft margins
md	Start bold mode
me	End all mode like so, us, mb, md, and mr
mh	Start half bright mode
mk	Dark mode (Characters invisible)
ML	Set left soft margin
mm	Put terminal in meta mode
mo	Put terminal out of meta mode
mp	Turn on protected attribute
mr	Start reverse mode
MR	Set right soft margin
nd	Cursor right one character
nw	Carriage return command
pc	Padding character
pf	Turn printer off
pk	Program key %1 to send string %2 as if typed by user
pl	Program key %1 to execute string %2 in local mode
pn	Program soft label %1 to show string %2
po	Turn the printer on
pO	Turn the printer on for %1 (<256) bytes
ps	Print screen contents on printer
px	Program key %1 to send string %2 to computer
r1	Reset string 1 to set terminal to sane modes
r2	Reset string 2 to set terminal to sane modes
r3	Reset string 3 to set terminal to sane modes
RA	disable automatic margins
rc	Restore saved cursor position
rf	Reset string filename
RF	Request for input from terminal
RI	Cursor right %1 characters
rp	Repeat character %1 for %2 times
rP	Padding after character sent in replace mode
rs	Reset string
RX	Turn off XON/XOFF flow control
sa	Set %1 %2 %3 %4 %5 %6 %7 %8 %9 attributes
SA	enable automatic margins
sc	Save cursor position
se	End standout mode
sf	Normal scroll one line
SF	Normal scroll %1 lines
so	Start standout mode
sr	Reverse scroll
SR	scroll back %1 lines
st	Set tabulator stop in all rows at current column
SX	Turn on XON/XOFF flow control
ta	move to next hardware tab
tc	Read in terminal description from another entry
te	End program that uses cursor motion
ti	Begin program that uses cursor motion
ts	Move cursor to column %1 of status line
uc	Underline character under cursor and move cursor right
ue	End underlining
up	Cursor up one line
UP	Cursor up %1 lines
us	Start underlining
vb	Visible bell
ve	Normal cursor visible
vi	Cursor invisible
vs	Standout cursor
wi	Set window from line %1 to %2 and column %3 to %4
XF	XOFF character if not \fB\(haS\fP
.fi
.PP
文字列機能の制御コードを定義するには、いくつかの方法がある。
.PP
Every normal character represents itself, except \(aq\(ha\(aq, \(aq\e\(aq,
and \(aq%\(aq.
.PP
A \fB\(hax\fP means Control\-x.  Control\-A equals 1 decimal.
.PP
\&\ex は特殊コードとして扱われる。x には以下の文字のどれかが入る。
.RS
E エスケープ (27)
.br
n ラインフィード (10)
.br
r 復帰 (13)
.br
t タブ (9)
.br
b バックスペース (8)
.br
f 頁送り (12)
.br
0 ヌルキャラクター。'\exxx' は 8 進数 xxx の文字を表す。
.RE
.IP i
パラメーターを 1 増加させる。
.IP r
一つのパラメーターをとる機能
.IP +
次の文字の値をパラメーターに追加し、バイナリで出力する
.IP 2
パラメーターを 2 桁の数字として ASCII 出力する (printf の %2d と同じ意味)
.IP d
パラメーターを数字として ASCII 出力する (printf の %d と同じ意味)
.IP %
\(aq%\(aq を表示する
.PP
バイナリ出力を行う場合、 文字列が終端されないようにヌル文字 (\(aq\e0\(aq) を避けねばならない。
タブ文字をパラメーターのバイナリ出力とする場合は、 タブ文字の展開をリセットしなければならない。
.IP 注意:
The above metacharacters for parameters may be wrong: they document Minix
termcap which may not be compatible with Linux termcap.
.PP
図形文字は 3 つの文字列機能で指定できる。
.IP as
代替文字セットの開始
.IP ae
end the alternative charset
.IP ac
文字列のペアの集合を指定する。 最初の文字は図形文字の名称で、 2 番目の文字はその定義である。
.PP
名称には以下のものがある。
.PP
.nf
+	right arrow (>)
,	left arrow (<)
\&.	down arrow (v)
0	full square (#)
I	lantern (#)
\-	upper arrow (\(ha)
\&'	rhombus (+)
a	chess board (:)
f	degree (')
g	plus\-minus (#)
h	square (#)
j	right bottom corner (+)
k	right upper corner (+)
l	left upper corner (+)
m	left bottom corner (+)
n	cross (+)
o	upper horizontal line (\-)
q	middle horizontal line (\-)
s	bottom horizontal line (_)
t	left tee (+)
u	right tee (+)
v	bottom tee (+)
w	normal tee (+)
x	vertical line (|)
\(ti	paragraph (???)
.fi
.PP
The values in parentheses are suggested defaults which are used by the
\fIcurses\fP library, if the capabilities are missing.
.SH 関連項目
\fBncurses\fP(3), \fBtermcap\fP(3), \fBterminfo\fP(5)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 5.10 の一部である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
\%https://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
