.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:17:50 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Thu Oct 19 21:25:21 MET 1995 by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.north.de>
.\" Modified Mon Oct 21 17:47:19 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond
.\" <esr@thyrsus.com>xk
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Feb 10 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH TTYTYPE 5 1993-07-24 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ttytype \- terminal device to default terminal type mapping
ttytype \- 端末デバイス−端末タイプのデフォルトマッピング
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I /etc/ttytype
.\"O file associates termcap/terminfo terminal type names
.\"O with tty lines.
.\"O Each line consists of a terminal type, followed by
.\"O whitespace, followed by a tty name (a device name without the
.\"O .IR /dev/ ") prefix."
.I /etc/ttytype
は tty ラインを termcap/terminfo の端末タイプの名前と関連付ける。それ
ぞれの行には、まず端末のタイプ、続いてスペース文字、さらに続いて tty
名 (デバイス名から先頭の \fI/dev/\fP をとったもの) が書かれる。

.\"O This association is used by the program
.\"O .BR tset (1)
.\"O to set the environment variable
.\"O .B TERM
.\"O to the default terminal name for
.\"O the user's current tty.
この関連付けはプログラム
.BR tset (1)
が利用し、ユーザーが現在使っている端末の
.B TERM
環境変数が、デフォルトの端末名にセットされる。

.\"O This facility was designed for a traditional time-sharing environment
.\"O featuring character-cell terminals hardwired to a Unix minicomputer.
.\"O It is little used on modern workstation and personal Unixes.
この機能は伝統的なタイム・シェアリング環境 ( Unix ミニコンピュータに
キャラクタ端末が直結されているような環境) 向けに設計された。近代的な
ワークステーションやパーソナル Unix 環境では、ほとんど利用されていない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.\"O .I /etc/ttytype
.\"O the tty definitions file.
.I /etc/ttytype
tty 定義ファイル。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O A typical
.\"O .I /etc/ttytype
.\"O is:
典型的な \fI/etc/ttytype\fP は以下のようなものである。
.RS
.sp
con80x25 tty1
.br
vt320 ttys0
.RE
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR termcap (5),
.BR terminfo (5),
.BR agetty (8),
.BR mingetty (8)
