.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@cantor.informatik.rwth-aachen.de),
.\" Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-07-25 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 1995-02-26 by Michael Haardt
.\" Modified 1996-07-20 by Michael Haardt
.\" Modified 1997-07-02 by Nicolas Lichtmaier <nick@debian.org>
.\" Modified 2004-10-31 by aeb, following Gwenole Beauchesne
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1998-02-16, Kazuyuki Tanisako <tanisako@osa.dec-j.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2003-01-20, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-02-21, Akihiro MOTOKI
.\" Updated 2005-10-06, Akihiro MOTOKI
.\" Updated 2008-08-11, Akihiro MOTOKI, LDP v3.05
.\"
.TH UTMP 5 2011-09-28 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O utmp, wtmp \- login records
utmp, wtmp \- ログイン記録
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <utmp.h>
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I utmp
.\"O file allows one to discover information about who is currently using the
.\"O system.
.\"O There may be more users currently using the system, because not
.\"O all programs use utmp logging.
.I utmp
ファイルを見ることで、現在誰がシステムを使っているかという情報
が得られる。ただすべてのプログラムが utmp ファイルを
更新しているわけではないので、実際にはそれ以上のユーザーが
システムを使っている可能性がある。
.PP
.\"O .B Warning:
.\"O .I utmp
.\"O must not be writable by the user class "other",
.\"O because many system programs (foolishly)
.\"O depend on its integrity.
.\"O You risk faked system logfiles and
.\"O modifications of system files if you leave
.\"O .I utmp
.\"O writable to any user other than the owner and group owner of the file.
.B 警告:
(愚かにも) 多くのシステムプログラムがその整合性に依存しているので、
.I utmp
ファイルは "other" に分類されるユーザに対して
書き込み可能にしてはならない。
ファイルの所有者とグループオーナー以外のユーザに対して
.I utmp
ファイルを書き込み可能な状態にしておくと、
システムのログファイルを偽造されたり、システムファイルの
改ざんを受けるといったリスクを犯すことになる。
.PP
.\"O The file is a sequence of
.\"O .I utmp
.\"O structures,
.\"O declared as follows in
.\"O .IR <utmp.h>
.\"O (note that this is only one of several definitions
.\"O around; details depend on the version of libc):
このファイルは
.I utmp
構造体の繰り返しで構成される。
この構造体は
.I <utmp.h>
で以下のように定義されている
(ここに記述してあるのは幾つかの大まかな定義のみで、
詳細は libc のバージョンにより変わることに注意が必要である)。
.in +4n
.nf
.sp
/* Values for ut_type field, below */

#define EMPTY         0 /* Record does not contain valid info
                           (formerly known as UT_UNKNOWN on Linux) */
#define RUN_LVL       1 /* Change in system run-level (see
                           \fBinit\fP(8)) */
#define BOOT_TIME     2 /* Time of system boot (in \fIut_tv\fP) */
#define NEW_TIME      3 /* Time after system clock change
                           (in \fIut_tv\fP) */
#define OLD_TIME      4 /* Time before system clock change
                           (in \fIut_tv\fP) */
#define INIT_PROCESS  5 /* Process spawned by \fBinit\fP(8) */
#define LOGIN_PROCESS 6 /* Session leader process for user login */
#define USER_PROCESS  7 /* Normal process */
#define DEAD_PROCESS  8 /* Terminated process */
#define ACCOUNTING    9 /* Not implemented */

#define UT_LINESIZE      32
#define UT_NAMESIZE      32
#define UT_HOSTSIZE     256

struct exit_status {              /* Type for ut_exit, below */
    short int e_termination;      /* Process termination status */
    short int e_exit;             /* Process exit status */
};

struct utmp {
    short   ut_type;              /* Type of record */
    pid_t   ut_pid;               /* PID of login process */
    char    ut_line[UT_LINESIZE]; /* Device name of tty \- "/dev/" */
    char    ut_id[4];             /* Terminal name suffix,
                                     or inittab(5) ID */
    char    ut_user[UT_NAMESIZE]; /* Username */
    char    ut_host[UT_HOSTSIZE]; /* Hostname for remote login, or
                                     kernel version for run-level
                                     messages */
    struct  exit_status ut_exit;  /* Exit status of a process
                                     marked as DEAD_PROCESS; not
                                     used by Linux init(8) */
.\"O     /* The ut_session and ut_tv fields must be the same size when
.\"O        compiled 32- and 64-bit.  This allows data files and shared
.\"O        memory to be shared between 32- and 64-bit applications. */
    /* ut_session と ut_tv フィールドは、32ビットでコンパイルされた場合と
       64ビットでコンパイルされた場合で同じサイズでなければならない。
       こうすることで、32ビットと64ビットのアプリケーションで、
       データファイルと共有メモリを共有することができるようになる。 */

#if __WORDSIZE == 64 && defined __WORDSIZE_COMPAT32
    int32_t ut_session;           /* Session ID (\fBgetsid\fP(2)),
                                     used for windowing */
    struct {
        int32_t tv_sec;           /* Seconds */
        int32_t tv_usec;          /* Microseconds */
    } ut_tv;                      /* Time entry was made */
#else
     long   ut_session;           /* Session ID */
     struct timeval ut_tv;        /* Time entry was made */
#endif

    int32_t ut_addr_v6[4];        /* Internet address of remote
                                     host; IPv4 address uses
                                     just ut_addr_v6[0] */
    char __unused[20];            /* Reserved for future use */
};

/* Backward compatibility hacks */
#define ut_name ut_user
#ifndef _NO_UT_TIME
#define ut_time ut_tv.tv_sec
#endif
#define ut_xtime ut_tv.tv_sec
#define ut_addr ut_addr_v6[0]
.sp
.fi
.in
.\"O This structure gives the name of the special file associated with the
.\"O user's terminal, the user's login name, and the time of login in the form
.\"O of
.\"O .BR time (2).
.\"O String fields are terminated by a null byte (\(aq\e0\(aq)
.\"O if they are shorter than the size
.\"O of the field.
この構造体からユーザーの使っている端末のスペシャルファイル名、
ユーザーのログイン名、
.RB ( time (2)
形式での)ログイン時刻がわかる。文字列フィールドは、
フィールドの長さより文字列が短い場合には、
NULL バイト (\(aq\e0\(aq) によって終端される。
.PP
.\"O The first entries ever created result from
.\"O .BR init (8)
.\"O processing
.\"O .BR inittab (5).
.\"O Before an entry is processed, though,
.\"O .BR init (8)
.\"O cleans up utmp by setting \fIut_type\fP to \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP, clearing
.\"O \fIut_user\fP, \fIut_host\fP, and \fIut_time\fP with null bytes for each
.\"O record which \fIut_type\fP is not \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP or \fBRUN_LVL\fP
.\"O and where no process with PID \fIut_pid\fP exists.
.\"O If no empty record
.\"O with the needed \fIut_id\fP can be found,
.\"O .BR init (8)
.\"O creates a new one.
.\"O It sets \fIut_id\fP from the inittab, \fIut_pid\fP and \fIut_time\fP to the
.\"O current values, and \fIut_type\fP to \fBINIT_PROCESS\fP.
最初のエントリは
.BR init (8)
コマンドが
.BR inittab (5)
を処理することで作られる。
あるエントリを処理する前に、
.BR init (8)
は \fIut_type\fP を \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP に初期化する。
レコードの
\fIut_type\fP が \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP と \fBRUN_LVL\fP のいずれでもなく、
かつ PID が \fIut_pid\fP であるプロセスがいない場合は、\fIut_user\fP,
\fIut_host\fP, \fIut_time\fP をヌルバイトでクリアして初期化を行う。
必要な \fIut_id\fP を持つ空のレコードを見つけられなかった場合、
.BR init (8)
は新しいレコードを作る。inittab から \fIut_id\fP を設定し、
\fIut_pid\fP および \fIut_time\fP を現在値に、
\fIut_type\fP を \fBINIT_PROCESS\fP に設定する。
.PP
.\"O .BR mingetty (8)
.\"O (or
.\"O .BR agetty (8))
.\"O locates the entry by the PID, changes \fIut_type\fP to
.\"O \fBLOGIN_PROCESS\fP, changes \fIut_time\fP, sets \fIut_line\fP, and waits
.\"O for connection to be established.
.\"O .BR login (1),
.\"O after a user has been
.\"O authenticated, changes \fIut_type\fP to \fBUSER_PROCESS\fP, changes
.\"O \fIut_time\fP, and sets \fIut_host\fP and \fIut_addr\fP.
.\"O Depending on
.\"O .BR mingetty (8)
.\"O (or
.\"O .BR agetty (8))
.\"O and
.\"O .BR login (1),
.\"O records may be located by
.\"O \fIut_line\fP instead of the preferable \fIut_pid\fP.
.BR mingetty (8)
(または
.BR agetty (8))
は pid でエントリを特定し、
\fIut_type\fP を \fBLOGIN_PROCESS\fP に変更し、
\fIut_time\fP を更新し、\fIut_line\fPを設定した後、接続が確立されるのを待つ。
.BR login (1)
はユーザー認証が終了すると、
\fIut_type\fP を \fBUSER_PROCESS\fP に変更し、
\fIut_time\fP を更新し、\fIut_host\fP と \fIut_addr\fPを設定する。
.BR mingetty (8)
(または
.BR agetty (8))
と
.BR login (1)
により異なるが、
\fIut_pid\fP の代わりに
\fIut_line\fP を使ってレコードの特定が行われることもある
(\fIut_pid\fP を使う方が望ましい) 。
.PP
.\"O When
.\"O .BR init (8)
.\"O finds that a process has exited, it locates its utmp
.\"O entry by \fIut_pid\fP, sets \fIut_type\fP to \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP, and
.\"O clears \fIut_user\fP, \fIut_host\fP and \fIut_time\fP with null bytes.
.BR init (8)
はプロセスの終了を検出した場合、
\fIut_pid\fP をキーとして utmp のエントリを特定し、
\fIut_type\fP を \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP に設定し、
\fIut_user\fP, \fIut_host\fP, \fIut_time\fP をヌルバイトでクリアする。
.PP
.\"O .BR xterm (1)
.\"O and other terminal emulators directly create a
.\"O \fBUSER_PROCESS\fP record and generate the \fIut_id\fP by using the
.\"O string that suffix part of the terminal name (the characters
.\"O following \fI/dev/[pt]ty\fP).
.\"O If they find a \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP for this ID,
.\"O they recycle it, otherwise they create a new entry.
.\"O If they can, they
.\"O will mark it as \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP on exiting and it is advised that
.\"O they null \fIut_line\fP, \fIut_time\fP, \fIut_user\fP, and \fIut_host\fP
.\"O as well.
.BR xterm (1)
コマンドや他の端末エミュレータは
直接 \fBUSER_PROCESS\fP のレコードを作り、
端末名のサフィックス文字列 (\fI/dev/[pt]ty\fP に続く文字列)
を使って \fIut_id\fP の値を生成する。
この id を持つエントリが \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP であった場合には再利用し、
それ以外の場合には新しいエントリが作られる。
可能な場合にはプロセス終了時に \fBDEAD_PROCESS\fP と設定し、
さらに \fIut_line\fP, \fIut_time\fP, \fIut_user\fP, \fIut_host\fP
をヌルバイトでクリアすることが奨励されている。
.PP
.\"O sets up a \fBLOGIN_PROCESS\fP entry and leaves the rest to
.\"O .BR login (1)
.\"O as usual.
.\"O After the telnet session ends,
.\"O .BR telnetd (8)
.\"O cleans up utmp in the described way.
.BR telnetd (8)
は \fBLOGIN_PROCESS\fP を設定するだけでよく、
残りの処理は通常通り
.BR login (1)
に任せればよい。
telnet のセッションが終了した後、前述のように
.BR telnetd (8)
が utmp のエントリを初期化する。
.PP
.\"O The \fIwtmp\fP file records all logins and logouts.
.\"O Its format is exactly like \fIutmp\fP except that a null username
.\"O indicates a logout
.\"O on the associated terminal.
.\"O Furthermore, the terminal name \fB~\fP
.\"O with username \fBshutdown\fP or \fBreboot\fP indicates a system
.\"O shutdown or reboot and the pair of terminal names \fB|\fP/\fB}\fP
.\"O logs the old/new system time when
.\"O .BR date (1)
.\"O changes it.
.\"O \fIwtmp\fP is maintained by
.\"O .BR login (1),
.\"O .BR init (8),
.\"O and some versions of
.\"O .BR getty (8)
.\"O (e.g.,
.\"O .BR mingetty (8)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR agetty (8)).
.\"O None of these programs creates the file, so if it is
.\"O removed, record-keeping is turned off.
\fIwtmp\fP ファイルには、すべてのログインとログアウトが記録される。
そのフォーマットは、ログアウト済の端末でユーザー名がヌルとなること以外は
\fIutmp\fP とまったく同じである。
ユーザー名が \fBshutdown\fP もしくは \fBreboot\fP である
端末名 \fB~\fP はシステムの停止 (shutdown) または再起動 (reboot)
を意味する。またその端末名が \fB|\fP と \fB}\fP の対は
.BR date (1)
コマンドで変更した新／旧のシステム時刻を記録している。
\fIwtmp\fP ファイルは
.BR login (1),
.BR init (8)
やいくつかのバージョンの
.BR getty (8)
.RB ( mingetty (8)
または
.BR agetty (8))
により管理されている。
これらのプログラムはどれもファイルを新たに作成しないので、
ファイルを削除することで情報の記録 (record-keeping) を止めることができる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/var/run/utmp
.br
/var/log/wtmp
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.PP
.\"O POSIX.1 does not specify a
.\"O .I utmp
.\"O structure, but rather one named
.\"O .IR utmpx ,
.\"O with specifications for the fields
.\"O .IR ut_type ,
.\"O .IR ut_pid ,
.\"O .IR ut_line ,
.\"O .IR ut_id ,
.\"O .IR ut_user ,
.\"O and
.\"O .IR ut_tv .
.\"O POSIX.1 does not specify the lengths of the
.\"O .I ut_line
.\"O and
.\"O .I ut_user
.\"O fields.
POSIX.1 では、
.I utmp
構造体ではなく、
.I utmpx
構造体を規定している。
.I utmpx
構造体で規定されているのは、フィールド
.IR ut_type ,
.IR ut_pid ,
.IR ut_line ,
.IR ut_id ,
.IR ut_user ,
.IR ut_tv
である。
POSIX.1 では、フィールド
.I ut_line
と
.I ut_user
の長さは規定されていない。

.\"O Linux defines the
.\"O .I utmpx
.\"O structure to be the same as the
.\"O .I utmp
.\"O structure.
Linux では、
.I utmpx
構造体の定義は
.I utmp
構造体と同じである。
.\"O .SS Comparison with Historical Systems
.SS 過去のシステムとの比較
.\"O Linux utmp entries conform neither to v7/BSD nor to System V; they are a
.\"O mix of the two.
Linux での utmp のエントリは v7/BSD や System V のいずれにも準拠しておらず、
その両方が混在したものである。

.\"O v7/BSD has fewer fields; most importantly it lacks
.\"O \fIut_type\fP, which causes native v7/BSD-like programs to display (for
.\"O example) dead or login entries.
.\"O Further, there is no configuration file
.\"O which allocates slots to sessions.
.\"O BSD does so because it lacks \fIut_id\fP fields.
v7/BSD ではより少しの項目しかない;
もっとも重要なことは、\fIut_type\fP が無いことである。
そのため v7/BSD 系のプログラムでは (たとえば) 死んだ状態のエントリや
ログイン状態のエントリまで表示されてしまうことになった。
さらにセッション用のスロットを割り当てるための設定ファイルがない。
BSD に設定ファイルがあるのは \fIut_id\fP がないからである。

.\"O In Linux (as in System V), the \fIut_id\fP field of a
.\"O record will never change once it has been set, which reserves that slot
.\"O without needing a configuration file.
.\"O Clearing \fIut_id\fP may result
.\"O in race conditions leading to corrupted utmp entries and potential
.\"O security holes.
.\"O Clearing the abovementioned fields by filling them
.\"O with null bytes is not required by System V semantics,
.\"O but makes it possible to run
.\"O many programs which assume BSD semantics and which do not modify utmp.
.\"O Linux uses the BSD conventions for line contents, as documented above.
Linux (System V 系)では、設定ファイルを必要とせず
セッション用のスロットを割り当てるので、一旦設定
されてしまうとレコードの \fIut_id\fP は決して変更されない。
\fIut_id\fP をクリアすると競合状態におちいり、
utmp のエントリを壊したり、潜在的なセキュリティホールになる可能性がある。
上述のフィールドを NULL バイトで埋めてクリアしておくのは、
System V での取り決めでは必要とはされていないが、
BSD での取り決めを前提としていて、かつ utmp を更新しない多くのプログラムが
動作するようにするためである。
Linux ではここまで記述してきたように、行内容の表示は BSD の慣例に従っている。
.PP
.\"O .\" mtk: What is the referrent of "them" in the following sentence?
.\"O .\" System V only uses the type field to mark them and logs
.\"O .\" informative messages such as \fB"new time"\fP in the line field.
.\"O System V has no \fIut_host\fP or \fIut_addr_v6\fP fields.
.\" mtk: What is the referrent of "them" in the following sentence?
.\" System V では ut_type を目印にしたり、たとえば \fB"new time"\fP のような
.\" 通知メッセージを記録するためのみに使っている。
\fBUT_UNKNOWN\fP は Linux で作られたもののようである。
System V には \fIut_host\fP も \fIut_addr_v6\fP も存在しない。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.PP
.\"O Unlike various other
.\"O systems, where utmp logging can be disabled by removing the file, utmp
.\"O must always exist on Linux.
.\"O If you want to disable
.\"O .BR who (1)
.\"O then
.\"O do not make utmp world readable.
ファイルを削除することで utmp への記録を止められる
他の様々なシステムとは違い、Linux では utmp ファイルを必ずおいて
おく必要がある。
.BR who (1)
コマンドが機能しないようにしたい場合には、
utmp ファイルの全ユーザーに対する読み取り許可を設定しないようにする。
.PP
.\"O The file format is machine-dependent, so it is recommended that it be
.\"O processed only on the machine architecture where it was created.
ファイルのフォーマットはマシンに依存するので、ファイルが作られた
マシンもしくは同一アーキテクチャのマシン上でのみ処理することを推奨する。
.PP
.\"O Note that on \fIbiarch\fP platforms, that is, systems which can run both
.\"O 32-bit and 64-bit applications (x86-64, ppc64, s390x, etc.),
.\"O \fIut_tv\fP is the same size in 32-bit mode as in 64-bit mode.
.\"O The same goes for \fIut_session\fP and \fIut_time\fP if they are present.
.\"O This allows data files and shared memory to be shared between
.\"O 32-bit and 64-bit applications.
注意すべき点としては、
\fIbiarch\fP なプラットフォーム、つまり 32ビットと 64ビットの両方の
アプリケーションを実行できるシステム (x86-64, ppc64, s390x など) では、
\fIut_tv\fP のサイズは 32ビットモードと 64ビットモードで同じである。
\fIut_session\fP と \fIut_time\fP も、存在する場合には同様に同じサイズ
である。これにより、32ビットアプリケーションと 64ビットアプリケーション
の間でデータファイルと共有メモリを共有することが可能になる。
.\"O This is achieved by changing the type of
.\"O .I ut_session
.\"O to
.\"O .IR int32_t ,
.\"O and that of
.\"O .I ut_tv
.\"O to a struct with two
.\"O .I int32_t
.\"O fields
.\"O .I tv_sec
.\"O and
.\"O .IR tv_usec .
そのためには、
.I ut_session
を
.I int32_t
型に、
.I ut_tv
を 2つの
.I int32_t
型のフィールド
.IR tv_sec ,
.I tv_usec
を持つ構造体に変更すればよい
.\"O Since \fIut_tv\fP may not be the same as \fIstruct timeval\fP,
.\"O then instead of the call:
\fIut_tv\fP は \fIstruct timeval\fP と同じサイズとは限らないので、
.in +4n
.nf
.sp
gettimeofday((struct timeval *) &ut.ut_tv, NULL);
.fi
.in

のような呼び出しをするのではなく、
.\"O the following method of setting this field is recommended:
以下のように各フィールドを設定する方法が推奨される:
.in +4n
.nf
.sp
struct utmp ut;
struct timeval tv;

gettimeofday(&tv, NULL);
ut.ut_tv.tv_sec = tv.tv_sec;
ut.ut_tv.tv_usec = tv.tv_usec;
.fi
.in
.PP
.\"O Note that the \fIutmp\fP struct from libc5 has changed in libc6.
.\"O Because of this,
.\"O binaries using the old libc5 struct will corrupt
.\"O .IR /var/run/utmp " and/or " /var/log/wtmp .
utmp 構造体は libc5 から libc6 で変更された。そのため昔の libc5 の構造体
を使ったプログラムは
.IR /var/run/utmp " や " /var/log/wtmp
ファイルを壊してしまう。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O This man page is based on the libc5 one, things may work differently now.
この man ページは libc5 に基づいて作られていて、
最新のものでは違っているかもしれない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ac (1),
.BR date (1),
.BR last (1),
.BR login (1),
.BR who (1),
.BR getutent (3),
.BR getutmp (3),
.BR login (3),
.BR logout (3),
.BR logwtmp (3),
.BR updwtmp (3),
.BR init (8)
