.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" This man-page is Copyright (C) 1997 John S. Kallal
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" correction, aeb, 970825
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998
.\"         ISHIKAWA Mutsumi, all rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Translated into Japanese Mon Jan 12 02:59:50 JST 1998
.\"         by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2006-07-20, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.34
.\"
.TH FULL 4 2007-11-24 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O full \- always full device
.SH 名前
full \- いつも full であるデバイス
.\"O .SH CONFIGURATION
.SH 設定
.\"O If your system does not have \fI/dev/full\fP created already, it
.\"O can be created with the following commands:
システムに作成済みの \fI/dev/full\fP がない場合、
次のコマンドにより作成できる。
.nf

        mknod \-m 666 /dev/full c 1 7
        chown root:root /dev/full
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O File \fI/dev/full\fP has major device number 1
.\"O and minor device number 7.
.SH 説明
\fI/dev/full\fP は、メジャーデバイス番号 1、
マイナーデバイス番号 7 のファイルである。
.LP
.\"O Writes to the \fI/dev/full\fP device will fail with an
.\"O .B ENOSPC
.\"O error.
.\"O This can be used to test how a program handles disk-full errors.
\fI/dev/full\fP デバイスへの書き込みは、
.B ENOSPC
エラーで失敗する。
この動作を使って、プログラムがディスクフルのエラーをどのように
処理するかをテストできる。

.\"O Reads from the \fI/dev/full\fP device will return \\0 characters.
\fI/dev/full\fP デバイスからの読み出しでは、\\0 文字(ヌル文字)が返される。

.\"O Seeks on \fI/dev/full\fP will always succeed.
\fI/dev/full\fP のシーク (seek) は常に成功する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/dev/full
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR mknod (1),
.BR null (4),
.BR zero (4)
.\"O .SH 翻訳者
.\"O 石川 睦 <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
