.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 16:56:20 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Mon Oct 21 21:38:51 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" (and some more by aeb)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996,1997,1998 ISHIKAWA Mutsumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 11 03:35:23 JST 1998
.\"         by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Last Modified Thu Feb  5 17:36:37 JST 1998
.\"	by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	hard disk drive		ハードディスクドライブ
.\" WORD:	block device		ブロックデバイス
.\" WORD:	primary			プライマリ
.\" WORD:	controller		コントローラ
.\" WORD:	master drive		マスタードライブ
.\" WORD:	slave drive		スレーブドライブ
.\" WORD:	pertition		パーティション
.\" WORD:	logical partition	論理パーティション
.\" WORD:	pertitioning		パーティショニング
.\" WORD:	BSD-disklabel		BSD ディスクラベル
.\"
.TH HD 4 1992-12-17 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O hd \- MFM/IDE hard disk devices
hd \- MFM/IDE ハードディスクデバイス
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The \fBhd*\fP devices are block devices to access MFM/IDE hard disk drives
.\"O in raw mode.
.\"O The master drive on the primary IDE controller (major device
.\"O number 3) is \fBhda\fR; the slave drive is \fBhdb\fR.
.\"O The master drive of the second controller (major device number 22)
.\"O is \fBhdc\fR and the slave \fBhdd\fR.
\fBhd*\fP デバイスは MFM/IDE ハードディスクドライブにローモード (raw mode)
でアクセスするためのブロックデバイス (block device) である。プライマリ
(primary) IDE コントローラ (メジャーナンバー 3) の マスタードライブ
(mater drive) は \fBhda\fR、スレーブドライブ (slave drive) は \fBhdb\fR
である。また、セカンドコントローラ (メジャーナンバー 22) のマスター
ドライブは \fBhdc\fR スレーブは \fBhdd\fR である。
.LP
.\"O General IDE block device names have the form
.\"O .BI hd X\c
.\"O , or
.\"O .BI hd XP\c
.\"O , where
.\"O .I X
.\"O is a letter denoting the physical drive, and
.\"O .I P
.\"O is a number denoting the partition on that physical drive.
.\"O The first form,
.\"O .BI hd X,
.\"O is used to address the whole drive.
一般的な IDE ブロックデバイスの名前は
.BI hd X\c
または、
.BI hd XP\c
という形態をとる。この、
.I X
の部分は物理的なドライブを表す文字で、
.I P
の部分はその物理的なドライブ上のパーティション (partition) を表す数字で
ある。この最初の形式
.BI hd X,
はドライブ全体を示すのに使われる。
.\"O Partition numbers are assigned in the order the partitions
.\"O are discovered, and only nonempty, nonextended partitions
.\"O get a number.
.\"O However, partition numbers 1-4 are given to the
.\"O four partitions described in the MBR (the "primary" partitions),
.\"O regardless of whether they are unused or extended.
.\"O Thus, the first logical partition will be
.\"O .BI hd X 5\c
.\"O \&.
.\"O Both DOS-type partitioning and BSD-disklabel partitioning are supported.
.\"O You can have at most 63 partitions on an IDE disk.
パーティションナンバーは発見されたパーティションに順に割り付けられる。
パーティションナンバーが割り付けられるのは、空でなく (nonempty) かつ
拡張パーティションでない (nonextended) パーティションのみである。
このうち、パーティションナンバー 1 から 4 はそれが使われていなくても、
また拡張パーティションだとしても MBR に記述される四つのパーティション
(いわゆる、プラマリ'パーティション) に与えられる。
従って、最初の論理パーティション (logical pertition) は、
.BI hd X 5\c
となるだろう。
(IDE ハードディスクでは) DOS タイプのパーティショニング (partitioning)
と BSD ディスクラベル (BSD-disklabel) によるパーティショニングの両方が
サポートされている。また、IDE ディスク上に最高 63 のパーティションを
作成する事ができる。
.LP
.\"O For example,
.\"O .I /dev/hda
.\"O refers to all of the first IDE drive in the system; and
.\"O .I /dev/hdb3
.\"O refers to the third DOS "primary" partition on the second one.
例えば、
.I /dev/hda
はシステムの最初の IDE ドライブ全体を参照する。そして、
.I /dev/hdb3
はセカンドドライブの三つめの DOS `プライマリ'パーティションを参照する。
.LP
.\"O They are typically created by:
これらのデバイスファイル (device file) は典型的には次のようにして作られる。
.RS
.sp
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hda b 3 0
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hda1 b 3 1
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hda2 b 3 2
.br
\&...
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hda8 b 3 8
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hdb b 3 64
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hdb1 b 3 65
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hdb2 b 3 66
.br
\&...
.br
mknod \-m 660 /dev/hdb8 b 3 72
.br
chown root:disk /dev/hd*
.RE
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/dev/hd*
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR chown (1),
.BR mknod (1),
.BR sd (4)
.BR mount (8),
