.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 16:57:14 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996,1997,1998 ISHIKAWA Mutsumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Translated into Japanese, and added Information of Japanese
.\" man-pages project, Thu Feb 6 16:39:55 1997,
.\" Mutsumi Ishikawa <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Last Modified Sun Jan 11 03:39:10 JST 1998
.\"    By ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	introduction	序文
.TH INTRO 4 2007-10-23 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O intro \- Introduction to special files
intro \- スペシャルファイルに関する序文
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Section 4 of the manual describes special files (devices).
マニュアルの 4 章は、スペシャルファイル (デバイス) について説明している。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /dev/* \(em device files
/dev/* \(em デバイスファイル
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 備考
.\"O .SS Authors and Copyright Conditions
.SS 著者と著作権
.\"O Look at the header of the manual page source for the author(s) and copyright
.\"O conditions.
.\"O Note that these can be different from page to page!
著者および copyright の条件については各マニュアルページのソースの
ヘッダ部分を参照してください。条件はそれぞれのページごとに異なっ
ていることにご注意願います。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR standards (7)
