.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996,1997,1998 ISHIKAWA Mutsumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 6 16:48:30 JST 1997
.\"         by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Last Modified Sun Jan 11 03:52:01 1998
.\"	by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	system memory		システムメモリ
.\" WORD:	kernel memory		カーネルメモリ
.\" WORD:	system ports		システムポート
.\" WORD:	character device file	キャラクターデバイスファイル
.\" WORD:	patch			パッチ
.\" WORD:	byte address		バイトアドレス
.\" WORD:	physical memory address	物理メモリアドレス
.\" WORD:	read-only		読み込み専用
.\" WORD:	write-only		書き込み専用
.\" WORD:	kernel			カーネル
.\" WORD:	virtual memory		仮想メモリ
.\" WORD:	I/O ports		IO ポート
.TH MEM 4 1992-11-21 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
mem, kmem, port \- システムメモリ(system memory)、カーネルメモリ
(kernel memory)、システムポート(sysmem ports)
.SH 説明
\fBmem\fP はコンピュータのメインメモリイメージのキャラクターデバイスファ
イル(character device file)である。このデバイスは、例えば、システムを
検査するため(また、パッチ(patch)をあてるため)に使われるだろう。
.LP
.B mem
のバイトアドレス(byte address)は 物理メモリアドレスとして解釈される。
存在していない場所への参照はエラーが返される。
.LP
読み込み専用(read-only)あるいは書き込み専用(write-only)のビットへの検
査あるいはパッチ当ては予期せぬ結果をもたらすことがある。
.LP
このデバイスファイルは典型的には次のようにして作られる。:
.RS
.sp
mknod \-m 660 /dev/mem c 1 1
.br
chown root:kmem /dev/mem
.RE
.LP
.B kmem
ファイルは
.B mem
と同じだが、
物理メモリへのアクセスではなく、カーネル(kernel)の仮想
メモリ(virtual memory)へのアクセスである点が異なる。
.LP
このデバイスファイルは典型的には次のようにして作られる。:
.RS
.sp
mknod \-m 640 /dev/kmem c 1 2
.br
chown root:kmem /dev/kmem
.RE
.LP
\fBport\fP は
.B mem
に似ているが I/O ポート(I/O ports)へのアクセスが行われる。
.LP
このデバイスファイルは典型的には次のように作られる。:
.RS
.sp
mknod \-m 660 /dev/port c 1 4
.br
chown root:mem /dev/port
.RE
.SH ファイル
.I /dev/mem
.br
.I /dev/kmem
.br
.I /dev/port
.SH 関連項目
.BR chown (1),
.BR mknod (1),
.BR ioperm (2)
.\" .SH 翻訳者
.\" 石川 睦 <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
