.\" sd.4
.\" Copyright 1992 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996,1997 ISHIKAWA Mutsumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-02-06, ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-11-19, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	pointer		ポインタ
.\" WORD:	structure	構造体
.\" WORD:	geometry	ジオメトリ
.\" WORD:	sector		セクタ
.\" WORD:	implement	実装
.\" WORD:	raw device	ローデバイス
.\"
.TH SD 4 1992-12-17 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sd \- Driver for SCSI Disk Drives
sd \- SCSI ディスクドライブのためのドライバ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.BR "#include <linux/hdreg.h>        " "/* for HDIO_GETGEO */"
.BR "#include <linux/fs.h>           " "/* for BLKGETSIZE and BLKRRPART */"
.fi
.\"O .SH CONFIGURATION
.SH 設定
.\"O The block device name has the following form:
.\"O .BI sd lp,
.\"O where
.\"O .I l
.\"O is a letter denoting the physical drive, and
.\"O .I p
.\"O is a number denoting the partition on that physical drive.
.\"O Often, the partition number,
.\"O .IR p ,
.\"O will be left off when the device corresponds to the whole drive.
このブロックデバイス (block device) の名前は、次のような形式をとる:
.BI sd lp,
このうち、
.I l
は物理ドライブを意味する文字であり、
.I p
はその物理ドライブ上のパーティション (partition) を意味する数字である。
パーティションナンバー
.I p
がない場合は、そのデバイスファイルはドライブ全体をさす。

.\"O SCSI disks have a major device number of 8, and a minor device number of
.\"O the form (16 *
.\"O .IR drive_number ") + " partition_number ,
.\"O where
.\"O .I drive_number
.\"O is the number of the physical drive in order of detection, and
.\"O .I partition_number
.\"O is as follows:
SCSI ディスクはメジャーナンバー 8 を持ち、次のような形式のマイナーナンバー
を持つ。(16 *
.IR drive_number ") + " partition_number 、
この
.I drive_number
は検出された物理ドライブの番号であり、
.I partition_number
は次のようになる:
.sp
.\"O partition 0 is the whole drive
.\"O .br
.\"O partitions 1-4 are the DOS "primary" partitions
.\"O .br
.\"O partitions 5-8 are the DOS "extended" (or "logical") partitions
パーティション 0 はドライブ全体
.br
パーティション 1 〜 4 は DOS の "基本 (primary)" パーティション
.br
パーティション 5 〜 8 は DOS の "拡張 (extended)" (または、"論理
(logical)") パーティション。

.\"O For example,
.\"O .I /dev/sda
.\"O will have major 8, minor 0, and will refer to all of the first SCSI drive
.\"O in the system; and
.\"O .I /dev/sdb3
.\"O will have major 8, minor 19, and will refer to the third DOS "primary"
.\"O partition on the second SCSI drive in the system.
例えば、
.I /dev/sda
はメジャーナンバー 8 マイナーナンバー 0 を持ち、システムの最初の SCSI
ドライブ全体を参照する。そして、
.I /dev/sdb3
はメジャーナンバー 8 マイナーナンバー 19 を持ち、システムの二つ目の
SCSI ドライブの三番目の DOS "基本" パーティションを参照する。

.\"O At this time, only block devices are provided.
.\"O Raw devices have not yet been implemented.
現在は、ブロックデバイスだけが提供されている。ロー・デバイス (raw device)
はまだ実装されていない。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The following
.\"O .IR ioctl s
.\"O are provided:
次の
.I ioctl
が提供されている:
.TP
.B HDIO_GETGEO
.RS
.\"O Returns the BIOS disk parameters in the following structure:
次のような構造体を用いて BIOS のディスクパラメータを返す:
.in +4n
.nf

struct hd_geometry {
    unsigned char  heads;
    unsigned char  sectors;
    unsigned short cylinders;
    unsigned long  start;
};
.fi
.in

.\"O A pointer to this structure is passed as the
.\"O .BR ioctl (2)
.\"O parameter.
この構造体へのポインタが
.BR ioctl (2)
へのパラメータとして渡される。

.\"O The information returned in the parameter is the disk geometry of the drive
.\"O .I "as understood by DOS!"
.\"O This geometry is
.\"O .I not
.\"O the physical geometry of the drive.
.\"O It is used when constructing the
.\"O drive's partition table, however, and is needed for convenient operation
.\"O of
.\"O .BR fdisk (1),
.\"O .BR efdisk (1),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR lilo (1).
.\"O If the geometry information is not available, zero will be returned for all
.\"O of the parameters.
このパラメータに入れられて返される情報は、
.I "DOS によって理解されるような"
ドライブのジオメトリである。
このジオメトリは、ドライブの物理的なジオメトリ
.I ではない。
この情報はドライブのパーティションテーブルを作成する時に用いられる、
また、
.BR fdisk (1),
.BR efdisk (1),
.BR lilo (1)
の適切な操作に必要である。
もし、ジオメトリの情報が得られなければ、それぞれの値全てにゼロが入れ
られて返される。
.RE
.TP
.B BLKGETSIZE
.\"O Returns the device size in sectors.
.\"O The
.\"O .BR ioctl (2)
.\"O parameter should be a pointer to a
.\"O .IR long .
セクタの数で表したデバイスのサイズが返される。
.BR ioctl (2)
のパラメータは、
.I long
へのポインタでなければならない。
.TP
.B BLKRRPART
.\"O Forces a reread of the SCSI disk partition tables.
.\"O No parameter is needed.
強制的に、SCSI ディスクのパーティションテーブルの再読み込みを行う。
パラメータは必要ない。

.\"O The
.\"O .BR scsi (4)
.\"O .BR ioctl (2)
.\"O operations are also supported.
.\"O If the
.\"O .BR ioctl (2)
.\"O parameter is required, and it is NULL, then
.\"O .BR ioctl (2)
.\"O will fail with the error
.\"O .BR EINVAL .
.BR scsi (4)
の
.BR ioctl (2)
操作も同様にサポートされる。
.BR ioctl (2)
のパラメータが必要で、それが NULL ならば、
.BR ioctl (2)
はエラー
.B EINVAL
で失敗する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /dev/sd[a\-h]: the whole device
/dev/sd[a\-h]: ドライブ全体
.br
.\"O /dev/sd[a\-h][0\-8]: individual block partitions
/dev/sd[a\-h][0\-8]: 個々のブロックパーティション
.\"O .\".SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" .SH 関連項目
.\"O .\".BR scsi (4)
.\" .BR scsi (4)
