.\" From jt@hplb.hpl.hp.com Thu Dec 19 18:31:49 1996
.\" From: Jean Tourrilhes <jt@hplb.hpl.hp.com>
.\" Address: HP Labs, Filton Road, Stoke Gifford, Bristol BS12 6QZ, U.K.
.\" Jean II - HPLB - '96
.\" wavelan.c.4
.\"
.\" Provenance of this page is unclear.  Licensed under the GPL,
.\" after inquiries with Jean Tourrilhes and Bruce Janson
.\" (mtk, July 2006)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997
.\"         ISHIKAWA Mutsumi, all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Sep 20 14:45:21 JST 1997
.\"         by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Last Modified Tue Feb 10 15:21:08 JST 1998
.\"	by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	wireless ethernet	ワイアレスイーサネット
.\"
.TH WAVELAN 4 1996-10-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O wavelan \- AT&T GIS WaveLAN ISA device driver
.SH 名前
wavelan \- AT&T GIS WaveLAN ISA デバイスドライバ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "insmod wavelan_cs.o [io=" B,B.. "] [ irq=" I,I.. "] [name=" N,N.. ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I wavelan
.\"O is the low-level device driver for the NCR / AT&T / Lucent
.\"O .B WaveLAN ISA
.\"O and Digital (DEC)
.\"O .B RoamAbout DS
.\"O wireless ethernet adapter.
.\"O This driver is available as a module or
.\"O might be compiled in the kernel.
.\"O This driver supports multiple cards
.\"O in both forms (up to 4) and allocates the next available ethernet
.\"O device (eth0..eth#) for each card found, unless a device name is
.\"O explicitly specified (see below).
.\"O This device name will be reported
.\"O in the kernel log file with the MAC address, NWID and frequency used
.\"O by the card.
.I wavelan
は、NCR / AT&T / Lucent の
.B WaveLan ISA
と  Digital(DEC) の
.B RoamAbout DS
というワイアレス・イーサネット (wireless ethernet) アダプタのための
ローレベル・デバイスドライバである。このドライバはモジュールとしても、また、
カーネルに組み込んだ形でも利用できる。また、どちらの場合でも、複数カード
(最大 4 枚まで) をサポートし、明示的にデバイスの名前を指定しない限り
(これに関しては、下を見よ)、発見されたそれぞれのカードには、利用可能な
次のイーサネットデバイス(eth0..eth#)が割り当てられる。このデバイス名は
MAC アドレス、NWID、カードによって利用される周波数とともに
カーネルログファイルに報告される。
.\"O .SS Parameters
.SS 引数
.\"O This section apply to the module form (parameters passed on the
.\"O .BR insmod (8)
.\"O command line).
.\"O If the driver is included in the kernel, use the
.\"O .I ether=IRQ,IO,NAME
.\"O syntax on the kernel command line.
このセクションのパラメーターは、モジュールとして使用する場合
に適用され、
.BR insmod (8)
のコマンド・ライン引き数として用いる。
カーネルにドライバが含まれている場合は、
.I ether=IRQ,IO,NAME
という形式のパラメータをカーネル・コマンドラインに渡す。
.TP
.\"O .B io
.\"O Specify the list of base address where to search for wavelan cards
.\"O (setting by dip switch on the card).
.\"O If you don't specify any io
.\"O address, the driver will scan 0x390 and 0x3E0 addresses, which might
.\"O conflict with other hardware...
.B io
wavelan カードを検出する時にどこのベースアドレスをサーチするかという
リストを指定する (カードが利用するベースアドレスはカードのディップ
スイッチで設定する)。もし io アドレスが指定されなければドライバは 0x390 と
0x3E0 をスキャンする(このアドレスは他のハードと衝突することも考えられる)。
.TP
.\"O .B irq
.\"O Set the list of irq that each wavelan card should use (the value is
.\"O saved in permanent storage for future use).
.B irq
それぞれの wavelan カードが利用する irq のリストをセットする (この値は
将来的な利用のためにパーマネント・ストレージに保存される)。
.TP
.\"O .B name
.\"O Set the list of name to be used for each wavelan cards device (name
.\"O used by
.\"O .BR ifconfig (8)).
.B name
それぞれの wavelan カードデバイスに
.RB ( ifconfig (8)
が利用する)名前のリストをセットする。
.\"O .SS "Wireless Extensions"
.SS "ワイアレス拡張 (Wireless Extentions)"
.\"O Use
.\"O .BR iwconfig (8)
.\"O to manipulate wireless extensions.
ワイアレス拡張の操作には
.BR iwconfig (8)
を使う。
.\"O .SS NWID (or domain)
.SS NWID (or ドメイン)
.\"O Set the network ID
.\"O .RI [ 0
.\"O to
.\"O .IR FFFF ]
.\"O or disable it
.\"O .RI [ off ].
.\"O As the NWID is stored in the card Permanent Storage Area, it will be
.\"O reuse at any further invocation of the driver.
ネットワーク IDを
.RI [ 0
から
.IR FFFF ]
に設定するか、
.RI [ off ]
その利用を無効にする。
NWID はカードのパーマネント・ストレージエリア (Permanent Strage Area) に
格納されるので、NWID はドライバが呼び出されるたびに利用できる。
.\"O .SS Frequency & channels
.SS 周波数とチャネル
.\"O For the 2.4GHz 2.00 Hardware, you are able to set the frequency by
.\"O specifying one of the 10 defined channels
.\"O .RI ( 2.412,
.\"O .I 2.422, 2.425, 2.4305, 2.432, 2.442, 2.452, 2.460, 2.462
.\"O or
.\"O .IR 2.484 )
.\"O or directly by its value.
.\"O The frequency is changed immediately and
.\"O permanently.
.\"O Frequency availability depends on the regulations...
2.4GHz 2.00 ハードウェアでは、10 の定義済みのチャネル
.RI ( 2.412
.I 2.422, 2.425, 2.4305, 2.432, 2.442, 2.452, 2.460, 2.462
.IR 2.484 )
のうちの一つを指定するか、その値を直接指定することによって周波数を設定
することができる。
周波数は直後に変更され、また、その変更は恒久的である。
どの周波数が利用できるかということは、(その国の) 法律に依存する…
.\"O .SS Statistics spy
.SS 統計スパイ (Statics spy)
.\"O Set a list of MAC addresses in the driver (up to 8) and get the last
.\"O quality of link for each of those (see
.\"O .BR iwspy (8)).
(8 つまでの) MAC アドレスのリストをドライバに設定して、
それぞれのリンクの品質を得る
.RB ( iwspy (8)
を参照)。
.\"O .SS /proc/net/wireless
.SS /proc/net/wireless
.\"O .I status
.\"O is the status reported by the modem.
.I status
はモデムから報告されたステータスである。
.\"O .I Link quality
.\"O reports the quality of the modulation on the air (direct sequence
.\"O spread spectrum) [max = 16].
.I link quality
は通信中の(直接拡散スペクトラム通信方式における)変調の品質を報告する
[最大 = 16]。
.\"O .I Level
.\"O and
.\"O .I Noise
.\"O refer to the signal level and noise level [max = 64].
.I Level
と
.I Noise
は信号レベルとノイズのレベルを参照する [最大 = 64]。
.\"O The
.\"O .I crypt discarded packet
.\"O and
.\"O .I misc discarded packet
.\"O counters are not implemented.
.I 暗号化されていて廃棄されたパケット(crypt discarded packet)
と
.I それ以外の廃棄されたパケット(misc discarded packet)
のカウンターは実装されていない。
.\"O .SS "Private Ioctl"
.SS "ドライバ固有のIOCTL (Private Ioctl)"
.\"O You may use
.\"O .BR iwpriv (8)
.\"O to manipulate private ioctls.
.BR iwpriv (8)
をドライバ固有の ioctl の操作のために利用できる。
.\"O .SS Quality and Level threshold
.\"O Enable you the define the quality and level threshold used by the
.\"O modem (packet below that level are discarded).
.SS 品質とレベルの閾値 (Quality and Level threshold)
モデムで使われる品質とレベルの閾値 (そのレベルを下回ったパケットは
破棄される) を定義することができる。
.\"O .SS Histogram
.\"O This functionality allow to set a number of signal level intervals and
.\"O to count the number of packets received in each of those defined
.\"O intervals.
.\"O This distribution might be used to calculate the mean value
.\"O and standard deviation of the signal level.
.SS ヒストグラム (Histogram)
この機能はシグナルレベル間隔の数の設定、および、それらの設定した間隔の
それぞれで受信したパケットの数をカウントすることを可能にする。
この分布はシグナルレベルの最瀕値標準偏差の計算に役立つだろう。
.\"O .SS "Specific Notes"
.SS 特定のドライバでの注意
.\"O This driver will fail to detect some
.\"O .B non-NCR/ATT&T/Lucent
.\"O Wavelan cards.
.\"O If this happens for you, you must look in the source code on
.\"O how to add your card to the detection routine.
このドライバはいくつかの
.B NCR/AT&T/Lucent ではない
Wavelan カードの検出に失敗するだろう。
これがあなたの持っているカードで起こった場合
、そのカードの検出処理をどのように加えればいいかと
いうことについてソースコードを確認する必要がある。
.PP
.\"O Some of the mentioned features are optional.
.\"O You may enable to disable
.\"O them by changing flags in the driver header and recompile.
ここまでで述べてきた機能のうちのいくつかは、選択可能である。
ドライバの先頭部分のフラグを変更してコンパイルしなおすことによって、
その機能を無効にすることも可能である。
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\" Bruce Janson \(em bruce@cs.usyd.edu.au
.\" .br
.\" Jean Tourrilhes \(em jt@hplb.hpl.hp.com
.\" .br
.\"O .\" (and others; see source code for details)
.\" (および、その他の人達; 詳細はソースコードを参照のこと)
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR wavelan_cs (4),
.BR ifconfig (8),
.BR insmod (8),
.BR iwconfig (8),
.BR iwpriv (8),
.BR iwspy (8)
