.\"$Id: limits.5,v 1.5 2002/09/21 08:12:52 nakano Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all right reserved,
.\" Translated Mon Nov  5 18:12:16 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@aisys-jp.com>
.\" Modified Tue 18 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH LIMITS 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O limits \- Resource limits definition
limits \- リソース制限の定義
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I limits
.\"O file (/etc/limits by default or LIMITS_FILE defined config.h)
.\"O describes the resource limits you wish to impose.
.\"O It should be owned by root and readable by root account only.
.I limits
ファイル (デフォルトでは /etc/limits。
あるいは config.h で定義した LIMITS_FILE)
には、設定したいリソース制限を記述する。
このファイルは root が所有し、
root アカウントのみが読み込み可能とするべきである．
.PP
.\"O By default no quotas are imposed on 'root'. In fact, there is no way to impose
.\"O limits via this procedure to root-equiv accounts (accounts with UID 0).
デフォルトでは root に対する制限は設定できない。
実は、root と同等のアカウント (UID 0 のアカウント)
をこの手段によって制限することはできない。
.PP
.\"O Each line describes a limit for a user in the form:
各行には以下の形式でユーザに対する制限を記述する。
.sp
.I	user LIMITS_STRING
.PP
.\"O The \fBLIMITS_STRING\fP is a string of a concatenated list of resource limits.
.\"O Each limit consists of a letter identifier followed by a numerical limit.
\fBLIMITS_STRING\fP はリソース制限の定義を連結させた文字列である。
各制限の定義は、1 文字の識別子と、それに続く制限数値からなる。
.PP
.\"O The valid identifiers are:
有効な識別子は以下の通り。
.sp
.\"O A: max address space (KB)
A: アドレス空間の最大値 (KB)
.br
.\"O C: max core file size (KB)
C: コアファイルサイズの最大値 (KB)
.br
.\"O D: max data size (KB)
D: データサイズの最大値 (KB)
.br
.\"O F: maximum filesize (KB)
F: ファイルサイズの最大値 (KB)
.br
.\"O M: max locked-in-memory address space (KB)
M: メモリ上にロックできるアドレス空間の最大値 (KB)
.br
.\"O N: max number of open files
N: ファイルオープン数の最大値
.br
.\"O R: max resident set size (KB)
R: レジデントセットサイズの最大値 (KB)
.br
.\"O S: max stack size (KB)
S: スタックサイズの最大値 (KB)
.br
.\"O T: max CPU time (MIN)
T: CPU 時間の最大値 (分)
.br
.\"O U: max number of processes
U: プロセス数の最大値
.br
.\"O K: file creation mask, set by \fBumask\fR(2).
K: \fBumask\fR(2) により設定される、ファイル作成時の mask
.br
.\"O L: max number of logins for this user
L: このユーザの同時ログイン数の最大値
.br
.\"O P: process priority, set by \fBsetpriority\fR(2).
P: \fBsetpriority\fR(2) によって設定されるプロセス優先度
.PP
.\"O For example, \fIL2D2048N5\fP is a valid \fBLIMITS_STRING\fP. For reading convenience,
.\"O the following entries are equivalent:
例えば、\fIL2D2048N5\fP は正しい \fBLIMITS_STRING\fP である。
以下の 2 つの例は等価である。2 番目のように読み易く書くこともできる。
.sp
.\"O username L2D2048N5
username L2D2048N5
.br
.\"O username L2 D2048 N5
username L2 D2048 N5
.PP
.\"O Be aware that after \fIusername\fP the rest of the line is considered a limit
.\"O string, thus comments are not allowed. A invalid limits string will be
.\"O rejected (not considered) by the login program.
\fIusername\fP 以降の行の残りが制限用の文字列として扱われるので、
コメントは書くことができない。
login プログラムは、正しくない制限文字列は拒絶する (無視する)。
.PP
.\"O The default entry is denoted by username "\fB*\fP". If you have multiple \fIdefault\fP
.\"O entries in your \fBLIMITS_FILE\fP, then the last one will be used as the default
.\"O entry.
デフォルトのエントリは、ユーザ名が "\fB*\fP" となっているものである。
\fBLIMITS_FILE\fP に複数の\fIデフォルト\fPを登録すると、
最後のものがデフォルト指定として使用される。
.PP
.\"O To completely disable limits for a user, a single dash "\fB-\fP" will do.
あるユーザへの制限を完全に無効にするには、
シングルダッシュ "\fB-\fP" を使用する。
.PP
.\"O Also, please note that all limit settings are set PER LOGIN.  They are
.\"O not global, nor are they permanent.  Perhaps global limits will come, but
.\"O for now this will have to do ;)
さらに、全ての制限の設定は「ログイン単位」で設定されていることに注意すること。
制限はグローバルではなく、永続的でもない。
グローバルな制限はいずれ可能になるだろうが、
今のところは「TO DO」である。;)
.\"nakano 二番目の文これでいいのかなあ。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/etc/limits
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1),
.BR setpriority (2),
.BR setrlimit (2)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Cristian Gafton (gafton@sorosis.ro)
