.\" Copyright 1991 - 1993, Julianne Frances Haugh and Chip Rosenthal
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$Id: login.defs.5,v 1.11 2002/03/08 04:39:11 kloczek Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated Wed Apr 26 17:22:36 JST 2000
.\"         by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Sat Jan 13 09:24:04 JST 2001
.\"         by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Tue 18 Sep 2002 by NAKNAO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD: shadow login suite	shadow ログイン機能
.TH LOGIN.DEFS 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O /etc/login.defs \- shadow password suite configuration
/etc/login.defs \- shadow パスワード機能の設定
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I /etc/login.defs
.\"O file defines the site-specific configuration for the shadow password
.\"O suite.  This file is required.  Absence of this file will not prevent
.\"O system operation, but will probably result in undesirable operation.
.I /etc/login.defs
ファイルは shadow ログイン機能に対するサイト固有の設定を定義する。
このファイルは必ず存在しなければならない。
このファイルが無くてもシステム運用は可能であるが、
おそらく望まない結果となるだろう。
.PP
.\"O This file is a readable text file, each line of the file describing
.\"O one configuration parameter.  The lines consist of a configuration
.\"O name and value, separated by whitespace.  Blank lines and comment
.\"O lines are ignored.  Comments are introduced with a `#' pound sign and
.\"O the pound sign must be the first non-white character of the line.
このファイルは読み取り可能なテキストファイルで、
ファイル中の一行につき一つの設定パラメータを設定している。
各行では、設定パラメータの名前とその値が空白で区切られて示される。
空行とコメント行は無視される。
コメント行は `#' 記号で始まる。
記号`#'はその行での空白以外の最初の文字でなければならない。
.PP
.\"O Parameter values may be of four types:  strings, booleans, numbers,
.\"O and long numbers.  A string is comprised of any printable characters.
.\"O A boolean should be either the value ``yes'' or ``no''.  An undefined
.\"O boolean parameter or one with a value other than these will be given
.\"O a ``no'' value.  Numbers (both regular and long) may be either decimal
.\"O values, octal values (precede the value with ``0'') or hexadecimal
.\"O values (precede the value with ``0x'').  The maximum value of the
.\"O regular and long numeric parameters is machine-dependent.
パラメータ値は四つの型を取ることができる。
文字列・ブール型・数値・倍精度数値、である。
文字列には全ての印字可能文字を使える。
ブール型パラメータの値は ``yes'' か ``no'' のいずれかでなければならない。
値の指定されていないブール型パラメータや、
``yes'', ``no'' 以外が指定されたブール型パラメータの値は ``no''とされる。
(単精度および倍精度) 数値は、
10 進数、
(数値の前に ``0'' を付けた) 8 進数、
(数値の前に ``0x'' を付けた) 16 進数のいずれかで指定する。
単精度・倍精度数値パラメータの最大値は計算機に依存する。
.PP
.\"O The following configuration items are provided:
以下に示すような設定項目がある:
.\"
.\"O .IP "CHFN_AUTH (boolean)"
.IP "CHFN_AUTH (ブール値)"
.\"O If
.\"O .IR yes ,
.\"O the
.\"O .B chfn
.\"O and
.\"O .B chsh
.\"O programs will require authentication before making any changes, unless
.\"O run by the superuser.
もし
.I yes
なら、
.BR chfn ", " chsh
両プログラムは、スーパーユーザが起動したのでない限り
何らかの変更を行なう前にパスワードを尋ねる。
.\"
.\"O .IP "CHFN_RESTRICT (string)"
.IP "CHFN_RESTRICT (文字列)"
.\"O This parameter specifies which values in the
.\"O .I gecos
.\"O field of the
.\"O .I passwd
.\"O file may be changed by regular users using the
.\"O .B chfn
.\"O program.  It can be any combination of letters
.\"O .IR f ,
.\"O .IR r ,
.\"O .IR w ,
.\"O .IR h ,
.\"O for Full name, Room number, Work phone, and Home phone, respectively.
.\"O For backward compatibility, "yes" is equivalent to "rwh"
.\"O and "no" is equivalent to "frwh".
.\"O If not specified, only the superuser can make any changes.
.\"O The most restrictive setting is better achieved by not installing chfn SUID.
このパラメータは
.I passwd
ファイルの
.I gecos
フィールドのうち、
一般ユーザが
.B chfn
を使って変更できるフィールドを指定する。
指定する文字列は
.IR f ,
.IR r ,
.IR w ,
.I h
各文字の任意の組み合わせで、それぞれフルネーム、部屋番号、
職場電話番号、自宅電話番号を意味する。
指定されなかった場合は、スーパーユーザだけが全ての項目を変更できる。
最も制限をきつくしたい場合は、
chfn を SUID ではインストールしなければよい。
.\"
.\"O .IP "CREATE_HOME (boolean)"
.IP "CREATE_HOME (ブール値)"
.\"O This defines whether useradd should create home directories for users by
.\"O default.  This option is OR'ed with the -m flag on useradd command line.
useradd が、デフォルトでユーザのホームディレクトリを
作成するかどうかを定義する。
このオプションは useradd のコマンドラインの -m フラグと OR される。
.\"
.\"O .IP "GID_MAX (number)"
.\"O .IP "GID_MIN (number)"
.IP "GID_MAX (数値)"
.IP "GID_MIN (数値)"
.\"O Range of group IDs to choose from for the
.\"O .B useradd
.\"O and
.\"O .B groupadd
.\"O programs.
.B useradd
プログラムおよび
.B groupadd
プログラムがグループ ID を選択する時の範囲。
.\"
.\"O .IP "MAIL_DIR (string)"
.IP "MAIL_DIR (文字列)"
.\"O The mail spool directory.  This is needed to manipulate the mailbox when
.\"O its corresponding user account is modified or deleted.  If not specified,
.\"O a compile-time default is used.
メールスプールディレクトリ。
あるユーザアカウントが修正・削除された際に、
そのユーザのメールボックスに対する作業のために必要となる。
指定されないと、コンパイル時のデフォルト値が用いられる。
.\"
.\"O .IP "PASS_MAX_DAYS (number)"
.IP "PASS_MAX_DAYS (数値)"
.\"O The maximum number of days a password may be used.  If the password is
.\"O older than this, a password change will be forced.  If not specified, -1
.\"O will be assumed (which disables the restriction).
一つのパスワードを使える最長日数。
パスワードがこの日数よりも古い場合は、変更するよう強制される。
指定されていない場合は -1 となる (この制限機能を無効にする)。
.\"O .IP "PASS_MIN_DAYS (number)"
.IP "PASS_MIN_DAYS (数値)"
.\"O The minimum number of days allowed between password changes.  Any password
.\"O changes attempted sooner than this will be rejected.  If not specified, -1
.\"O will be assumed (which disables the restriction).
パスワードを変更してから次に変更できるようになるまでの最短日数。
この日数が経たないうちにパスワードを変更しようとしても拒否される。
指定されていない場合は -1 となる (この制限機能を無効にする)。
.\"O .IP "PASS_WARN_AGE (number)"
.IP "PASS_WARN_AGE (数値)"
.\"O The number of days warning given before a password expires.  A zero means
.\"O warning is given only upon the day of expiration, a negative value means
.\"O no warning is given.  If not specified, no warning will be provided.
パスワードの有効期限が来る前に警告を発する期間の日数。
ゼロにしておくと、期限切れの当日にのみ警告を行い、
負の数を指定した場合は一切警告を行わない。
指定されていない場合は警告を行わない。
.PP
.\"O PASS_MAX_DAYS, PASS_MIN_DAYS and PASS_WARN_AGE
.\"O are only used at the time of account creation.  Any changes to these
.\"O settings won't affect existing accounts.
PASS_MAX_DAYS, PASS_MIN_DAYS, PASS_WARN_AGE
はアカウントを作るときにだけ利用される。
これらの設定を変更しても、既存のアカウントには影響しない。
.\"
.\"O .IP "UID_MAX (number)"
.\"O .IP "UID_MIN (number)"
.IP "UID_MAX (数値)"
.IP "UID_MIN (数値)"
.\"O Range of user IDs to choose from for the
.\"O .B useradd
.\"O program.
.B useradd
プログラムがユーザ ID を選択する時の範囲。
.\"
.\"O .IP "UMASK (number)"
.IP "UMASK (数値)"
.\"O The permission mask is initialized to this value.  If not specified,
.\"O the permission mask will be initialized to 077.
許可属性マスクをこの値に初期化する。
指定されていない場合は、許可属性マスクは 077 に初期化される。
.\"
.\"O .IP "USERDEL_CMD (string)"
.IP "USERDEL_CMD (文字列)"
.\"O If defined, this command is run when removing a user.
.\"O It should remove any at/cron/print jobs etc. owned by
.\"O the user to be removed (passed as the first argument).
定義されていると、ユーザを削除するときにこのコマンドが実行される。
削除されるユーザ (最初の引き数に渡される) の at/cron/print
ジョブなどを削除するコマンドにしておくとよい。
.\"
.\"O .SH CROSS REFERENCE
.SH 参照表
.\"O The following cross reference shows which programs in the shadow password
.\"O suite use which parameters.
以下の参照表は、
shadow パスワード機能のどのプログラムが
どのパラメータを使用するかを示したものである。
.na
.IP chfn 12
CHFN_AUTH CHFN_RESTRICT
.IP chsh 12
CHFN_AUTH
.IP groupadd 12
GID_MAX GID_MIN
.IP newusers 12
PASS_MAX_DAYS PASS_MIN_DAYS PASS_WARN_AGE
UMASK
.IP pwconv 12
PASS_MAX_DAYS PASS_MIN_DAYS PASS_WARN_AGE
.IP useradd 12
CREATE_HOME
GID_MAX GID_MIN
PASS_MAX_DAYS PASS_MIN_DAYS PASS_WARN_AGE
UID_MAX UID_MIN
UMASK
.IP userdel 12
MAIL_DIR
USERDEL_CMD
.IP usermod 12
MAIL_DIR
.ad
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Much of the functionality that used to be provided by the shadow password
.\"O suite is now handled by PAM.
.\"O Thus,
.\"O .I /etc/login.defs
.\"O is no longer used by programs such as
.\"O .BR login (1),
.\"O .BR passwd (1)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR su (1).
.\"O Please refer to the corresponding PAM configuration files instead.
shadow パスワード機能によって提供されてきた機能の大部分は、
現在は PAM によって処理されている。
したがって、
.BR login (1),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR su (1)
などのプログラムは、もはや
.I /etc/login.defs
を用いない。
対応する PAM の設定ファイルを調べるようにしてほしい。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR su (1),
.BR passwd (5),
.BR shadow (5),
.BR pam (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
.br
Chip Rosenthal (chip@unicom.com)
