.\"$Id: login.access.5,v 1.3 2001/01/25 10:43:50 kloczek Exp $
.\" this is comment
.\"
.\" This page is originally in the shadow package.
.\" Translated Fri 14 Feb 1997
.\"   by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Modified Tue 18 Sep 2002 by NAKNAO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH LOGIN.ACCESS 5
.\" .Dt SKEY.ACCESS 5
.\" .Os FreeBSD 1.2
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O login.access \- Login access control table
login.access \- ログインアクセスの制御表
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I login.access
.\"O file specifies (user, host) combinations and/or (user, tty) 
.\"O combinations for which a login will be either accepted or refused.
.I login.access
ファイルには、ログインを許可または拒絶する、
(ユーザ, ホスト) や (ユーザ, tty) の組み合わせを指定する。
.PP
.\"O When someone logs in, the 
.\"O .I login.access
.\"O is scanned for the first entry that
.\"O matches the (user, host) combination, or, in case of non-networked
.\"O logins, the first entry that matches the (user, tty) combination.  The
.\"O permissions field of that table entry determines whether the login will 
.\"O be accepted or refused.
誰かがログインすると、
.I login.access
ファイルがスキャンされ、最初にマッチする
(ユーザ,ホスト) の組、
あるいはネットワーク経由のログインでない場合は最初にマッチする
(ユーザ, tty) の組を探す。
このテーブルの許可フィールドによって、
ログインが許可されるか拒絶されるかが決まる。
.PP
.\"O Each line of the login access control table has three fields separated by a
.\"O ":" character:
ログインアクセス制御表の各行は 3 つのフィールドからなり、
文字 ":" で分割される。
.sp 1
.IR 	permission : users : origins
.sp 1
.\"O The first field should be a "\fB+\fR" (access granted) or "\fB-\fR"
.\"O (access denied) character. The second field should be a list of one or
.\"O more login names, group names, or
.\"O .B ALL
.\"O (always matches).  The third field should be a list
.\"O of one or more tty names (for non-networked logins), host names, domain
.\"O names (begin with "\fB.\fR"), host addresses, internet network numbers
.\"O (end with "\fB.\fR"),
.\"O .B ALL
.\"O (always matches) or
.\"O .B LOCAL
.\"O (matches any string that does not contain a "\fB.\fR" character).
.\"O If you run NIS you can use @netgroupname in host or user patterns.
最初のフィールドは "\fB+\fR" (アクセスを許可する) か
"\fB-\fR" (アクセスを拒否する) でなければならない。
二番目のフィールドは、一つ以上のログイン名やグループ名、
もしくは
.B ALL
(必ずマッチする)
でなければならない。
三番目のフィールドは、
tty 名 (ネットワーク経由でないログインの場合)、
ホスト名、
ドメイン名 ("\fB.\fR"で始まる)、
ホストアドレス、
インターネットのネットワーク番号 ("\fB.\fR"で終わる)、
のひとつ以上の構成要素からなるリストであるか、
.B ALL
(必ずマッチする) または
.B LOCAL
("\fB.\fR"を全く含まない文字列全てにマッチする)
のいずれかでなくてはならない。
NIS を運用している場合は、ホストやユーザのパターンで
@netgroupname が使える。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B EXCEPT
.\"O operator makes it possible to write very compact rules.
.B EXCEPT
オペレータを用いると、
非常に簡略にルールを指定できる。
.PP
.\"O The group file is searched only when a name does not match that of the
.\"O logged-in user. Only groups are matched in which users are explicitly
.\"O listed: the program does not look at a user's primary group id value.
group ファイルが検索されるのは、
ログインするユーザ名が名前にマッチしなかった場合に限られる。
マッチするグループは、
group ファイル中でユーザ名が明示的にリストされているものに限られる。
このプログラムはユーザの主グループの ID 番号までは見ない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/etc/login.access
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Guido van Rooij
