.\"$Id: passwd.5,v 1.8 2002/03/08 04:39:11 kloczek Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 - 1990, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Modified Tue 18 Sep 2002 by NAKNAO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PASSWD 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O passwd \- The password file
passwd \- パスワードファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I passwd
.\"O contains various pieces of information for each user account.
.\"O Included is
.I passwd
ファイルには各ユーザアカウントの様々な情報が記録されている。
書かれているのは次の通り。
.IP "" .5i
.\"O Login name
ログイン名
.IP "" .5i
.\"O Optional encrypted password
暗号化されたパスワード (無いこともある)
.IP "" .5i
.\"O Numerical user ID
ユーザ ID 番号
.IP "" .5i
.\"O Numerical group ID
グループ ID 番号
.IP "" .5i
.\"O User name or comment field
ユーザ名またはコメントのフィールド
.IP "" .5i
.\"O User home directory
ユーザのホームディレクトリ
.IP "" .5i
.\"O User command interpreter
ユーザのコマンドインタプリタ
.PP
.\"O The password field may not be filled if shadow passwords
.\"O have been enabled.
.\"O If shadow passwords are being used, the encrypted password will
.\"O be found in \fI/etc/shadow\fR.
.\"O The encryped password consists of 13 characters from the
.\"O 64 character alphabet
.\"O a thru z, A thru Z, 0 thru 9, \. and /.
.\"O Refer to \fBcrypt\fR(3) for details on how this string is
.\"O interpreted.
パスワードが shadow 化されている場合は、
パスワードフィールドを埋めてはならない。
shadow パスワードを用いている場合、暗号化されたパスワードは
\fI/etc/shadow\fR に書かれている。
暗号化されたパスワードは、
アルファベット a から z、A から Z、0 から 9、\. と / の
64 文字から作られた 13 文字からなる。
この文字列がどのように解釈されるかの詳細は
\fBcrypt\fR(3) を参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O An optional password age string may follow the encrypted
.\"O password, separated by a comma, from the same alphabet
.\"O as the password itself.
.\"O The first character gives the number of weeks during which the
.\"O password is valid.
.\"O The second character gives the number of weeks which must pass
.\"O before the user is permitted to change the password.
.\"O The last two characters give the week since Jan 1970 when the
.\"O password was last changed.
.\"O When the number of weeks during which the password is valid
.\"O have passed, the user will be required to provide a new
.\"O password.
オプションとして、パスワードの後に、
コンマに続いてパスワードの有効期限文字列が記されていることもある。
この文字列はパスワードと同じ文字セットからなる。
最初の文字は、パスワードが何週間有効かを示す。
二番目の文字は、何週間経てばユーザがパスワードを変更できるかを示す。
最後の二文字は、
最後にパスワードを変更したのが
1970 年 1 月から何週間経過した時点であるかを表す。
パスワードの有効期限が過ぎた時は、
ユーザは新しいパスワードを設定しなければならない。
.PP
.\"O The comment field is used by various system utilities, such as
.\"O \fBfinger\fR(1).
.\"O Three additional values may be present in the comment field.
.\"O They are
コメントフィールドは
\fBfinger\fR(1) のような様々なシステムユーティリティから利用される。
コメントフィールドには、追加情報として、
次のような 3 つの数値が記入されていることもある。
.IP "" .5i
.\"O pri= \- set initial value of nice
pri= \- nice の初期設定値
.IP "" .5i
.\"O umask= \- set initial value of umask
umask= \- umask の初期設定値
.IP "" .5i
.\"O ulimit= \- set initial value of ulimit
ulimit= \- ulimit の初期設定値
.PP
.\"O These fields are separated from each other and from any other
.\"O comment field by a comma.
これらのフィールドは互いに、また他のコメントフィールドと、
コンマを用いて分離される。
.PP
.\"O The home directory field provides the name of the initial
.\"O working directory.
.\"O \fBLogin\fR uses this information to set the value of
.\"O the \fBHOME\fR environmental variable.
ホームディレクトリフィールドは、
初期作業ディレクトリの名前を与える。
\fBlogin\fR はこの情報を用いて環境変数 \fBHOME\fR の内容を設定する。
.PP
.\"O The command interpreter field provides the name of the user's
.\"O command language interpreter, or the name of the initial program
.\"O to execute.
.\"O \fBLogin\fR uses this information to set the value of the
.\"O \fBSHELL\fR environmental variable.
.\"O If this field is empty, it defaults to the value \fB/bin/sh\fR.
コマンドインタプリタのフィールドには、
ユーザのコマンド言語インタプリタか、
最初に実行するプログラムの名前を記す。
\fBlogin\fR はこの情報を用いて環境変数 \fBSHELL\fR の内容を設定する。
このフィールドに何も記されていない場合は、
デフォルト値として \fB/bin/sh\fR を使用する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/passwd \- user account information
/etc/passwd \- ユーザアカウント情報
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR su (1),
.BR shadow (5),
.BR pwconv (8),
.BR pwunconv (8),
.BR sulogin (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
