.\"$Id: porttime.5,v 1.7 2001/01/25 10:43:51 kloczek Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 - 1990, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Modified Tue 18 Sep 2002 by NAKNAO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PORTTIME 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O porttime \- port access time file
porttime \- ポートアクセス時間設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I porttime
.\"O contains a list of tty devices, user names, and permitted login times.
.I porttime
は tty デバイス・ユーザ名・ログイン可能時間、のリストからなる。
.PP
.\"O Each entry consists of three colon separated fields.
.\"O The first field is a comma separated list of tty devices,
.\"O or an asterisk to indicate that all tty devices are matched by this entry.
.\"O The second field is a comma separated list of user names, or an
.\"O asterisk to indicated that all user names are matched by this entry.
.\"O The third field is a comma separated list of permitted access times.
それぞれのエントリは、コロンで区切られた三つのフィールドからなる。
最初のフィールドはコンマで区切られた tty デバイスのリストで、
アスタリスクを指定した場合はあらゆる tty デバイスにマッチする。
二番目のフィールドはコンマで区切られたユーザ名のリストで、
アスタリスクを指定した場合はあらゆるユーザにマッチする。
三番目のフィールドは、
コンマで区切られたログインを許可時間のリストである。
.PP
.\"O Each access time entry consists of zero or more days of the week,
.\"O abbreviated \fBSu\fR, \fBMo\fR, \fBTu\fR, \fBWe\fR, \fBTh\fR,
.\"O \fBFr\fR, and \fBSa\fR, followed by a pair of times separated by
.\"O a hyphen.
.\"O The abbreviation \fBWk\fR may be used to represent Monday thru Friday,
.\"O and \fBAl\fR may be used to indicate every day.
.\"O If no days are given, \fBAl\fR is assumed.
アクセス時間の各エントリは、
\fBSu\fR, \fBMo\fR, \fBTu\fR, \fBWe\fR, \fBTh\fR, \fBFr\fR, \fBSa\fR
で略記されたゼロ個以上の曜日と、
ハイフンで区切られた 2 つの時刻とからなる。
月曜日から金曜日までを指定する \fBWk\fR や、
全ての日を指定する \fBAl\fR という略記法を用いることもできる。
曜日の指定が無い場合は \fBAl\fR だとみなされる。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O The following entry allows access to user \fBjfh\fR on every port
.\"O during weekdays from 9am to 5pm.
次のエントリは、ユーザ \fBjfh\fR が平日の午前9時から午後5時まで、
全てのポートからアクセス可能であることを示す。
.br
.sp 1
	*:jfh:Wk0900-1700
.br
.sp 1
.\"O The following entries allow access only to the users \fBroot\fR and
.\"O \fBoper\fR on /dev/console at any time.
.\"O This illustrates how the
.\"O \fI/etc/porttime\fR file is an ordered list of access times.
.\"O Any other user would match the second entry which does not permit
.\"O access at any time.
次のエントリは、
\fBroot\fR と \fBoper\fR 以外のユーザには、どの時間帯にも
/dev/console からのアクセスを許可しない。
この例は、\fI/etc/porttime\fR
ファイルがアクセス可能時間のリストを
どういう順序で扱うかも示している。
他の全てのユーザは二番目のエントリにマッチし、
したがって console からのアクセスは許可されない。
.br
.sp 1
	console:root,oper:Al0000-2400
.br
	console:*:
.br
.sp 1
.\"O The following entry allows access for the user \fBgames\fR on any
.\"O port during non-working hours.
次のエントリは、
ユーザ \fBgames\fR が、就業時間外なら
あらゆるポートからアクセスできるように指定している。
.br
.sp 1
	*:games:Wk1700-0900,SaSu0000-2400
.br
.sp 1
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/porttime \- file containing port access times
/etc/porttime \- ポートへのアクセス可能時間を記したファイル
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
