.\"$Id: suauth.5,v 1.3 2001/01/25 10:43:51 kloczek Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri 14 Feb 1997
.\"     by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Modified Tue 18 Sep 2002 by NAKNAO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SUAUTH 5 "Feb 14, 1996"
.UC 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O suauth \- Detailed su control file
suauth \- su を詳細に制御するためのファイル
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /etc/suauth
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The file
.\"O .I /etc/suauth
.\"O is referenced whenever the su command is called. It can change the
.\"O behaviour of the su command, based upon
.I /etc/suauth
ファイルは、
su コマンドが実行されるたびに参照される。
このファイルを用いると、
以下の情報に基づいて su コマンドの動作を変更できる。
.PP
.RS
.nf
.\"O 1) the user su is targetting
1) su で成り代わろうとしているユーザ
.fi
.\"O 2) the user executing the su command (or any groups he might be
.\"O a member of)
2) su コマンドを実行しているユーザ
(もしくはそのユーザが属するグループのいずれか)
.RE
.PP
.\"O The file is formatted like this, with lines starting with a #
.\"O being treated as comment lines and ignored;
このファイルは次の様な書式をしている。
# で始まる行はコメントとして扱われ、無視される。
.PP
.RS
to-id:from-id:ACTION
.RE
.PP
.\"O Where to-id is either the word
.\"O .BR ALL ,
.\"O a list of usernames
.\"O delimited by "," or the words
.\"O .B ALL EXCEPT
.\"O followed by a list
.\"O of usernames delimted by ","
ここで to-id は、
.B ALL
という単語、
コンマで区切られたユーザ名のリスト、
.B ALL EXCEPT
という単語以降に置かれた "," 区切りのユーザ名リスト、
のいずれかである。
.PP
.\"O from-id is formatted the same as to-id except the extra word
.\"O .B GROUP
.\"O is recognised.
.\"O .B ALL EXCEPT GROUP
.\"O is perfectly valid too.
.\"O Following
.\"O .B GROUP
.\"O appears one or more group names, delimited by
.\"O ",". It is not sufficient to have primary group id of the
.\"O relevant group, an entry in
.\"O .BR /etc/group (5)
.\"O is neccessary.
from-id は to-id と同じ書式であり、更に
.B GROUP
という単語も使用できる。
.B ALL EXCEPT GROUP
という使い方も同様に利用できる。
.B GROUP
の後には一つ以上のグループ名を "," で区切って記す。
そのグループを主グループ id として持つだけではだめで、
.BR /etc/group (5)
のエントリにユーザ名が記されていなければならない。
.PP
.\"O Action can be one only of the following currently supported
.\"O options.
ACTION には、以下のオプションのいずれか一つを指定できる。
.\"O .TP 20
.TP 10
.B DENY
.\"O The attempt to su is stopped before a password is even asked for.
パスワードを聞く前に su 動作を中止する。
.\"O .TP 20
.TP
.B NOPASS
.\"O The attempt to su is automatically successful; no password is
.\"O asked for.
自動的に su は成功し、パスワードは尋ねない。
.\"O .TP 20
.TP
.B OWNPASS
.\"O For the su command to be successful, the user must enter
.\"O his or her own password. They are told this.
su が成功するためには、
ユーザが自分のパスワードを入力しなくてはならない。
パスワードを入力するように要求される。
.PP
.\"O Note there are three separate fields delimted by a colon. No
.\"O whitespace must surround this colon. Also note that the file
.\"O is examined sequentially line by line, and the first applicable
.\"O rule is used without examining the file further. This makes it
.\"O possible for a system administrator to exercise as fine control
.\"O as he or she wishes.
コロンによって区切られた別々のフィールドが三つある点に注意すること。
コロンの前後に空白があってはならない。
ファイルは一行毎に順番に吟味され、
最初にマッチした規則が用いられ、
ファイルの残りはそれ以上捜査されない。
これによって、
システム管理者は望む限りの微調整を行うことが可能となる。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.PP
.nf
.\"O # sample /etc/suauth file
.\"O #
.\"O # A couple of privileged usernames may
.\"O # su to root with their own password.
.\"O #
# /etc/suauthファイルの例
#
# 二人の特権ユーザが、自分のパスワードを
# 用いて root に su できる。
#
root:chris,birddog:OWNPASS
.\"O # 
.\"O # Anyone else may not su to root unless in
.\"O # group wheel. This is how BSD does things.
.\"O #
# 
# 他のユーザは wheel グループに属していない限り
# root に su できない。これは BSD と同じ動作である。
#
root:ALL EXCEPT GROUP wheel:DENY
.\"O #
.\"O # Perhaps terry and birddog are accounts
.\"O # owned by the same person.
.\"O # Access can be arranged between them
.\"O # with no password.
.\"O #
#
# おそらく terry と birddog は同じ人間が
# 所有するアカウントである。
# パスワード無しで互いに他方に su できる。
#
terry:birddog:NOPASS
birddog:terry:NOPASS
#
.fi
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/etc/suauth
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O There could be plenty lurking. The file parser is particularly
.\"O unforgiving about syntax errors, expecting no spurious whitespace
.\"O (apart from beginning and end of lines), and a specific token
.\"O delimiting different things.
多くのバグが潜んでいる可能性がある。
とりわけ、ファイルパーザは書式エラーに寛大ではなく、
(行の始め及び終わり以外に) 無駄な空白があってはならないし、
特定のトークンが別々のものを区切るようになっている。
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O An error parsing the file is reported using
.\"O .BR syslogd (8)
.\"O as level ERR on
.\"O facility AUTH.
ファイルをパースする際のエラーは
.BR syslogd (8)
を通して、AUTH ファシリティの ERR レベルで通知される。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR su (1)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.nf
Chris Evans (lady0110@sable.ox.ac.uk)
Lady Margaret Hall
Oxford University
England
