.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 10art-ni Corporation        
.\"                             all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri May 19 10:55:26 JST 2006
.\"         by OSHIRO Moritoshi <m-ooshiro@10art-ni.co.jp>
.\"
.\" this is a comment`
.\"O .TH MICROCODE_CTL "8" "13 September 2005" "microcode_ctl"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O microcode_ctl \- microcode utility for Intel IA32 processors
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.\"O .B microcode_ctl
.\"O [\fI\-h\fR] [\fI\-u\fR [\fI\-q\fR]] [\fI\-Q\fR] [\fI\-f microcode\fR]
.\"O .br
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O ." Add any additional description here
.\"O .PP
.\"O The microcode_ctl utility is a companion to the IA32 microcode driver writtn
.\"O by Tigran Aivazian <tigran@veritas.com>. The utility has two uses:
.\"O .br

.TH MICROCODE_CTL "8" "19 January 2006" "microcode_ctl"
.SH 名前
microcode_ctl \- Intel IA32 プロセッサのマイクロコードユーティリティ
.SH 書式
.B microcode_ctl
[\fI\-h\fR] [\fI\-u\fR [\fI\-q\fR]] [\fI\-Q\fR] [\fI\-f microcode\fR]
.br
.SH 説明
." Add any additional description here
.PP
microcode_ctl は Tigran Aivazian 氏 <tigran@veritas.com> によって書かれた、IA32 マイクロコードドライバ向けのユーティリティである。このユーティリティには2つの用途がある：
.br

.\"O .PP
.\"O \fBa)\fR it decodes and sends new microcode to the kernel driver to be
.\"O uploaded to Intel IA32 processors. (Pentium Pro, PII, Celeron, PIII,
.\"O Xeon, Pentium 4 etc)

.PP
\fBa)\fR Intel IA32 のプロセッサ(Pentium Pro, PII, Celeron, PIII, Xeon, Pentium 4 等) に転送するために新しいマイクロコードをデコードして、カーネルドライバに送信する。

.\"O .PP
.\"O \fBb)\fR it signals the kernel driver to release the buffers containing the
.\"O copy of microcode data actually applied to given CPU, linear array of 2048
.\"O bytes per CPU, see struct microcode in include/asm/processor.h for
.\"O information on the layout of chunks buffers may hold
.\"O .br

.PP
\fBb)\fR マイクロコードのデータコピーが含まれるバッファ解放のため、カーネルドライバにシグナルを送信する。そのデータは各 CPU 毎に 2048 バイトのリニアアレイとして実際に CPU に割り振られる。バッファが保持出来る構造体の詳細については include/asm/processor.h の struct microcode を参照。
.br


.\"O .PP
.\"O The microcode update is volatile and needs to be uploaded on each system
.\"O boot i.e. it doesn't reflash your cpu permanently, reboot and it reverts
.\"O back to the old microcode.
.\"O .br

.PP
更新されたマイクロコードは保持されないため、システムをブートする度に更新の転送を行う必要がある。つまり、CPU はずっと新しいままではなく、リブートすると古いマイクロコードに戻ってしまうということである。
.br

.\"O .TP
.\"O \fB\-h\fR
.\"O display usage and exit
.\"O .TP
.\"O \fB\-u\fR
.\"O upload microcode (from default filename)
.\"O .TP
.\"O \fB\-f\fR
.\"O upload microcode from named Intel formatted file
.\"O .TP
.\"O \fB\-q\fR
.\"O run silently when successful
.\"O .TP
.\"O \fB\-Q\fR
.\"O run silently even on failure
.\"O .PD

.TP
\fB\-h\fR
利用方法を表示し終了する
.TP
\fB\-u\fR
(標準のファイルから)マイクロコードを転送する
.TP
\fB\-f\fR
指定した Intel フォーマットのファイルからマイクロコードを転送する
.TP
\fB\-q\fR
成功した場合、静かに実行する
.TP
\fB\-Q\fR
失敗しても静かに実行する
.PD


.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.\"O .TP
.\"O microcode_ctl -u
.\"O Upload microcode using defaults

.SH 例
.TP
microcode_ctl -u
標準設定でマイクロコードを転送する

.\"O .SH FILES
.\"O .TP
.\"O /etc/microcode.dat
.\"O The default microcode location
.\"O .PD

.SH ファイル
.TP
/etc/microcode.dat
マイクロコードのデフォルト位置
.PD
 

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O Microcode utility written by Simon Trimmer
.\"O .br
.\"O Linux Kernel driver written by Tigran Aivazian.

.SH 著者
Microcode ユーティリティは Simon Trimmer 氏によって作成された。
.br
Linux カーネルドライバは Tigran Aivazian 氏によって作成された。

.\"O .SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.\"O Report bugs to either Simon Trimmer <simon@urbanmyth.org> or
.\"O Tigran Aivazian <tigran@veritas.com>
.SH バグ報告
バグは Simon Trimmer 氏 <simon@urbanmyth.org> か、Tigran Aivazian 氏 
<tigran@veritas.com> に報告して下さい。


.\"O .SH COPYRIGHT
.\"O Copyright \(co 2000 VERITAS Software
.\"O .br
.\"O This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
.\"O warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"O .SH "SPECIAL THANKS"
.\"O Thanks to the Intel Corporation, for supplying microcode update data and
.\"O publishing the specifications that enabled us to write microcode driver for
.\"O Linux.
.\"O .br 


.SH 著作権
Copyright \(co 2000 VERITAS Software
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "謝辞"
私達が Linux 向けのマイクロコードドライバを作成出来るようにマイクロコードの更新データと仕様を発表した Intel 社に感謝いたします。
.br 

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O The brave are recommended to view the driver source code located in the
.\"O Linux Kernel source tree in arch/i386/kernel/microcode.c
.\"O .PP
.\"O Visit http://www.urbanmyth.org/microcode/ for more information
.\"O and microcode updates.

.SH 関連項目
強者は Linux カーネルのソースツリーの arch/i386/kernel/microcode.c ドライバソースコードを読んで欲しい。

.PP
詳細とマイクロコード更新については http://www.urbanmyth.org/microcode/ を参照のこと。
