.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)lpq.1	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/6/93
.\"
.Dd 23 Jun, 1995
.Dt LPQ 1
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh 名称
.Nm lpq
.Nd キューに登録されている印刷ジョブの確認を行う
.Sh 書式
.Nm lpq
.Op Fl l
.Op Fl P Ns Ar printer
.Op  job # ...
.Op  user ...
.Sh 解説
.Nm  lpq
は、ラインプリンタにファイルをプリントアウトするために
.Xr lpd 8
が利用するスプールエリアを調べ、
指定したジョブもしくはすべてのジョブの状態を報告します。
.Nm  lpq
を引数を指定せずに実行したときは、現在、キュー内にあるすべての
ジョブの状態を報告します。
.Pp
オプションとしては、以下のものがあります:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl P
特定のプリンタを指定します。
.Nm -P
を使わない場合は、デフォルトのラインプリンタ
(もしくは環境変数
.Ev PRINTER
の値)が用いられます。
.It Fl l
ジョブエントリを構成するファイルのそれぞれについての情報を
表示します。たいていは 1 行に収まる程度の情報が表示されます。
.El
.Pp
委託された(つまり
.Xr lpr 1
の実行)各ジョブに対して、 
.Nm lpq
はユーザ名、
キュー内でのランク、ジョブが持っているファイルの名前、ジョブ識別子 (特
定のジョブを削除するために
.Xr lprm 1
に引数として与えられるかもしれない
番号)、そして合計のサイズを報告します。ジョブの順番はスプールディレク
トリをスキャンするアルゴリズムに依存し、
.Tn FIFO
(First In First Out) であ
ると仮定しています。ジョブのファイル名がわからない場合
.Ns ( Xr lpr 1
がパイプラインで接続された場合など) は、ファイル名は ``(standard input)'' と
表示されます。
.Pp
もし 
.Nm  lpq
がデーモンがないと警告した場合 (何かの不調が原因である)、
.Xr lpc 8
コマンドを用いてプリンタデーモンをリスタートさせてください。
.Sh 環境変数
.Bl -tag -width PRINTER
.It Ev PRINTER
かわりのデフォルトプリンタを指定する
.El
.Sh 関連ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/misc/termcap -compact
.It Pa /etc/printcap
プリンタの特徴を決定する
.It Pa /var/spool/*
スプールディレクトリ。printcap での設定により決まる
.It Pa /var/spool/*/cf*
ジョブを明記した制御ファイル
.It Pa /var/spool/*/lock
現在アクティブなジョブを得るためのロックファイル
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/termcap
繰り返して表示するときに画面を操作するために用いる
.El
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr lpr 1 ,
.Xr lprm 1 ,
.Xr lpc 8 ,
.Xr lpd 8
.Sh 歴史
.Nm lpq
コマンドは
.Bx 3
から登場しました。
