.\" Copyright (c) 1988 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
.\" Student Information Processing Board.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu 13 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.\" $Header$
.\"
.TH COMPILE_ET 1 "30 Mar 1998" SIPB
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O compile_et \- error table compiler
.SH 名前
compile_et \- エラー表のコンパイラー
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B compile_et
file
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Compile_et
.\"O converts a table listing error-code names and associated messages into
.\"O a C source file suitable for use with the
.\"O .IR com_err (3)
.\"O library.
.B compile_et
は、エラーコードの名前と対応するメッセージをリストした表を、
.IR com_err (3)
ライブラリで扱いやすい C ソース形式に変換する。

.\"O The source file name must end with a suffix of ``.et''; the file
.\"O consists of a declaration supplying the name (up to four characters
.\"O long) of the error-code table:
ソースファイルの名前は ``.et'' という拡張子で終わっている必要がある。
ファイルの先頭で、まずエラーコード表の名前
(名前は 4 文字まで)。
を与える宣言を行う。
.RS
.sp
.B error_table
.I name
.sp
.RE
.\"O followed by up to 256 entries of the form:
続いて、エントリを次の形式で与える (256 エントリまで)。
.RS
.sp
.B error_code
.I name,
.\"O "
.\"O .I string
.\"O "
.RI \" string \"
.sp
.RE

.\"O and a final
そして最後に表の末尾を
.RS
.sp
.B end
.sp
.RE
.\"O to indicate the end of the table.
によって示す。

.\"O The name of the table is used to construct the name of a subroutine
.\"O .I initialize_XXXX_error_table
.\"O which must be called in order for the
.\"O .I com_err
.\"O library to recognize the error table.
表の名前は、サブルーチンの名前をつくるときに
.I initialize_XXXX_error_table
の様に用いられる。
.I com_err
ライブラリにこのエラー表を認識させるには、
このサブルーチンを呼び出す必要がある。

.\"O The various error codes defined are assigned sequentially increasing
.\"O numbers (starting with a large number computed as a hash function of
.\"O the name of the table); thus for compatibility it is suggested that
.\"O new codes be added only to the end of an existing table, and that no
.\"O codes be removed from tables.
各種エラーコードの定義は、ひとつずつ増える数値に割り当てられる
(先頭の数値は、表の名前をハッシュ関数に与えて計算された値になる)。
したがって互換性を保つためには、
新しいコードの追加は既存の表の末尾に行い、
表からコードの削除を行わないことである。

.\"O The names defined in the table are placed into a C header file with
.\"O preprocessor directives defining them as integer constants of up to
.\"O 32 bits in magnitude.
表で定義されている名前は、 C のヘッダファイルにおいて、
それらの名前を 32 ビットまでの整数定数として定義する
プリプロセッサ指定になる。

.\"O A C source file is also generated which should be compiled and linked
.\"O with the object files which reference these error codes; it contains
.\"O the text of the messages and the initialization subroutine.  Both C
.\"O files have names derived from that of the original source file, with
.\"O the ``.et'' suffix replaced by ``.c'' and ``.h''.
C ソースファイルも生成されるので、これをコンパイルして、
エラーコードを参照するオブジェクトファイルにリンクする。
C ソースファイルには、メッセージのテキストと初期化サブルーチンとが含まれる。
C のヘッダファイル・ソースファイル両者の名前は、
オリジナルのソースファイルの名前の ``.et'' 拡張子を、
それぞれ ``.h'', ``.c'' に置き換えたものになる。

.\"O A ``#'' in the source file is treated as a comment character, and all
.\"O remaining text to the end of the source line will be ignored.
ソースファイル中の ``#'' はコメント文字として扱われ、
その行の末尾までの残りのテキストは無視される。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH BUGS
.\"O 
.SH バグ
.\"O Since the original
.\"O .B compile_et
.\"O uses a very simple parser based on
.\"O .IR yacc (1), 
.\"O and this current version of 
.\"O .B compile_et
.\"O uses an awk/sed combination of scripts, 
.\"O its error recovery leaves much to be desired.
オリジナルの
.B compile_et
は
.IR yacc (1)
を用いた非常に簡単なパーサーを使っていたし、
現在のバージョンの
.B compile_et
は awk と sed スクリプトを組み合わせて用いているので、
エラーリカバリは望ましい水準からはほど遠い。
.\"O 
.\" .IR for manual entries
.\" .PP for paragraph breaks
.\"O 
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O com_err (3).
com_err (3)

Ken Raeburn, "A Common Error Description Library for UNIX".
