.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" 
.\" This page is a part of e2fsprogs.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Mar 13 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji.
.\" Updated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Jul 24 07:56:57 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 17 01:37:35 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	attribute	属性
.\"
.TH LSATTR 1 "December 2010" "E2fsprogs version 1.41.14"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O lsattr \- list file attributes on a Linux second extended file system
.SH 名前
lsattr \- Linux 第 2 拡張ファイルシステム (ext2fs) 上にあるファイルの
属性 (attribute) を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B lsattr
[
.B \-RVadv
]
[
.I files...
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B lsattr
.\"O lists the file attributes on a second extended file system.  See
.\"O .BR chattr (1)
.\"O for a description of the attributes and what they mean.
.B lsattr
は  Linux 第 2 拡張ファイルシステム (ext2fs) 上にあるファイルの
属性 (attribute) を表示する。
属性の説明とその意味については、
.BR chattr (1)
を参照すること。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-R
.\"O Recursively list attributes of directories and their contents.
ディレクトリやその内容の属性を再帰的に表示する。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Display the program version.
プログラムのバージョンを表示する。
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O List all files in directories, including files that start with `.'.
`.' ではじまるファイルも含め、全てのファイルおよびディレクトリを表示する。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O List directories like other files, rather than listing their contents.
ディレクトリの内容ではなく、ディレクトリそのものを表示する。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O List the file's version/generation number.
ファイルのバージョン/世代を表示する。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B lsattr
.\"O was written by Remy Card <Remy.Card@linux.org>.  It is currently being
.\"O maintained by Theodore Ts'o <tytso@alum.mit.edu>.
.B lsattr 
は、Remy Card <Remy.Card@linux.org> によって作成された。
現在は Theodore Ts'o <tytso@alum.mit.edu> によってメンテナンスされている。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O There are none :-).
ない :-)
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O .B lsattr
.\"O is part of the e2fsprogs package and is available from
.\"O 
.B lsattr
は e2fsprogs パッケージの一部であり、
http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net から入手できる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
chattr (1)
