.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Theodore Ts'o
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Mar  7 00:39:45 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH MK_CMDS 1 "2003" E2FSPROGS
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mk_cmds \- error table compiler
mk_cmds \- エラーテーブルコンパイラ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mk_cmds
file
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Mk_cmds
.\"O converts a table listing command names and associated help messages
.\"O into a C source file suitable for use with the
.\"O .IR ss (3)
.\"O library.
.B mk_cmds
は、コマンド名とそれに関連するヘルプメッセージを列挙したテーブルを、
.IR ss (3)
ライブラリと共に使用するのに適した、C のソースファイルに変換する。

.\"O The source file name must end with a suffix of ``.ct''; the file
.\"O consists of a declaration supplying the name of the command table:
ソースファイルの名前はサフィックス ``.ct'' で終っていなければならない。
ファイルはコマンドラインテーブルの名前を与える宣言で構成される。

.\"O .B command_table
.\"O .I name
.\"O 
.\"O followed by entries of the form:
.\"O 
.\"O [
.\"O .B request
.\"O |
.\"O .B unimplemented
.\"O ] 
.\"O .I name,
.\"O "
.\"O .I string
.\"O "[, abbrev]...;
.\"O 
.\"O and a final
.\"O 
.\"O .B end
.\"O 
.\"O to indicate the end of the table.
.B command_table
.I name

の後に

[
.B request
|
.B unimplemented
] 
.I name,
"
.I string
"[, abbrev]...;

という形式のエントリが続き、テーブルの終りを示す

.B end

で終る。

.\"O A C source file is generated which should be compiled and linked
.\"O with the object files use the ss library.   
C のソースファイルが生成されるので、コンパイルして、
ss ライブラリを使うオブジェクトファイルとリンクする。

.\"O A ``#'' in the source file is treated as a comment character, and all
.\"O remaining text to the end of the source line will be ignored.
ソースファイル中の ``#'' はコメント文字として扱われ、
ソースファイルの行末までの残りの文字列は無視される。

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ

.\"O Since the original
.\"O .B mk_cmds
.\"O uses a very simple parser based on
.\"O .IR yacc (1), 
.\"O and this current version of 
.\"O .B mk_cmds
.\"O uses an awk/sed combination of scripts, 
.\"O its error recovery leaves much to be desired.
オリジナルの
.B mk_cmds
は
.IR yacc (1)
に基づくとても簡単なパーサを使っており、
現在のバージョンの
.B mk_cmds
は awk と sed を組み合わせたスクリプトを使っているので、
エラーからの回復についてはまだ十分とは言えない。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
ss (3)
