.\" Copyright 1999 Andreas Dilger (adilger@enel.ucalgary.ca)
.\"
.\" This man page was created for libuuid.so.1.1 from e2fsprogs-1.14.
.\" 
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Created  Wed Mar 10 17:42:12 1999, Andreas Dilger
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright 1999 by NAKANO Takeo. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Translated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH UUIDGEN 1 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O uuidgen \- command\-line utility to create a new UUID value
.SH 名前
uuidgen \- UUID 値を生成するコマンドラインユーティリティ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B uuidgen 
[
.B \-r
|
.B \-t
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B uuidgen
.\"O program creates a new universally unique identifier (UUID) using the
.\"O .BR libuuid (3)
.\"O library.  The new UUID can reasonably be considered unique among 
.\"O all UUIDs created on the local system, 
.\"O and among UUIDs created on other systems in the past
.\"O and in the future.
.B uuidgen
プログラムは
.BR libuuid (3)
ライブラリを用いて、 UUID (universal unique identifier:
汎システム的に他とは重ならない識別子) を生成する。
新しい UUID は、ローカルシステムで以前に生成された
UUID はもちろん、他のシステムで過去・未来に作成された/作成される
UUID のいずれとも重ならないと考えて良い。
.PP
.\"O There are two types of UUID's which 
.\"O .B uuidgen
.\"O can generate: time-based UUID's and random-based UUID's.  By 
.\"O default 
.\"O .B uuidgen
.\"O will generate a random-based UUID if a high-quality random number
.\"O generator is present.  Otherwise, it will chose a time-based UUID.  It 
.\"O is possible to force the generation of one of these two 
.\"O UUID types by using the
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O options.
.B uuidgen
は二つのタイプの UUID を生成することができる。時刻ベースの UUID と
乱数ベースの UUID である。デフォルトでは、
質の良い乱数生成機構があれば
.B uuidgen
は乱数ベースの UUID を生成しようとする。そうでなければ
時刻ベースの UUID を生成する。
.B \-r
または
.B \-t
オプションを指定すれば、二つのタイプのいずれかを生成するかを強制できる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Generate a random-based UUID.  This method creates a UUID consisting mostly
.\"O of random bits.  It requires that the operating system have a high
.\"O quality random number generator, such as
.\"O .IR /dev/random .
乱数ベースの UUID を生成する。この方法は、ほとんどがランダムなビットから
なる UUID を生成する。これを用いるには、オペレーティングシステムが
.I /dev/random
のような質の良い乱数生成機構を備えていなければならない。
.TP
.B \-t
.\"O Generate a time-based UUID.  This method creates a UUID based on the system 
.\"O clock plus the system's ethernet hardware address, if present.
時刻ベースの UUID を生成する。この手法では、システムクロックと
システムのイーサネットハードウェアアドレスが取得できればそれとに基づいて
UUID を生成する。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O The UUID of the form 1b4e28ba-2fa1-11d2-883f-b9a761bde3fb (in
.\"O .BR printf (3)
.\"O format "%08x-%04x-%04x-%04x-%012x") is output to the standard output.
1b4e28ba-2fa1-11d2-883f-b9a761bde3fb のような形式
.RB ( printf (3)
フォーマットで書けば "%08x-%04x-%04x-%04x-%012x")
の UUID が標準出力に書き出される。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
OSF DCE 1.1
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B uuidgen
.\"O was written by Andreas Dilger for libuuid.
.B uuidgen
は Andreas Dilger によって libuuid のために作成された。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O .B uuidgen
.\"O is part of libuuid from the e2fsprogs package and is available from
.\"O http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net.
.B uuidgen
は e2fsprogs パッケージ付属の libuuid の一部であり、
http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net から入手できる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR libuuid (3)
