.\" This page is originally in the SysVinit package.
.\"
.\" Translated Fri 14 Feb 1997 by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated Sun 14 May 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"{{{}}}
.\"{{{  Title
.TH INITTAB 5 "May 19, 1998" "" "Linux System Administrator's Manual"
.\"}}}
.\"{{{ 名前 
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O inittab \- format of the inittab file used by the sysv-compatible init
.\"O process
inittab \- sysv-互換のinitが使うinittabファイルの書式
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  概要
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 概要
.\"O The \fBinittab\fP file describes which processes are started at bootup and
.\"O during normal operation (e.g.\& /etc/init.d/boot, /etc/init.d/rc, gettys...).
\fBinittab\fPファイルは、ブートアップ時や通常運転中にどの様なプロセスを
起動するのか(例えば\& /etc/init.d/boot, /etc/rc, getty等)を指定するファイルである。
.\"O .BR Init (8)
.\"O distinguishes multiple \fIrunlevels\fP, each of which can have its own set of
.\"O processes that are started.  Valid runlevels are \fB0\fP\-\fB6\fP plus
.\"O \fBA\fP, \fBB\fP, and \fBC\fP for \fBondemand\fP entries.  An entry in the
.\"O \fBinittab\fP file has the following format:
.BR init (8)
は複数の\fIランレベル\fPを区別する。
それぞれの\fIランレベル\fPに対して固有のプロセス群を起動する事ができる。
ランレベルとして有効なものは、\fB0\fP\-\fB6\fPと、
\fBondemand\fPエントリーとしての\fBA\fP, \fBB\fP, \fBC\fPである。
\fBinittab\fPファイル中のエントリーは次の書式で記される :
.RS
.sp
\fIid\fP:\fIrunlevels\fP:\fIaction\fP:\fIprocess\fP
.sp
.RE
.\"O Lines beginning with `#' are ignored.
`#' で始まる行は無視される。
.\"{{{  id
.\"O .IP \fIid\fP
.\"O is a unique sequence of 1-4 characters which identifies an entry in
.\"O .B inittab 
.\"O (for versions of sysvinit compiled with libraries < 5.2.18 or
.\"O a.out libraries the limit is 2 characters).
.IP \fIid\fP
は
.B inittab
ファイル中でエントリーを識別するための、
1-4文字からなる固有の識別子である
(バージョン5.2.18以前の、又はa.outのライブラリでコンパイルされた
sysvinitでは2文字までに制限されている) 。
.sp
.\"O Note: For gettys or other login processes, the \fIid\fP field should be
.\"O the tty suffix of the corresponding tty, e.g.\& \fB1\fP for \fBtty1\fP.
註:gettys や他のログインプロセスに対しては、
\fIid\fP欄と対応する tty の添字を同じにすべきである
(例えば\fBtty1\fPに対しては\fB1\fPというように)。
.\"O Otherwise, the login accounting might not work correctly.
でないと、ログインのアカウンティングが正常に動作しない可能性がある。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  runlevels
.\"O .IP \fIrunlevels\fP
.\"O lists the runlevels for which the specified action should be taken.
.IP \fIrunlevels\fP
は、指定した動作を行なうランレベルの一覧を示す。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  action
.IP \fIaction\fP
.\"O describes which action should be taken.
はどのような動作を行うべきかをあらわす。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  process
.\"O .IP \fIprocess\fP
.\"O specifies the process to be executed.  If the process field starts with
.\"O a `+' character, 
.\"O .B init 
.\"O will not do utmp and wtmp accounting for that process.  This is needed for 
.\"O gettys that insist on doing their own utmp/wtmp housekeeping.  This is also 
.\"O a historic bug.
.IP \fIprocess\fP
には実行されるプロセスを指定する。
プロセス欄の最初の文字が`+'である場合、
.B init
はそのプロセスに対して utmp 及び wtmp アカウンティングを行わない。
これは gettys が自分のutmp/wtmpの面倒を自分でみてしまうために必要となっている。
これは歴史上有名なバグでもある。
.\"}}}
.PP
.\"O The \fIrunlevels\fP field may contain multiple characters for different
.\"O runlevels.  For example, \fB123\fP specifies that the process should be 
.\"O started in runlevels 1, 2, and 3.
\fIrunlevels\fPには異なったランレベルを表わす複数の文字を書いても良い。
例えば、\fB123\fPはランレベル1, 2, 3でそのプロセスを起動することを表わす。
.\"O The \fIrunlevels\fP for \fBondemand\fP entries may contain an \fBA\fP,
.\"O \fBB\fP, or \fBC\fP.  The \fIrunlevels\fP field of \fBsysinit\fP,
.\"O \fBboot\fP, and \fBbootwait\fP entries are ignored.
\fBondemand\fPエントリーのための\fIrunlevels\fPは
\fBA\fP, \fBB\fP, \fBC\fPのいずれか一つのみを書くことができる。
\fBsysinit\fP、\fBboot\fP及び\fBbootwait\fPエントリーの
\fIrunlevel\fP欄は無視される。
.PP
.\"O When the system runlevel is changed, any running processes that are not
.\"O specified for the new runlevel are killed, first with \s-2SIGTERM\s0,
.\"O then with \s-2SIGKILL\s0.
システムのランレベルが変更された場合は、
現在実行中のプロセスのうち新たなランレベルに記されていないものは、
先ず\s-2SIGTERM\s0により、次いで\s-2SIGKILL\s0シグナルにより kill される。
.PP
.\"O Valid actions for the \fIaction\fP field are:
\fIaction\fP として有効なものは次の通り:
.\"{{{  respawn
.IP \fBrespawn\fP
.\"O The process will be restarted whenever it terminates (e.g.\& getty).
プロセスが終了した場合は常に再起動する(例えば\& getty) 。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  wait
.IP \fBwait\fP
.\"O The process will be started once when the specified runlevel is entered and 
.\"O .B init 
.\"O will wait for its termination.
指定したランレベルになった時に一度だけ起動する。
.B init
はこのプロセスが終了するまで待機する。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  once
.IP \fBonce\fP
.\"O The process will be executed once when the specified runlevel is
.\"O entered.
指定したランレベルになった時に一度だけ実行する。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  boot
.IP \fBboot\fP
.\"O The process will be executed during system boot.  The \fIrunlevels\fP
.\"O field is ignored.
システムブート中に実行される。
\fIrunlevels\fP欄は無視される。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  bootwait
.IP \fBbootwait\fP
.\"O The process will be executed during system boot, while 
.\"O .B init 
.\"O waits for its termination (e.g.\& /etc/rc).  
システムブート中に実行されるが、
.B init
はそれが終了するまで待機する
(例えば/etc/rc)。
.\"O The \fIrunlevels\fP field is ignored.
\fIrunlevels\fP欄は無視される。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  off
.IP \fBoff\fP
.\"O This does nothing.
何もしない。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  ondemand
.IP \fBondemand\fP
.\"O A process marked with an \fBondemand\fP runlevel will be executed
.\"O whenever the specified \fBondemand\fP runlevel is called.  However, no
.\"O runlevel change will occur (\fBondemand\fP runlevels are `a', `b',
.\"O and `c').
\fBondemand\fPランレベルの印が付いたプロセスは、
指定した\fBondemand\fPランレベルになった時に常に実行される。
しかし、ランレベルは変化しない
(\fBondemand\fPランレベルとは`a', `b', `c'のことである)。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  initdefault
.IP \fBinitdefault\fP
.\"O An \fBinitdefault\fP entry specifies the runlevel which should be
.\"O entered after system boot.  If none exists, 
.\"O .B init
.\"O will ask for a runlevel on the console. The \fIprocess\fP field is ignored.
\fBinitdefault\fPエントリーは、システムブート完了時に入るべき
ランレベルを示す。
\fBinitdefault\fPエントリーが存在しない場合は、
.B init
はどのランレベルに入るべきかをコンソールに問い合わせる。
\fIprocess\fP欄は無視される。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  sysinit
.IP \fBsysinit\fP
.\"O The process will be executed during system boot. It will be
.\"O executed before any \fBboot\fP or \fB bootwait\fP entries.
.\"O The \fIrunlevels\fP field is ignored.
システムブート中に実行される。
このエントリーはいかなる\fBboot\fP及び\fBbootwait\fPエントリーよりも
先に実行される。
\fIrunlevels\fP欄は無視される。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  powerwait
.IP \fBpowerwait\fP
.\"O The process will be executed when the power goes down. Init is usually
.\"O informed about this by a process talking to a UPS connected to the computer.
電源に異常が起きた時に実行されるプロセス。
init は普通コンピュータと接続されている UPS と通信しているプロセスから
このことを知らされる。
.\"O \fBInit\fP will wait for the process to finish before continuing.
\fBinit\fPはこのプロセスが終了するまで待機する。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  powerfail
.IP \fBpowerfail\fP
.\"O As for \fBpowerwait\fP, except that \fBinit\fP does not wait for the process's
.\"O completion.
\fBpowerwait\fPと同様だが、\fBinit\fPはこのプロセスが完了するのを
待たないところが異なる。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  powerokwait
.IP \fBpowerokwait\fP
.\"O This process will be executed as soon as \fBinit\fP is informormed that the
.\"O power has been restored.
このプロセスは電源が回復したことを\fBinit\fPが知った時に実行される。
.\"O .\"}}}
.\"O .\"{{{  powerfailnow
.IP \fBpowerfailnow\fP
.\"O This process will be executed when \fBinit\fP is told that the battery of
.\"O the external UPS is almost empty and the power is failing (provided that the
.\"O external UPS and the monitoring process are able to detect this condition).
このプロセスは電源に異常が起き、さらに外部 UPS のバッテリー容量が
少なくなったことを(外部 UPS と監視プロセスがこのような状態を
検出できるようになっている場合に)\fBinit\fPが知った時に実行される。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  ctrlaltdel
.IP \fBctrlaltdel\fP
.\"O The process will be executed when \fBinit\fP receives the SIGINT signal.
\fBinit\fPがSIGINTシグナルを受け取ったときに実行される。
.\"O This means that someone on the system console has pressed the
.\"O \fBCTRL\-ALT\-DEL\fP key combination.
これは誰かがシステムコンソールで\fBCTRL\-ALT\-DEL\fPという組み合わせで
キーを押したことを意味する。
.\"O Typically one wants to execute some
.\"O sort of \fBshutdown\fP either to get into single\-user level or to
.\"O reboot the machine.
システムをシングルユーザレベルにしたい時やマシンをリブート
したい時など、\fBshutdown\fP的なことを行いたい場合に実行される。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  kbrequest
.IP \fBkbrequest\fP
.\"O The process will be executed when init receives a signal from the
.\"O keyboard handler that a special key combination was pressed on the
.\"O console keyboard.
\fBinit\fPがキーボードハンドラーから、コンソールキーボード上で特定の組み合わせ
のキー入力が行なわれた、とのシグナルを受け取ったときに実行される。
.sp
.\"O The documentation for this function is not complete yet; more documentation
.\"O can be found in the kbd-x.xx packages (most recent was kbd-0.94 at
.\"O the time of this writing). Basically you want to map some keyboard
.\"O combination to the "KeyboardSignal" action. For example, to map Alt-Uparrow
.\"O for this purpose use the following in your keymaps file:
この機能に関する文書はまだ不完全である; 
kbd-x.xx パッケージ中を探せばより多くの資料が見つかるだろう
(この文書を書いている時点で最新のものは kbd-0.94 である)。
基本的には、あるキーの組み合わせを"KeyboardSignal"という動作に結びつけたい
という場合に用いられる。
例えば、Alt-上向き矢印というキーの組み合わせをこの用途に使いたい場合は、
キーマップファイル中に次の様に書いておけばよい:
.RS
.sp
alt keycode 103 = KeyboardSignal
.sp
.RE
.\"}}}
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  例
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O This is an example of a inittab which resembles the old Linux inittab:
以下は、昔のLinuxで使われていたものに似たinittabの例である:
.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
.\"O # inittab for linux
# linux用のinittab
id:1:initdefault:
rc::bootwait:/etc/rc
1:1:respawn:/etc/getty 9600 tty1
2:1:respawn:/etc/getty 9600 tty2
3:1:respawn:/etc/getty 9600 tty3
4:1:respawn:/etc/getty 9600 tty4
.fi
.sp
.RE
.\"O This inittab file executes \fB/etc/rc\fP during boot and starts gettys
.\"O on tty1\-tty4.
このinittabファイルはブート中に\fB/etc/rc\fPを実行し、
tty1\-tty4でgettyを起動する。
.PP
.\"O A more elaborate \fBinittab\fP with different runlevels (see the comments
.\"O inside):
次に示すのは、異なったランレベルがある手の込んだ例である
(スクリプト中のコメントを参照):
.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 19
.\"O # Level to run in
# ブート後に入るべきランレベル
id:2:initdefault:

.\"O # System initialization before anything else.
# 何より先ずシステムの初期化をする。
si::sysinit:/etc/rc.d/bcheckrc

.\"O # Runlevel 0,6 is halt and reboot, 1 is maintenance mode.
# ランレベル0及び6はそれぞれ haltとreboot。
# 1 はメンテナンスモード
l0:0:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc.halt
l1:1:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc.single
l2:2345:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc.multi
l6:6:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc.reboot

.\"O # What to do at the "3 finger salute".
# "三つ指をついてリセット"された時に何をすべきか。
ca::ctrlaltdel:/sbin/shutdown -t5 -rf now

.\"O # Runlevel 2&3: getty on console, level 3 also getty on modem port.
# ランレベル2及び3: コンソールでgettyを実行する
# (レベル3の場合はモデムポートでも)。
1:23:respawn:/sbin/getty tty1 VC linux
2:23:respawn:/sbin/getty tty2 VC linux
3:23:respawn:/sbin/getty tty3 VC linux
4:23:respawn:/sbin/getty tty4 VC linux
S2:3:respawn:/sbin/uugetty ttyS2 M19200

.fi
.sp
.RE
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  ファイル
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/etc/inittab
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  著者
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O \fBInit\fP was written by Miquel van Smoorenburg 
.\"O (miquels@cistron.nl).  This manual page was written by 
.\"O Sebastian Lederer (lederer@francium.informatik.uni-bonn.de) and modified
.\"O by Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de).
\fBinit\fPはMiquel van Smoorenburg
(miquels@drinkel.ow.org)により作成された。
この man ページは
Sebastian Lederer (lederer@francium.informatik.uni-bonn.de)が作成し
Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)が変更を行った。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  関連項目
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR init (8),
.BR telinit (8)
.\"}}}

