.\"             -*-Nroff-*-
.\"  This page Copyright (C) 1993 Matt Welsh, mdw@sunsite.unc.edu.
.\"  Freely distributable under the terms of the GPL
.\"
.\"  Translated Fri Sep  4 22:54:33 JST 1998
.\"         by Kanda Mitsuru <kanda@nn.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"  Updated & modified Sat 26 Jan 2003
.\"         by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"  Updated & modified Fri Jul  8 03:08:47 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" 
.TH FREE 1 "20 Mar 1993 " "Cohesive Systems" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O free \- Display amount of free and used memory in the system
free \- システムの空きメモリと利用メモリの量を表示する。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR "free " [ "\-b" " | " "\-k" " | " "\-m" "] [" "\-o" "] [" "\-s"
.I delay
.RB "] [" "\-t" "] [" "\-V" ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBfree\fP displays the total amount of free and used physical and swap 
.\"O memory in the system, as well as the buffers used by the kernel.
.\"O The shared memory column should be ignored; it is obsolete.
\fBfree\fP はシステムの物理メモリとスワップメモリそれぞれに対して、
使用量と空き容量を表示し、カーネルが用いているバッファも表示する。
共有メモリの欄は無視してほしい。これは古い機能の名残である。
.\"O .SS Options
.\"O The \fB-b\fP switch displays the amount of memory in bytes; the 
.\"O \fB-k\fP switch (set by default) displays it in kilobytes; the \fB-m\fP
.\"O switch displays it in megabytes.
.SS オプション
\fB-b\fP を指定するとメモリの量をバイト単位で表示し、
\fB-k\fP ではキロバイト単位で表示 (デフォルト) し、
\fB-m\fP ではメガバイト単位で表示する。
.PP
.\"O The \fB-t\fP switch displays a line containing the totals.
\fB-t\fP を指定すると物理メモリ、スワップメモリの合計を示す行も表示する。
.PP
.\"O The \fB-o\fP switch disables the display of a "buffer adjusted" line.
.\"O If the -o option is not specified, \fBfree\fP subtracts buffer memory
.\"O from the used memory and adds it to the free memory reported.
\fB-o\fP を指定すると「バッファの分を増減した行」を表示しない。
\-o オプションを指定しない場合、\fBfree\fP は
使用中のメモリからバッファメモリを引いた値と、
未使用のメモリにバッファメモリを足した値とを報告する。
.PP
.\"O The \fB-s\fP switch activates continuous polling \fIdelay\fP seconds apart. You
.\"O may actually specify any floating point number for \fIdelay\fP, 
.\"O .BR usleep (3)
.\"O is used for microsecond resolution delay times.
\fB-s\fP オプションを指定すると \fIdelay\fP 秒間隔でポーリングを続ける。
実は delay の値には浮動小数点の数値を指定できる。
マイクロ秒単位の分解能が必要な遅延時間には
.BR usleep (3)
が用いられる。
.PP
.\"O The \fB\-V\fP displays version information.
\fB-V\fP を指定するとバージョン情報を表示する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.ta
.\"O .IR /proc/meminfo "\-\- memory information"
.IR /proc/meminfo "\-\- メモリ情報 "
.fi

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ps (1),
.BR slabtop (1),
.BR vmstat (8),
.BR top(1)

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O  Written by Brian Edmonds. 
Brian Edmonds によって書かれた。

.\"O Send bug reports to <albert@users.sf.net>
バグ報告は <albert@users.sf.net> まで送って欲しい。
