'\" t
.\" (The preceding line is a note to broken versions of man to tell
.\" them to pre-process this man page with tbl)
.\" Man page for kill.
.\" Licensed under version 2 of the GNU General Public License.
.\" Written by Albert Cahalan; converted to a man page by
.\" Michael K. Johnson
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jul  9 00:25:31 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH KILL 1 "November 21, 1999" "Linux" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O kill \- send a signal to a process
.SH 名前
kill \- プロセスにシグナルを送る

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.TS
l l.
.\"O kill pid ...	Send SIGTERM to every process listed.
.\"O kill -signal pid ...	Send a signal to every process listed.
.\"O kill -s signal pid ...	Send a signal to every process listed.
.\"O kill -l	List all signal names.
.\"O kill -L	List all signal names in a nice table.
.\"O kill -l signal	Convert a signal number into a name.
.\"O kill -V,--version	Show version of program
kill pid ...	リストされた全てのプロセスに SIGTERM を送る
kill -signal pid ...	リストされた全てのプロセスにシグナルを送る
kill -s signal pid ...	リストされた全てのプロセスにシグナルを送る
kill -l	全てのシグナルの名前をリストする
kill -L	T{
全てのシグナルの名前を見栄えの良い表形式でリストする
T}
kill -l signal	シグナルの番号と名前を変換する
kill -V,--version	プログラムのパージョンを表示する
.TE

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The default signal for kill is TERM. Use -l or -L to list available signals.
.\"O Particularly useful signals include HUP, INT, KILL, STOP, CONT, and 0.
.\"O Alternate signals may be specified in three ways: -9 -SIGKILL -KILL.
kill のデフォルトのシグナルは TERM である。
-l や -L を用いると、指定できるシグナルをリストできる。
特に便利なシグナルには HUP, INT, KILL, STOP, CONT, 0 などがある。
デフォルト以外のシグナルの指定方法は 3 つある。 -9 -SIGKILL -KILL。
.\"O Negative PID values may be used to choose whole process groups; see the
.\"O PGID column in ps command output. A PID of -1 is special; it indicates
.\"O all processes except the kill process itself and init.
負の PID の値はプロセスグループ全体を選択するのに使われる。
ps コマンドの出力の PGID カラムを参照すること。
\-1 という PID は特別である。
これは kill プロセス自身と init 以外の全てのプロセスを表す。

.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O The signals listed below may be available for use with kill.
.\"O When known constant, numbers and default behavior are shown.
以下に kill で使えるシグナルのリストを示す。
わかるものについては、定数・番号とデフォルトの動作も示す。

.TS
lB rB lB lB
lfCW r l l.
.\"O Name	Num	Action	Description
名前	番号	アクション	説明
.TH
.\"O 0	0	n/a	exit code indicates if a signal may be sent
0	0	n/a	シグナルを送った場合の終了コードを取得する
ALRM	14	exit
HUP	1	exit
INT	2	exit
.\"O KILL	9	exit	this signal may not be blocked
KILL	9	exit	このシグナルはブロックされない
PIPE	13	exit
POLL		exit
PROF		exit
TERM	15	exit
USR1		exit
USR2		exit
VTALRM		exit
.\"O STKFLT		exit	may not be implemented
.\"O PWR		ignore	may exit on some systems
STKFLT		exit	実装されていないかもしれない
PWR		ignore	T{
システムによっては終了 (exit) するかもしれない
T}
WINCH		ignore
CHLD		ignore
URG		ignore
.\"O TSTP		stop	may interact with the shell
.\"O TTIN		stop	may interact with the shell
.\"O TTOU		stop	may interact with the shell
.\"O STOP		stop	this signal may not be blocked
.\"O CONT		restart	continue if stopped, otherwise ignore
TSTP		stop	シェルと相互作用するかもしれない
TTIN		stop	シェルと相互作用するかもしれない
TTOU		stop	シェルと相互作用するかもしれない
STOP		stop	このシグナルはブロックされない
CONT		restart	停止 (stop) 状態なら再開、その他なら無視
ABRT	6	core
FPE	8	core
ILL	4	core
QUIT	3	core
SEGV	11	core
TRAP	5	core
.\"O SYS		core	may not be implemented
.\"O EMT		core	may not be implemented
.\"O BUS		core	core dump may fail
.\"O XCPU		core	core dump may fail
.\"O XFSZ		core	core dump may fail
SYS		core	実装されていないかもしれない
EMT		core	実装されていないかもしれない
BUS		core	コアダンプは失敗するかもしれない
XCPU		core	コアダンプは失敗するかもしれない
XFSZ		core	コアダンプは失敗するかもしれない
.TE

.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Your shell (command line interpreter) may have a built-in kill command.
.\"O You may need to run the command described here as /bin/kill to solve
.\"O the conflict.
あなたの使っているシェル (コマンドラインインタープリター)
には組み込みの kill コマンドがあるかもしれない。
この場合、ここで説明した kill を実行するには、
/bin/kill のように指定する必要があるかもしれない。

.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例

.SS
.B "kill -9 -1"
.nf
.\"O Kill all processes you can kill.
kill 可能な全てのプロセスを kill する。
.fi
.PP
.SS
.B "kill -l 11"
.nf
.\"O Translate number 11 into a signal name.
数値 11 をシグナル名に変換する。
.fi
.PP
.SS
.B "kill -L"
.nf
.\"O List the available signal choices in a nice table.
使用可能なシグナルを見栄えの良い表形式でリストする。
.fi
.PP
.SS
.B "kill 123 543 2341 3453"
.nf
.\"O Send the default signal, SIGTERM, to all those processes.
デフォルトのシグナル SIGTERM をこれら全てのプロセスに送る。
.fi
.PP
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O pkill(1) skill(1) kill(2) renice(1) nice(1) signal(7) killall(1)
.BR pkill (1),
.BR skill (1),
.BR kill (2),
.BR renice (1),
.BR nice (1),
.BR signal (7),
.BR killall (1)

.\"O .SH STANDARDS
.SH 標準
.\"O This command meets appropriate standards. The -L flag is Linux-specific.
このコマンドは適切な標準に準拠している。
-L フラグは Linux 固有のものである。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Albert Cahalan <albert@users.sf.net> wrote kill in 1999 to replace a
.\"O bsdutils one that was not standards compliant. The util-linux one might
.\"O also work correctly.
Albert Cahalan <acahalan@cs.uml.edu> が 1999 年に
標準に合致していない bsdutils のものを置き換えるために kill を書いた。
util-linux の kill も正しく動作するだろう。

.\"O Please send bug reports to <procps-feedback@lists.sf.net>
バグ報告は <procps-feedback@lists.sf.net> まで送って欲しい。
