.\" Manual page for pgrep / pkill.
.\" Licensed under version 2 of the GNU General Public License.
.\" Copyright 2000 Kjetil Torgrim Homme
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jul  9 01:00:52 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH PGREP 1 "June 25, 2000" "Linux" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O pgrep, pkill \- look up or signal processes based on name and other attributes
.SH 名前
pgrep, pkill \- 名前や各種属性に基づくプロセスの閲覧とシグナル送信

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
pgrep [\-flvx] [\-d \fIdelimiter\fP] [\-n|\-o] [\-P \fIppid\fP,...] [\-g \fIpgrp\fP,...]
.br
	[\-s \fIsid\fP,...] [\-u \fIeuid\fP,...] [\-U \fIuid\fP,...] [\-G \fIgid\fP,...]
.br
	[\-t \fIterm\fP,...] [\fIpattern\fP]

pkill [\-\fIsignal\fP] [\-fvx] [\-n|\-o] [\-P \fIppid\fP,...] [\-g \fIpgrp\fP,...]
.br
	[\-s \fIsid\fP,...] [\-u \fIeuid\fP,...] [\-U \fIuid\fP,...] [\-G \fIgid\fP,...]
.br
	[\-t \fIterm\fP,...] [\fIpattern\fP]

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBpgrep\fP looks through the currently running processes and lists the
.\"O process IDs which matches the selection criteria to stdout.  All
.\"O the criteria have to match.  For example,
.B pgrep
は現在実行中のプロセスを調べ、選択基準 (selection criteria)
にマッチするプロセスのプロセス ID を標準出力にリストする。
全ての基準にマッチしなければならない。例えば

pgrep -u root sshd

.\"O will only list the processes called \fBsshd\fP AND owned by \fBroot\fP.
.\"O On the other hand,
は、
.B sshd
という名前で、かつ
.B root
が所有するプロセスのみをリストする。一方

pgrep -u root,daemon

.\"O will list the processes owned by \fBroot\fP OR \fBdaemon\fP.
は、
.BR root " または " daemon
が所有するプロセスをリストする。

.\"O \fBpkill\fP will send the specified signal (by default \fBSIGTERM\fP)
.\"O to each process instead of listing them on stdout.
.B pkill
は、標準出力にリストする代わりに、
各プロセスに指定したシグナル
を送る (デフォルトでは \fBSIGTERM\fP)。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
\-d \fIdelimiter\fP
.\"O Sets the string used to delimit each process ID in the output (by
.\"O default a newline).  (\fBpgrep\fP only.)
出力で各プロセスの区切りに用いる文字列を設定する
(デフォルトでは改行文字)。(\fBpgrep\fP のみ)
.TP
\-f
.\"O The \fIpattern\fP is normally only matched against the process name.
.\"O When \-f is set, the full command line is used.
.I pattern
は通常プロセス名にマッチするが、
\-f を設定するとコマンドライン全体にマッチの対象となる。
.TP
\-g \fIpgrp\fP,...
.\"O Only match processes in the process group IDs listed.  Process group 0
.\"O is translated into \fBpgrep\fP's or \fBpkill\fP's own process group.
リストされた ID のプロセスグループのどれかに属するプロセスにのみマッチする。
プロセスグループ 0 は、
.BR pgrep " または " pkill
自身のプロセスグループとみなされる。
.TP
\-G \fIgid\fP,...
.\"O Only match processes whose real group ID is listed.  Either the
.\"O numerical or symbolical value may be used.
実グループ ID がリストのどれかであるプロセスにのみマッチする。
.TP
\-l
.\"O List the process name as well as the process ID. (\fBpgrep\fP only.)
プロセス名をプロセス ID といっしょに表示する。
(\fBpgrep\fP のみ)
.TP
\-n
.\"O Select only the newest (most recently started) of the matching
.\"O processes.
マッチしたプロセスの中から最新のもの (最も新しく起動されたもの)
だけを選ぶ。
.TP
\-o
.\"O Select only the oldest (least recently started) of the matching
.\"O processes.
マッチしたプロセスの中から最古のもの (最も昔に起動されたもの) だけを選ぶ。
.TP
\-P \fIppid\fP,...
.\"O Only match processes whose parent process ID is listed.
親プロセスのプロセス ID がリストのどれかであるプロセスにのみマッチする。
.TP
\-s \fIsid\fP,...
.\"O Only match processes whose process session ID is listed.  Session ID 0
.\"O is translated into \fBpgrep\fP's or \fBpkill\fP's own session ID.
セッション ID がリストのどれかであるプロセスにのみマッチする。
セッション ID 0 は、
.BR pgrep " または " pkill
自身のプロセスグループとみなされる。
.TP
\-t \fIterm\fP,...
.\"O Only match processes whose controlling terminal is listed.  The
.\"O terminal name should be specified without the "/dev/" prefix.
制御端末がリストのどれかであるプロセスにのみマッチする。
端末名にはプレフィクス "/dev/" 抜きで指定する。
.TP
\-u \fIeuid\fP,...
.\"O Only match processes whose effective user ID is listed.  Either the
.\"O numerical or symbolical value may be used.
実効ユーザー ID がリストのどれかであるプロセスにのみマッチする。
数値・シンボル値のいずれかが使える。
.TP
\-U \fIuid\fP,...
.\"O Only match processes whose real user ID is listed.  Either the
.\"O numerical or symbolical value may be used.
実ユーザー ID がリストのどれかであるプロセスにのみマッチする。
数値・シンボル値のいずれかが使える。
.TP
\-v
.\"O Negates the matching.
マッチの否定。
.TP
\-x
.\"O Only match processes whose name (or command line if \-f is specified)
.\"O \fBexactly\fP match the \fIpattern\fP.
名前が (\-f を指定した場合はコマンドラインが)
.I pattern
に\fB正確に\fP一致するプロセスにのみマッチする。
.TP
\-\fIsignal\fP
.\"O Defines the signal to send to each matched process.  Either the
.\"O numeric or the symbolic signal name can be used.  (\fBpkill\fP only.)
マッチしたプロセスに送るシグナルを定義する。
数値・シンボル値のいずれかが使える。
(\fBpkill\fP のみ)

.\"O .SH OPERANDS
.SH オペランド (OPERANDS)
.TP
\fIpattern\fP
.\"O Specifies an Extended Regular Expression for matching against the
.\"O process names or command lines.
プロセス名またはコマンドラインにマッチさせる拡張正規表現を指定する。

.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O Example 1: Find the process ID of the \fBnamed\fP daemon:
例 1: \fBnamed\fP デーモンのプロセス ID を表示する。

unix$ pgrep \-u root named

.\"O Example 2: Make \fBsyslog\fP reread its configuration file:
例 2: \fB syslog\fP に設定ファイルを再読み込みさせる。

unix$ pkill \-HUP syslogd

.\"O Example 3: Give detailed information on all \fBxterm\fP processes:
例 3: 全ての \fBxterm\fP プロセスの詳しい情報を表示する。

unix$ ps \-fp $(pgrep \-d, \-x xterm)

.\"O Example 4: Make all \fBnetscape\fP processes run nicer:
例 4: 全ての \fBnetscape\fP の nice 値を上げる。

unix$ renice +4 `pgrep netscape`

.\"O .SH "EXIT STATUS"
.SH 終了ステータス
.TP
.I "0"
.\"O One or more processes matched the criteria.
ひとつ以上のプロセスが選択基準にマッチした。
.TP
.I "1"
.\"O No processes matched.
マッチしたプロセスがなかった。
.TP
.I "2"
.\"O Syntax error in the command line.
コマンドラインに文法エラーがある。
.TP
.I "3"
.\"O Fatal error: out of memory etc.
致命的エラー: メモリ不足など。

.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The process name used for matching is limited to the 15 characters
.\"O present in the output of /proc/\fIpid\fP/stat.  Use the \-f option to
.\"O match against the complete command line, /proc/\fIpid\fP/cmdline.
マッチに用いられるプロセス名は /proc/\fIpid\fP/stat の出力にある
15 文字までに制限されている。完全なコマンドラインである
/proc/\fIpid\fP/cmdline にマッチさせるには \-f オプションを用いること。

.\"O The running \fBpgrep\fP or \fBpkill\fP process will never report
.\"O itself as a match.
動作中の
.B pgerp " と " pkill
プロセスは、自分自身には決してマッチしない。

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The options \-n and \-o and \-v can not be combined.  Let me know if
.\"O you need to do this.
\-n, \-o, \-v は同時に指定できない。
これをしたい場合は私に連絡して欲しい。

.\"O Defunct processes are reported.
消滅したプロセスも報告されてしまう。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O ps(1) regex(7) signal(7) killall(1) skill(1) kill(1) kill(2)
.BR ps (1),
.BR regex (7),
.BR signal (7),
.BR killall (1),
.BR skill (1),
.BR kill (1),
.BR kill (2)

.\"O .SH STANDARDS
.SH 標準
.\"O \fBpkill\fP and \fBpgrep\fP were introduced in Sun's Solaris 7.  This
.\"O implementation is fully compatible.
.BR pkill " と " pgrep
は Sun の Solaris 7 で導入された。
この実装は完全に互換である。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Kjetil Torgrim Homme <kjetilho@ifi.uio.no>

.\"O Albert Cahalan <albert@users.sf.net> is the current maintainer of
.\"O the procps package.
Albert Cahalan <albert@users.sf.net> が現在の
procps コレクションのメンテナである。

.\"O Please send bug reports to <procps-feedback@lists.sf.net>
バグ報告は <procps-feedback@lists.sf.net> まで送って欲しい。
