'\" t
.\" (The preceding line is a note to broken versions of man to tell
.\" them to pre-process this man page with tbl)
.\" Man page for pmap.
.\" Licensed under version 2 of the GNU General Public License.
.\" Written by Albert Cahalan.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Nov  3 06:57:02 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	quiet	寡黙な
.\"
.TH PMAP 1 "October 26, 2002" "Linux" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pmap \- report memory map of a process
pmap \- プロセスのメモリマップを表示する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
pmap [ -x | -d ] [ -q ] pids...
pmap -V
.fi

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The pmap command reports the memory map of a process or processes.
pmap コマンドはプロセス (群) のメモリマップを表示する。

.\"O .SH "GENERAL OPTIONS"
.SH 一般のオプション
.TS
l l l.
.\"O -x	extended	Show the extended format.
.\"O -d	device	Show the device format.
.\"O -q	quiet	Do not display some header/footer lines.
.\"O -V	show version	Displays version of program.
-x	拡張モード	拡張フォーマットで表示する。
-d	デバイスモード	デバイスフォーマットで表示する。
-q	寡黙モード	ヘッダ・フッタ行を表示しない。
-V	バージョン表示	プログラムのバージョンを表示する。
.TE

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
ps(1) pgrep(1)

.\"O .SH STANDARDS
.SH 準拠
.\"O No standards apply, but pmap looks an awful lot like a SunOS command.
対応する標準はないが、SunOS の pmap コマンドに非常に似ている。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Albert Cahalan <albert@users.sf.net> wrote pmap in 2002, and is the current
.\"O maintainer of the procps collection. Please send bug reports
.\"O to <procps-feedback@lists.sf.net>.
Albert Cahalan <albert@users.sf.net> が 2002 年に pmap を書き、
procps コレクションの現在のメンテナである。
バグ報告は <procps-feedback@lists.sf.net> まで送って欲しい。
