'\" t
.\" (The preceding line is a note to broken versions of man to tell
.\" Man page for ps.
.\" Quick hack conversion by Albert Cahalan, 1998.
.\" Licensed under version 2 of the Gnu General Public License.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Wed Jul 27 00:21:34 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	namelist file	名前リストファイル
.\"WORD:	personality	流儀
.\"WORD:	alias		別名
.\"
.TH PS 1 "July 28, 2004" "Linux" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"
.\" To render this page:
.\"    groff -t -b -man -X -P-resolution -P100 -Tps ps.1 &
.\"    groff -t -b -man -X -TX100 ps.1 &
.\"    tbl ps.1 | troff -Ww -man -z
.\"    groff -t -man -Tps ps.1 | ps2pdf - - > ps.pdf
.\"
.\" The '70s called. They want their perfect justification,
.\" hyphenation, and double-spaced sentences back.
.na
.nh
.if n .ss 12 0
.\"
.\" See /usr/share/groff/current/tmac/an-old.tmac for what these do.
.\" Setting them to zero provides extra space, but only do that for
.\" plain text output. PostScript and such will remain indented.
.if n .nr IN 0n
.if n .nr an-prevailing-indent 0n
.\"
.\"
.\" ColSize is used for the format spec table.
.\" It's the left margin, minus the right, minus
.\" the space needed for the 1st two columns.
.\" Making it messy: inches, ens, points, scaled points...
.\"
.nr ColSize ((\n(.lu-\n(.iu/\n(.Hu-20u)n)
.\"
.\" This is for command options
.nr OptSize (16u)
.\"
.\" l=\n(.l
.\" i=\n(.i
.\" o=\n(.o
.\" H=\n(.H
.\" s=\n(.s
.\" ColSize=\n[ColSize]
.\" 
.\" Macro for easy option formatting:   .opt \-x
.de opt              
.  TP \\n[OptSize]
.  BI \\$*
..
.\"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ps \- report a snapshot of the current processes.
ps \- 現在実行されているプロセスのスナップショットを表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBps\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.PP
.PP
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ps
.\"O displays information about a selection of the active processes.
.\"O If you want a repetitive update of the selection and the
.\"O displayed information, use\ \fItop\fR(1) instead.
.B ps
はアクティブなプロセスのうち選択されたものの情報を表示する。
プロセスの選択や表示される情報を繰り返し更新したい場合は、
代わりに \fItop\fR(1) を使うこと。
.P
.\"O This version of \fBps\fR accepts several kinds of options:
このバージョンの \fBps\fR が受け付けるオプションにはいくつかの種類がある。
.PD 0
.IP 1 4
.\"O UNIX options, which may be grouped and must be preceeded by a dash.
UNIX オプション。まとめることが可能で、前にはダッシュを置かなければならない。
.IP 2 4
.\"O BSD options, which may be grouped and must not be used with a dash.
BSD オプション。まとめることが可能で、ダッシュを使ってはならない。
.IP 3 4
.\"O GNU long options, which are preceeded by two dashes.
GNU ロングオプション。前に二つのダッシュを置く。
.PD
.PP
.\"O Options of different types may be freely mixed, but conflicts can appear.
.\"O There are some synonomous options, which are functionally identical, due
.\"O to the many standards and \fBps\fR implementations that this \fBps\fR is
.\"O compatible with.
別々の種類のオプションは自由に混在させてよいが、
衝突が起こるかもしれない。
機能的には全く等しい、同義のオプションがいくつかある。
これは多くの標準と \fBps\fR 実装に対して、
この \fBps\fR が互換性を持っているためである。
.P
.\"O Note that "\fBps\ \-aux\fR" is distinct from "\fBps\ aux\fR".
.\"O The POSIX and UNIX standards require that "\fBps\ \-aux\fR" print all
.\"O processes owned by a user named "x", as well as printing all processes
.\"O that would be selected by the \fB\-a\fR option. If the user named "x" does
.\"O not exist, this \fBps\fR may interpret the command as "\fBps\ aux\fR"
.\"O instead and print a warning. This behavior is intended to aid in
.\"O transitioning old scripts and habits. It is fragile, subject to change,
.\"O and thus should not be relied upon.
"\fBps\ \-aux\fR" は "\fBps\ aux\fR" とは異なることに注意すること。
POSIX と UNIX 標準では、"\fBps\ \-aux\fR" は "x" という名前のユーザーが
所有する全てのプロセスを表示し、
かつ \fB\-a\fR オプションで選択される全てのプロセスを表示する。
"x" という名前のユーザーが存在しない場合、
この \fBps\fR は代わりに "\fBps\ aux\fR" というコマンドとして解釈され、
警告を表示する。
この動作は昔のスクリプトと慣習からの移行の助けになることを意図している。
これは脆くて変更される可能性があるので、
これに依存すべきではない。
.P
.\"O By default, \fBps\fR selects all processes with the same effective user
.\"O ID (EUID) as the curent user and associated with the same terminal as the
.\"O invoker.  It displays the process ID (PID), the terminal associated
.\"O with the process (TTY), the cumulated CPU time in [dd\-]hh:mm:ss format
.\"O (TIME), and the executable name (CMD). Output is unsorted by default.
デフォルトでは、\fBps\fR はカレントユーザーと
同じ実効 (effective) ユーザー ID (EUID) を持ち、
かつ呼び出した端末と同じ端末に関連づけられている
全てのプロセスを選択する。
この場合、プロセス ID (PID)・プロセスに関連づけられている端末 (TTY)・
[dd\-]hh:mm:ss という形式の累積 CPU 時間 (TIME)・
実行ファイル名 (CMD) が表示される。
出力はデフォルトではソートされない。
.P
.\"O The use of BSD\-style options will add process state (STAT) to the
.\"O default display and show the command args (COMMAND) instead of the
.\"O executable name. You can override this with the \fBPS_FORMAT\fR
.\"O environment variable. The use of BSD\-style options will also change the
.\"O process selection to include processes on other terminals (TTYs) that
.\"O are owned by you; alternately, this may be described as setting the
.\"O selection to be the set of all processes filtered to exclude
.\"O processes owned by other users or not on a terminal. These effects
.\"O are not considered when options are described as being "identical" below,
.\"O so \fB\-M\fR will be considered identical to \fBZ\fR and so on.
BSD 形式オプションを使うと、
デフォルトの表示にプロセス状態 (STAT) が追加され、
実行ファイル名の代わりにコマンドライン引き数 (COMMAND) が表示される。
これは \fBPS_FORMAT\fR 環境変数で上書きできる。
BSD 形式オプションを使った場合、
選択されるプロセスも変わり、
ユーザが所有する他の端末 (TTY) 上のプロセスも含まれるようになる。
言い換えれば、選択されるプロセスは、全てのプロセスから
他のユーザーが所有するプロセスと端末上にないプロセスを除いたものに
設定されると説明できる。
以下でオプションが「等しい ("identical")」と書かれているものについては、
これらの違いは除いて考える。
したがって、\fB\-M\fR は \fBZ\fR と等しく、他も同様である。
.P
.\"O Except as described below, process selection options are additive.
.\"O The default selection is discarded, and then the selected processes
.\"O are added to the set of processes to be displayed.
.\"O A\ process will thus be shown if it meets any of the given
.\"O selection criteria.
以下で記述されているものを除き、
個々のプロセス選択オプションで選択されたプロセスは足し合わされる。
デフォルトの選択は破棄され、選択されたプロセスは
表示されるプロセス群に追加される。
したがって、あるプロセスは、
指定された選択基準のどれかひとつに合致すれば、表示される。
.PP
.\" """""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.\"O .SH "EXAMPLES"
.SH 例
.TP 3
.\"O To see every process on the system using standard syntax:
標準的な書式を使ってシステム上の全てのプロセスを表示する:
.B ps\ \-e
.br
.B ps\ \-ef
.br
.B ps\ \-eF
.br
.B ps\ \-ely
.TP
.\"O To see every process on the system using BSD syntax:
BSD 書式を使ってシステム上の全てのプロセスを表示する:
.B ps\ ax
.br
.B ps\ axu
.TP
.\"O To print a process tree:
プロセスツリーを表示する:
.B ps\ -ejH
.br
.B ps\ axjf
.TP
.\"O To get info about threads:
スレッドに関する情報を取得する:
.B ps\ -eLf
.br
.B ps\ axms
.TP
.\"O To get security info:
セキュリティ情報を取得する:
.B ps\ -eo euser,ruser,suser,fuser,f,comm,label
.br
.B ps\ axZ
.br
.B ps\ -eM
.TP
.\"O To see every process running as root (real\ &\ effective\ ID) in user format:
root (実 (real) ID と実効 ID) として実行されている全てのプロセスを
ユーザ形式で表示する:
.B ps\ \-U\ root\ \-u\ root\ u
.TP
.\"O To see every process with a user\-defined format:
全てのプロセスをユーザー定義フォーマットで表示する:
.B ps\ \-eo\ pid,tid,class,rtprio,ni,pri,psr,pcpu,stat,wchan:14,comm
.br
.B ps\ axo\ stat,euid,ruid,tty,tpgid,sess,pgrp,ppid,pid,pcpu,comm
.br
.B ps\ \-eopid,tt,user,fname,tmout,f,wchan
.TP
.\"O Print only the process IDs of syslogd:
syslogd のプロセス ID のみを表示する:
.B ps\ \-C\ syslogd\ \-o\ pid=
.TP
.\"O Print only the name of PID 42:
PID 42 の名前のみを表示する。
.B ps\ \-p\ 42\ \-o\ comm=
.PP
.PP
.\" """""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.\"O .SH "SIMPLE PROCESS SELECTION"
.SH "簡易プロセス選択"
.TP 16
.B \-A
.\"O Select all processes.  Identical to \fB\-e\fR.
全てのプロセスを選択する。\fB\-e\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-N
.\"O Select all processes except those that fulfill the specified conditions.
.\"O (negates the selection) Identical to \fB\-\-deselect\fR.
指定された条件を満たさないプロセスのみを選択する (選択の否定)。
\fB\-\-deselect\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B T
.\"O Select all processes associated with this terminal.  Identical to the
.\"O \fBt\fR option without any argument.
この端末の全てのプロセスを選択する。
引き数なしの \fBt\fR オプションと等しい。
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Select all processes except session leaders (see \fIgetsid\fR(2)) and
.\"O processes not associated with a terminal.
セッションリーダ (\fIgetsid\fR(2) を参照) と端末を持たないプロセスを除く、
全てのプロセスを表示する。
.TP
.B a
.\"O Lift the BSD\-style "only yourself" restriction, which is imposed upon
.\"O the set of all processes when some BSD\-style (without\ "\-") options
.\"O are used or when the \fBps\fR personality setting is BSD\-like.
BSD 形式の ("\-" のない) オプションが使用された場合、
または \fBps\fR の流儀 (personality) の設定が BSD 形式の場合に、
全てのプロセスの集合に対して課される
「自分自身のみ」という BSD 形式の制約をなくす。
.\"O The set of processes selected in this manner is
.\"O in addition to the set of processes selected by other means.
この方式で選択されたプロセスの集合は、
他の手段で選ばれたプロセスの集合に加えられる。
.\"O An alternate description is that this option causes \fBps\fR to
.\"O list all processes with a terminal (tty),
.\"O or to list all processes when used together with the \fBx\fR option.
このオプションの別の説明は以下の通り:
このオプションを指定すると、
\fBps\fR は端末 (tty) を持つ全てのプロセスをリストする。
また \fBx\fR オプションと共に指定すると、全てのプロセスをリストする。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Select all processes except session leaders.
セッションリーダを除く全てのプロセスを選択する。
.TP
.B \-e
.\"O Select all processes.  Identical to \fB\-A\fR.
全てのプロセスを選択する。\fB\-A\fR と等しい。

.\"O .\" Current "g" behavior: add in the session leaders, which would
.\"O .\" be excluded in the sunos4 personality. Supposed "g" behavior:
.\"O .\" add in the group leaders -- at least according to the SunOS 4
.\"O .\" man page on the FreeBSD site. Uh oh. I think I had tested SunOS
.\"O .\" though, so maybe the code is correct.
.\" 現在の "g" の動作: sunos4 の流儀では除外されるセッションリーダを追加する。
.\" 想定される "g" の動作: グループリーダを追加する -- 少なくとも
.\" FreeBSD のサイトにある SunOS 4 の man ページに基づけば。
.\" これはまずいことになった。私は SunOS をテストしたが、
.\" コードは正しいと思う。
.TP
.B g
.\"O Really all, even session leaders.  This flag is obsolete and may be
.\"O discontinued in a future release. It is normally implied by the \fBa\fR flag,
.\"O and is only useful when operating in the sunos4 personality.
本当に全てのプロセスを選択する。セッションリーダも含む。
このフラグは旧式で、
将来のリリースでは廃止されるかもしれない。
この振る舞いは通常 \fBa\fR フラグで暗黙に有効になり、
sunos4 の流儀で操作するときにのみ役立つ。
.TP
.B r
.\"O Restrict the selection to only running processes.
実行中のプロセスのみに選択を限定する。
.TP
.B x
.\"O Lift the BSD\-style "must have a tty" restriction, which is imposed upon
.\"O the set of all processes when some BSD\-style (without\ "\-") options
.\"O are used or when the \fBps\fR personality setting is BSD\-like.
BSD 形式の ("\-" のない) オプションが使用された場合、
または \fBps\fR の流儀の設定が BSD 形式の場合に、
全てのプロセスの集合に対して課される
「端末を持たなければならない」という BSD 形式の制約をなくす。
.\"O The set of processes selected in this manner is
.\"O in addition to the set of processes selected by other means.
この方式で選択されたプロセスの集合は、
他の手段で選ばれたプロセスの集合に加えられる。
.\"O An alternate description is that this option causes \fBps\fR to
.\"O list all processes owned by you (same EUID as \fBps\fR),
.\"O or to list all processes when used together with the \fBa\fR option.
このオプションの別の説明は以下の通り:
このオプションを指定すると、\fBps\fR は呼び出したユーザーの所有する
(\fBps\fR と同じ EUID の) 全てのプロセスをリストする。
また \fBa\fR オプションと共に指定すると、全てのプロセスをリストする。
.TP
.B \-\-deselect
.\"O Select all processes except those that fulfill the specified conditions.
.\"O (negates the selection) Identical to \fB\-N\fR.
指定された条件を満たさないプロセスのみを選択する (選択の否定)。
\fB\-N\fR と等しい。

.\" """""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.PD
.PP
.\"O .SH "PROCESS SELECTION BY LIST"
.SH リストによるプロセス選択
.\"O These options accept a single argument in the form of a blank\-separated
.\"O or comma\-separated list.  They can be used multiple times.
.\"O For\ example:\ \fBps\ \-p\ "1\ 2"\ \-p\ 3,4\fR
これらのオプションは空白区切りまたはコンマ区切り形式の
1 つの引き数を受け付け、複数回指定できる。
例:\ \fBps\ \-p\ "1\ 2"\ \-p\ 3,4\fR
.P
.TP 16
.B \-C \ cmdlist
.\"O Select by command name.
コマンド名で選択する。
.br
.\"O This selects the processes whose executable name is given in
.\"O \fIcmdlist\fR.
実行ファイル名が \fIcmdlist\fR に含まれるプロセスを選択する。
.TP
.B \-G \ grplist
.\"O Select by real group ID (RGID) or name.
実グループ ID または実グループ名で選択する。
.br
.\"O This selects the processes whose real group name or ID is in the
.\"O \fIgrplist\fR list.  The real group ID identifies the group of the user
.\"O who created the process, see \fIgetgid\fR(2).
実グループ名または実グループ ID が
\fIgrplist\fR リストに含まれるプロセスを選択する。
実グループ ID とはプロセスを作成したユーザーのグループである。
\fIgetgid\fR(2) を参照。
.TP
.B U \ userlist
.\"O Select by effective user ID (EUID) or name.
実効ユーザー ID (EUID) または実効ユーザー名で選択する。
.br
.\"O This selects the processes whose effective user name
.\"O or ID is in \fIuserlist\fR.
実効ユーザー名または実効ユーザー ID が
\fIuserlist\fR に含まれるプロセスを選択する。
.\"O The effective user\ ID describes the user whose file
.\"O access permissions are used by the process
.\"O (see\ \fIgeteuid\fR(2)).
.\"O Identical to \fB\-u\fR and\ \fB\-\-user\fR.
実効ユーザー ID はそのファイルアクセス許可が
プロセスによって使用される (\fIgeteuid\fR(2) を参照)。
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-user\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-U \ userlist
.\"O select by real user ID (RUID) or name.
実ユーザー ID (RUID) または実ユーザー名で選択する。
.br
.\"O It selects the processes whose real user name or ID is in the
.\"O \fIuserlist\fR list.
.\"O The real user ID identifies the user who created the process,
.\"O see\ \fIgetuid\fR(2).
実ユーザー名または実ユーザー ID が
\fIuserlist\fR に含まれるプロセスを選択する。
実ユーザー ID はプロセスを作成したユーザーを識別する。
\fIgetuid\fR(2) を参照。
.TP
.B \-g \ grplist
.\"O Select by session OR by effective group name.
セッションと実効グループ名の OR で選択する。
.br
.\"O Selection by session is specified by many standards,
.\"O but selection by effective group is the logical behavior that
.\"O several other operating systems use.
セッションによる選択は多くの標準で指定されているが、
実効グループ ID による選択は、
いくつかのオペレーティングシステムで使用されている論理的な動作である。
.\"O This \fBps\fR will select by session when the list
.\"O is completely numeric (as\ sessions\ are).
この \fBps\fR はリストが (セッションを表す) 数値だけの場合、
セッションで選択する。
グループ ID 番号による選択は、他のグループ名が
指定されている場合にのみ動作する。
.\"O See the \fB\-s\fR and \fB\-\-group\fR options.
\fB\-s\fR と \fB\-\-group\fR オプションを参照すること。
.TP
.B p \ pidlist
.\"O Select by process ID.  Identical to \fB\-p\fR and\ \fB\-\-pid\fR.
プロセス ID で選択する。\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-pid\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-p \ pidlist
.\"O Select by PID.
PID で選択する。
.br
.\"O This selects the processes whose process ID numbers appear in
.\"O \fIpidlist\fR.  Identical to \fBp\fR and\ \fB\-\-pid\fR.
プロセス ID 番号が \fIpidlist\fR にあるプロセスを選択する。
\fBp\fR, \fB\-\-pid\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-s \ sesslist
.\"O Select by session ID.
セッション ID で選択する。
.br
.\"O This selects the processes
.\"O with a session ID specified in\ \fIsesslist\fR.
\fIsesslist\fR で指定されたセッション ID のプロセスを選択する。
.TP
.B t \ ttylist
.\"O Select by tty.  Nearly identical to \fB\-t\fR and \fB\-\-tty\fR,
.\"O but can also be used with an empty \fIttylist\fR to indicate
.\"O the terminal associated with \fBps\fR.
端末 (tty) で選択する。
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-tty\fR とほぼ等しいが、
空の \fIttylist\fR を使うことで、
\fBps\fR と関連づけられている端末を表すことができる。
.\"O Using the \fBT\fR option is considered cleaner than using \fBT\fR with
.\"O an\ empty\ \fIttylist\fR.
\fBT\fR オプションを使う方が、\fBt\fR と空の \fIttylist\fR を使うより、
すっきりしている。
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: T with an empty ttylist は、
.\"Osato: t with an empty ttylist の間違いか？
.\"Osato: 
.TP
.B \-t \ ttylist
.\"O Select by tty.
端末 (tty) で選択する。
.br
.\"O This selects the processes associated with the terminals
.\"O given in \fIttylist\fR.
\fIttylist\fR で指定された端末と関連づけられているプロセスを選択する。
.\"O Terminals (ttys, or screens for text output) can be specified in several
.\"O forms: /dev/ttyS1, ttyS1, S1.
端末 (テキスト出力のための tty またはスクリーン) は、
いくつかの形式で指定できる: /dev/ttyS1, ttyS1, S1.
.\"O A\ plain "\-" may be used to select processes not attached to any terminal.
単なる "\-" は、どの端末にも属さない
プロセスを選択するのに使用される。
.TP
.B \-u \ userlist
.\"O Select by effective user ID (EUID) or name.
実効ユーザー ID (EUID) または実効ユーザー名で選択する。
.br
.\"O This selects the processes whose effective user name or ID is in
.\"O \fIuserlist\fR.  The effective user ID describes the user whose file
.\"O access permissions are used by the process (see\ \fIgeteuid\fR(2)).
\fIuserlist\fR にある実効ユーザー名
または実効ユーザー ID のプロセスを選択する。
実効ユーザー ID は、プロセスによってファイルアクセス許可が
使用されるユーザーを表す (\fIgeteuid\fR(2) を参照)。
.\"O Identical to \fBU\fR and \fB\-\-user\fR.
\fBU\fR, \fB\-\-user\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-\-Group \ grplist
.\"O Select by real group ID (RGID) or name.  Identical to \fB\-G\fR.
実グループ ID (RGID) または実グループ名で選択する。\fB\-G\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-\-User \ userlist
.\"O Select by real user ID (RUID) or name.  Identical to \fB\-U\fR.
実ユーザー ID (RUID) または実ユーザー名で選択する。\fB\-U\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-\-group \ grplist
.\"O Select by effective group ID (EGID) or name.
実効グループ ID (EGID) または実効グループ名で選択する。
.br
.\"O This selects the processes whose effective group name or ID is in
.\"O \fIgrouplist\fR.  The effective group ID describes the group whose file
.\"O access permissions are used by the process (see\ \fIgeteuid\fR(2)).
.\"O The \fB\-g\fR option is often an alternative to\ \fB\-\-group\fR.
実効グループ名または実効グループ ID が
\fIgrouplist\fR にあるプロセスを選択する。
実効グループ ID は、プロセスによってファイルアクセス許可が
使用されるグループを表す (\fIgeteuid\fR(2) を参照)。
\fB\-g\fR は、しばしば \fB\-\-group\fR の代わりとされる。
.TP
.B \-\-pid \ pidlist
.\"O Select by process\ ID.  Identical to \fB\-p\fR\ and\ \fBp\fR.
プロセス ID で選択する。\fB\-p\fR, \fBp\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-\-ppid \ pidlist
.\"O Select by parent process\ ID.
.\"O This selects the processes
.\"O with a parent\ process\ ID in \fRpidlist\fR.
.\"O That\ is, it selects processes that are children
.\"O of those listed in \fRpidlist\fR.
親プロセスのプロセス ID で選択する。
親プロセスの ID が \fRpidlist\fR にあるプロセスを選択する。
つまり、\fRpidlist\fR にリストされているプロセスの
子プロセスを選択する。
.TP
.B \-\-sid \ sesslist
.\"O Select by session\ ID.  Identical to\ \fB\-s\fR.
セッション ID で選択する。\fB\-s\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-\-tty \ ttylist
.\"O Select by terminal.  Identical to \fB\-t\fR and\ \fBt\fR.
端末で選択する。\fB\-t\fR, \fBt\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-\-user \ userlist
.\"O Select by effective user ID (EUID) or name.
.\"O Identical to \fB\-u\fR and\ \fBU\fR.
実効ユーザー ID (EUID) または実効ユーザー名で選択する。
\fB\-u\fR, \fBU\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-\fI123\fR
.\"O Identical to \fB\-\-sid\ \fI123\fR.
\fB\-\-sid\ \fI123\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \fI123\fR
.\"O Identical to \fB\-\-pid\ \fI123\fR.
\fB\-\-pid\ \fI123\fR と等しい。

.\" """""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.PD
.PP
.\"O .SH "OUTPUT FORMAT CONTROL"
.SH 出力フォーマットの制御
.\"O These options are used to choose the information displayed by \fBps\fR.
これらのオプションは、\fBps\fR によって表示される情報を選択するのに使用される。
.\"O The output may differ by personality.
出力は流儀によって異なる可能性がある。
.PP
.TP 16
.B \-F
.\"O extra full format. See the \fB\-f\fR option, which \fB\-F\fR implies.
特別に完全なフォーマット。
\fB\-F\fR が暗黙のうちに指定する \fB\-f\fR オプションを参照すること。
.TP
.B \-O \ format
.\"O is like \fB\-o\fR, but preloaded with some default columns.
.\"O Identical to \fB\-o\ pid,\fIformat\fB,state,tname,time,command\fR
.\"O or \fB\-o\ pid,\fIformat\fB,tname,time,cmd\fR, see\ \fB\-o\fR\ below.
\fB\-o\fR と似ているが、いくつかのデフォルトカラムをプリロードする。
\fB\-o\ pid,\fIformat\fB,state,tname,time,command\fR
または \fB\-o\ pid,\fIformat\fB,tname,time,cmd\fR と等しい。
下記の \fB\-o\fR\ を参照すること。
.\"nakano ??
.\"tsekine デフォルトの書式に、指定された書式のフィールドを(第2フィールドに)追加します
.TP
.B O \ format
.\"O is preloaded \fBo\fR (overloaded).
プリロードされた \fBo\fR (上書きされる)。
.br
.\"O The BSD \fBO\fR option can act like \fB\-O\fR (user\-defined output
.\"O format with some common fields predefined) or can be used to specify
.\"O sort order.  Heuristics are used to determine the behavior of this
.\"O option. To ensure that the desired behavior is obtained (sorting or
.\"O formatting), specify the option in some other way
.\"O (e.g. with \fB\-O\fR or \fB\-\-sort\fR).
BSD の \fBO\fR オプションは、\fB\-O\fR (ユーザー定義の出力フォーマット。
いくつかのよく使われるフィールドは定義済) オプションのように動作したり、
あるいはソートの順序指定にも用いることができる。
このオプションにどちらの動作をさせるかは、
ヒューリスティックな手法を用いて決定する。
(ソートあるいはフォーマットについて) 望みの動作をさせるには、
その他のオプションを指定すること。
.\"nakano in some other way はどうしよう?
(例えば、\fB\-O\fR または \fB\-\-sort\fR と一緒に指定する)。

.\"O When used as a formatting option, it is identical to \fB\-O\fR, with the
.\"O BSD\ personality.
フォーマットオプションとして使用する場合は、
BSD の流儀で \fB\-O\fR を指定するのと等しい。
.TP
.B \-M
.\"O Add a column of security data. Identical to \fBZ\fR. (for\ SE\ Linux)
セキュリティデータのカラムを追加する。
\fBZ\fR と同じ。(SE\ Linux 用)。
.TP
.B X
.\"O Register format.
レジスタフォーマット
.TP
.B Z
.\"O Add a column of security data. Identical to \fB\-M\fR. (for\ SE\ Linux)
セキュリティデータのカラムを追加する。
\fB-M\fR と同じ。(SE\ Linux 用)。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Show different scheduler information for the \fB\-l\fR option.
\fB\-l\fR オプションとは異なるスケジューリング情報を表示する。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O does full\-format listing. This option can be combined with many
.\"O other UNIX\-style options to add additional columns. It also causes
.\"O the command arguments to be printed. When used with \fB\-L\fR, the
.\"O NLWP (number of threads) and LWP (thread ID) columns will be added.
完全なフォーマットでリストする。
このオプションは、他の多くの UNIX 形式オプションと組み合わせることが可能で、
その他のカラムを追加する。
またコマンドライン引き数も表示される。
\fB\-L\fR と組み合わせて使うと、
NLWP (スレッド数), LWP (スレッド ID) カラムが追加される。
.\"O See the \fBc\fR option, the format keyword \fBargs\fR, and the
.\"O format keyword \fBcomm\fR.
フォーマットキーワード \fBargs\fR と \fBcomm\fR については、
\fBc\fR オプションを参照すること。
.TP
.B j
.\"O BSD job control format.
BSD のジョブ制御フォーマット。
.TP
.B \-j
.\"O jobs format
jobs フォーマット。
.TP
.B l
.\"O display BSD long format.
BSD の長いフォーマット。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O long format. The \fB\-y\fR option is often useful with this.
長いフォーマット。
\fB\-y\fR オプションは、このオプションと組み合わせることで、
しばしば役に立つ。
.TP
.B o \ format
.\"O specify user\-defined format.  Identical to \fB\-o\fR and
.\"O \fB\-\-format\fR.
ユーザー定義フォーマットを指定する。
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-format\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-o \ format
.\"O user\-defined format.
ユーザー定義フォーマット。
.br
.\"O \fIformat\fR is a single argument in the form of a
.\"O blank\-separated or comma\-separated list, which offers
.\"O a way to specify individual output columns.
\fIformat\fR は空白区切りまたはコンマ区切りリストの形式の
1 つの引き数である。
これにより各出力カラムを指定する方法を提供している。
.\"O The recognized keywords are described in the \fBSTANDARD FORMAT
.\"O SPECIFIERS\fR section below.
「\fB標準フォーマット指定子\fR」のセクションで説明されている
キーワードを認識する。
.\"O Headers may be
.\"O renamed (\fBps\ \-o\ pid,ruser=RealUser\ \-o\ comm=Command\fR) as desired.
ヘッダは望みのものに変更できる
(\fBps\ \-o\ pid,ruser=RealUser\ \-o\ comm=Command\fR)。
.\"O If all column headers are empty (\fBps\ \-o\ pid=\ \-o\ comm=\fR) then the
.\"O header line will not be output. Column width will increase as
.\"O needed for wide headers; this may be used to widen up columns
.\"O such as WCHAN (\fBps\ \-o\ pid,wchan=WIDE\-WCHAN\-COLUMN\ \-o\ comm\fR).
全てのカラムヘッダが空の場合 (\fBps\ \-o\ pid=\ \-o\ comm=\fR)、
ヘッダ行は出力されない。
ヘッダの幅が広い場合は、カラム幅が増やされる。
これは WCHAN のようなカラムの幅を広げるのに使われる
(\fBps\ \-o\ pid,wchan=WIDE\-WCHAN\-COLUMN\ \-o\ comm\fR)。
.\"O Explicit width control (\fBps\ opid,wchan:42,cmd\fR) is offered too.
.\"O The behavior of \fBps\ \-o\ pid=X,comm=Y\fR varies with personality;
.\"O output may be one column named "X,comm=Y" or two columns
.\"O named "X" and "Y". Use multiple \fB\-o\fR options when in doubt.
明示的な幅の制御 (\fBps\ opid,wchan:42,cmd\fR) も提供されている。
\fBps\ \-o\ pid=X,comm=Y\fR の挙動は流儀によって変わる。
"X,comm=Y" という名前の 1 つのカラムが出力される場合もあるし、
"X" と "Y" という名前の 2 つのカラムが出力される場合もある。
疑わしい場合は、\fB\-o\fR オプションを複数使うこと。
.\"O Use the \fBPS_FORMAT\fR environment variable to specify a default
.\"O as desired; DefSysV and DefBSD are macros that may be used to
.\"O choose the default UNIX or BSD columns.
デフォルトを望みのものにしたい場合は、
\fBPS_FORMAT\fR 環境変数を使うこと。
DefSysV と DefBSD は、
デフォルトの UNIX または BSD カラムを選択するためのマクロである。
.TP
.B s
.\"O display signal format
シグナルフォーマット。
.TP
.B u
.\"O display user\-oriented format
ユーザー指向のフォーマット。
.TP
.B v
.\"O display virtual memory format
仮想メモリフォーマット。
.TP
.B \-y
.\"O Do not show flags; show rss in place of addr.
.\"O This option can only be used with \fB\-l\fR.
フラグを表示しない。addr の代わりに rss を表示する。
このオプションは \fB\-l\fR と一緒のときにのみ使用できる。
.TP
.B \-\-format \ format
.\"O user\-defined format.  Identical to \fB\-o\fR and \fBo\fR.
ユーザー定義フォーマット。
\fB\-o\fR, \fBo\fR と等しい。
.TP
.B \-\-context
.\"O Display security context format. (for\ SE\ Linux)
セキュリティコンテキストフォーマット (SE\ Linux 用)。

.\" """""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.PD
.PP
.\"O .SH "OUTPUT MODIFIERS"
.SH 出力修正指定

.\"  .TP
.\"  .B C
.\"O .\"  use raw CPU time for %CPU instead of decaying average
.\"  %CPU に、減衰平均でなく raw CPU 時間を表示する
.TP 16
.B \-H
.\"O show process hierarchy (forest)
プロセスを階層表示する (森)。
.TP
.B N \ namelist
.\"O Specify namelist file.  Identical to \fB\-n\fR, see \fB\-n\fR above.
名前リストファイルを指定する。
\fB\-n\fR と等しい。上記の \fB\-n\fR を参照すること。
.TP
.B O \ order
.\"O Sorting order. (overloaded)
ソート順の指定 (上書きされる)。
.\"nakano ここの overloaded は?
.br
.\"O The BSD \fBO\fR option can act like \fB\-O\fR (user\-defined output
.\"O format with some common fields predefined) or can be used to specify
.\"O sort order.  Heuristics are used to determine the behavior of this
.\"O option. To ensure that the desired behavior is obtained (sorting or
.\"O formatting), specify the option in some other way (e.g. with \fB\-O\fR
.\"O or \fB\-\-sort\fR).
BSD の \fBO\fR オプションは、\fB\-O\fR (ユーザー定義の出力フォーマット。
いくつかのよく使われるフィールドは定義済) オプションのように動作したり、
あるいはソートの順序指定にも用いることができる。
このオプションにどちらの動作をさせるかは、
ヒューリスティックな手法を用いて決定する。
(ソートあるいはフォーマットについて) 望みの動作をさせるには、
その他のオプションを指定すること。
(例えば、\fB\-O\fR または \fB\-\-sort\fR と一緒に指定する)。

.\"O For sorting, obsolete BSD \fBO\fR option syntax is
.\"O \fBO\fR[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIk1\fR[,[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIk2\fR[,...]].
ソートに用いる場合、廃止された BSD の \fBO\fR オプションの文法は
\fBO\fR[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIk1\fR[,[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIk2\fR[,...]]
である。
.\"O It orders the processes listing according to the multilevel sort specified by
.\"O the sequence of one\-letter short keys \fIk1\fR, \fIk2\fR, ... described
.\"O in the \fBOBSOLETE SORT KEYS\fR section below.
「\fB廃止されたソートキー\fR」にある 1 文字の短いキーのシーケンスを
\fIk1\fR, \fIk2\fR, ... に指定すれば、
プロセスリストを複数レベルでソートできる。

.\"O The\ "+" is currently optional,
.\"O merely re\-iterating the default direction on a key,
.\"O but may help to distinguish an \fBO\fR sort from an \fBO\fR format.
"+" は現在では省略可能な指定で、
単にデフォルトのソート方向を繰り返しているに過ぎない。
\fBO\fR ソートと \fBO\fR フォーマットを区別する助けになる。
.\"O The\ "\-" reverses direction only on the key it precedes.
"\-" はその直後のキーのソート順を逆順にする。
.TP
.B S
.\"O Sum up some information, such as CPU usage, from dead child processes
.\"O into their parent. This is useful for examining a system where a
.\"O parent process repeatedly forks off short\-lived children to do work.
死んだ子プロセスの CPU 使用量といった情報を、親プロセスに加算する。
親プロセスが寿命の短い子プロセスを繰り返し fork して処理を行なうような
システムを調べるのに役に立つ。
.TP
.B c
.\"O Show the true command name. This is derived from the name of the
.\"O executable file, rather than from the argv value. Command arguments
.\"O and any modifications to them (see\ \fIsetproctitle\fR(3)) are
.\"O thus not shown. This option
.\"O effectively turns the \fBargs\fR format keyword into the \fBcomm\fR
.\"O format keyword; it is useful with the \fB\-f\fR format option and with
.\"O the various BSD\-style format options, which all normally
.\"O display the command arguments.
本当のコマンド名を表示する。
これは argv の値ではなく、実行ファイル名から導き出される。
よって、コマンド引き数とそれを修正したもの
(\fIsetproctitle\fR(3) を参照) は表示されない。
実際上、このオプションは \fBargs\fR フォーマットキーワードを
\fBcomm\fR フォーマットキーワードに置き換える。
これは \fB\-f\fR フォーマットオプションを、
様々な BSD 形式のフォーマットオプション
(通常は全てのオプションがコマンド引き数を表示する) とともに
使う場合に役に立つ。
.\"O See the \fB\-f\fR option, the format keyword \fBargs\fR, and the
.\"O format keyword \fBcomm\fR.
\fB\-f\fR オプション、およびフォーマットキーワード
\fBargs\fR と\fBcomm\fR を参照すること。
.TP
.B e
.\"O Show the environment after the command.
コマンドの後に環境を表示する。
.TP
.B f
.\"O ASCII\-art process hierarchy (forest)
ASCII アートでプロセス階層を表示する (森)。
.TP
.B h
.\"O No header. (or, one header per screen in the BSD personality)
へッダ行を表示しない
(また BSD 流儀の場合はスクリーンごとに 1 つのへッダ行)
.br
.\"O The \fBh\fR option is problematic.  Standard BSD \fBps\fR uses
.\"O this option to print a header on each page of output, but older
.\"O Linux \fBps\fR uses this option to totally disable the header.
\fBh\fR オプションには問題がある。
標準的な BSD の \fBps\fR では、
このオプションは出力の各ページにヘッダを出力することになるが、
古い Linux の \fBps\fR ではヘッダを全く出力しないことになる。
.\"O This version of \fBps\fR follows the Linux usage of not printing
.\"O the header unless the BSD personality has been selected, in which
.\"O case it prints a header on each page of output. Regardless of the
.\"O current personality, you can use the long options \fB\-\-headers\fR
.\"O and \fB\-\-no\-headers\fR to enable printing headers each page or
.\"O disable headers entirely, respectively.
この \fBps\fR では Linux の利用法に倣い、ヘッダを出力しない。
ただし別途 BSD の流儀が選択されていれば、
出力の各ページにヘッダを出力するようになる。
長いオプションである \fB\-\-headers\fR や \fB\-\-no\-headers\fR  を使えば、
現在の流儀に関係なく、各ページにヘッダを出力するか、
全くヘッダを出力しないかを選択することができる。
.TP
.B k \ spec
.\"O specify sorting order. Sorting syntax is
.\"O [\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIkey\fR[,[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIkey\fR[,...]]
.\"O Choose a multi\-letter key from the \fBSTANDARD FORMAT SPECIFIERS\fR section.
ソート順を指定する。
ソート文法は
[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIkey\fR[,[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIkey\fR[,...]] である。
複数文字のキーは「\fB標準フォーマット指定子\fR」のセクションから選ぶこと。
.\"O The\ "+" is optional since default direction is increasing numerical or
.\"O lexicographic order. Identical to \fB\-\-sort\fR. Examples:
デフォルトのソートの方向は数値順・辞書順ともに昇順なので、"+" は省略してよい。
\fB\-\-sort\fR と等しい。
例:
.br
\fBps\ jaxkuid,\-ppid,+pid\fR
.br
\fBps\ axk\ comm\ o\ comm,args\fR
.br
\fBps\ kstart_time\ \-ef\fR
.TP
.B \-n \ namelist
.\"O set namelist file.  Identical to \fBN\fR.
名前リストファイルを指定する。
\fBN\fR と等しい。
.br
.\"O The namelist file is needed for a proper WCHAN display, and must match
.\"O the current Linux kernel exactly for correct output.
.\"O Without this option, the default search path for the namelist is:
WCHAN の表示を正しく行うには、 名前リストファイルが必要である。
正しい出力のためには、名前リストファイルは現在の Linux カーネルに
正確に一致するものでなければならない。
このオプションを指定しない場合、
名前リストのデフォルトの検索パスは以下の通り:

	$PS_SYSMAP
.br
	$PS_SYSTEM_MAP
.br
	/proc/*/wchan
.br
	/boot/System.map\-\`uname\ \-r\`
.br
	/boot/System.map
.br
	/lib/modules/\`uname\ \-r\`/System.map
.br
	/usr/src/linux/System.map
.br
	/System.map
.TP
.B n
.\"O Numeric output for WCHAN and USER. (including all types of UID and GID)
WCHAN と USER を数値で出力する (UID と GID の全てのタイプを含む)。
.TP
.B \-w
.\"O Wide output. Use this option twice for unlimited width.
出力幅を広げる。このオプションを 2 つ指定すると、幅の制限がなくなる。
.TP
.B w
.\"O Wide output. Use this option twice for unlimited width.
出力幅を広げる。このオプションを 2 つ指定すると、幅の制限がなくなる。
.TP
.B \-\-cols \ n
.\"O set screen width
スクリーンの幅を指定する。
.TP
.B \-\-columns \ n
.\"O set screen width
スクリーンの幅を指定する
.TP
.B \-\-cumulative
.\"O include some dead child process data (as a sum with the parent)
死んだ子プロセスも (親プロセスへの加算として) 含める。
.TP
.B \-\-forest
.\"O ASCII art process tree
ASCII アートでプロセス階層を表示する。
.TP
.B \-\-headers
.\"O repeat header lines, one per page of output
ヘッダ行を繰り返す。出力の 1 ページ毎に 1 行。
.TP
.B \-\-no\-headers
.\"O print no header line at all
ヘッダ行を一切表示しない。
.TP
.B \-\-lines \ n
.\"O set screen height
スクリーンの行数を設定する。
.TP
.B \-\-rows \ n
.\"O set screen height
スクリーンの行数を設定する。
.TP
.B \-\-sort \ spec
.\"O specify sorting order. Sorting syntax is
.\"O [\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIkey\fR[,[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIkey\fR[,...]]
.\"O Choose a multi\-letter key from the \fBSTANDARD FORMAT SPECIFIERS\fR section.
ソート順を指定する。
ソートの文法は
[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIkey\fR[,[\fB+\fR|\fB\-\fR]\fIkey\fR[,...]] である。
複数文字のキーは「\fB標準フォーマット指定子\fR」セクションから選ぶこと。
.\"O The\ "+" is optional since default direction is increasing numerical or
.\"O lexicographic order. Identical to\ \fBk\fR.
デフォルトのソートの方向は数値順・辞書順ともに昇順なので、"+" は任意である。
\fBk\fR と等しい。
.\"O For example: \fBps\ jax\ \-\-sort=uid,\-ppid,+pid\fR
例: \fBps\ jax\ \-\-sort=uid,\-ppid,+pid\fR
.TP
.B \-\-width \ n
.\"O set screen width
スクリーンの幅を指定する

.\" """""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.PD
.PP
.\"O .SH "THREAD DISPLAY"
.SH スレッド表示
.PD 0
.TP 16
.B H
.\"O Show threads as if they were processes
スレッドをプロセスのように表示する。
.TP
.B \-L
.\"O Show threads, possibly with LWP and NLWP columns
可能ならば LWP と NLWP カラムをつけてスレッドを表示する。
.TP
.B \-T
.\"O Show threads, possibly with SPID column
可能ならば SPID カラムをつけてスレッドを表示する。
.TP
.B m
.\"O Show threads after processes
プロセスの後にスレッドを表示する。
.TP
.B \-m
.\"O Show threads after processes
プロセスの後にスレッドを表示する。

.\" """""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.PD
.PP
.\"O .SH "OTHER INFORMATION"
.SH その他の情報
.PD 0
.TP 16
.B L
.\"O List all format specifiers.
全てのフォーマット指定子をリストする。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Print the procps version.
procps のバージョンを表示する。
.TP
.B V
.\"O Print the procps version.
procps のバージョンを表示する。
.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Print a help message.
ヘルプメッセージを表示する。
.TP
.B \-\-info
.\"O Print debugging info.
デバッグ情報を表示する。
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Print the procps version.
procps のバージョンを表示する。

.\" """""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.PD
.PP
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O This \fBps\fR works by reading the virtual files in\ /proc.
.\"O This \fBps\fR does not need to be setuid kmem or have any privileges to run.
.\"O Do not give this \fBps\fR any special permissions.
この \fBps\fR は /proc にある仮想ファイルを読み込んで動作する。
この \fBps\fR は kmem に suid する必要はなく、
動作にいかなる特権も必要としない。
この \fBps\fR に特別な許可属性を与えないようにすること。

.\"O This \fBps\fR needs access to namelist data for proper WCHAN display.
この \fBps\fR が WCHAN の表示を正しく行うには、
名前リストファイルにアクセスする必要がある。
.\"O For kernels prior to 2.6, the System.map file must be installed.
2.6 より前のカーネルでは、System.map ファイルが
インストールされていなければならない。

.\"O CPU usage is currently expressed as the percentage of time spent
.\"O running during the entire lifetime of a process.
.\"O This is not ideal, and\ it does not conform to the
.\"O standards that \fBps\fR otherwise conforms\ to.
.\"O CPU\ usage is unlikely to add up to exactly\ 100%.
現在のところ CPU 使用率は、プロセスの生存期間中に
実行に利用した時間のパーセンテージで表される。
これは理想的ではなく、\fBps\fR が準拠すべき標準に準拠していない。
CPU\ 使用率は足し合わせても正確に 100% になることは少ない。

.\"O The SIZE and RSS fields don't count some parts of a process including the
.\"O page tables, kernel stack, struct thread_info, and struct task_struct.
.\"O This is usually at least 20\ KiB of memory that is always resident.
.\"O SIZE is the virtual size of the process (code+data+stack).
SIZE フィールドと RSS フィールドには、プロセスの一部
(page tables, kernel stack, struct thread_info, struct task_struct) が
含まれない。
これらは最低 20\ Ki バイト以上あり、必ずメモリに常駐している。
SIZE はプロセスの仮想サイズ (code+data+stack) である。

.\"O Processes marked <defunct> are dead processes (so\-called\ "zombies") that
.\"O remain because their parent has not destroyed them properly. These processes
.\"O will be destroyed by \fIinit\fR(8) if the parent process exits.
<defunct> マークがついたプロセスは死んだプロセス (ゾンビ) である。
これらは親プロセスによって正しく消去されていないために残っている。
これらのプロセスは、親プロセスが終了すると
\fIinit\fR(8) によって消去される。

.\"O .SH "PROCESS FLAGS"
.SH プロセスフラグ
.\"O The sum of these values is displayed in the "F" column,
.\"O which is provided by the \fBflags\fR output specifier.
これらの値の合計は、\fBflags\fR 出力指定子で提供される
"F" カラムに表示される。
.PD 0
.TP 5
1
.\"O forked but didn't exec
fork されたが exec されていない。
.TP
4
.\"O used super\-user privileges
スーパーユーザー権限を使っている。
.PD
.PP
.\"O .SH "PROCESS STATE CODES"
.SH プロセスの状態コード
.\"O Here are the different values that the \fBs\fR, \fBstat\fR and
.\"O \fBstate\fR output specifiers (header\ "STAT"\ or\ "S") will display to
.\"O describe the state of a process.
\fBs\fR, \fBstat\fR, \fBstate\fR 出力指定子
(ヘッダ\ "STAT"\ または\ "S") がプロセス状態の説明のために
表示する値を以下に示す。
.PD 0
.TP 5
D
.\"O Uninterruptible sleep (usually\ IO)
割り込み不可能なスリープ状態 (通常 IO 中)
.TP
R
.\"O Running or runnable (on\ run\ queue)
実行中または実行可能状態 (実行キューにある)
.TP
S
.\"O Interruptible sleep (waiting for an event to complete)
割り込み可能なスリープ状態 (イベントの完了を待っている)
.TP
T
.\"O Stopped, either by a job control signal or because it is being traced.
ジョブ制御シグナルまたはトレースされているために停止中の状態
.TP
W
.\"O paging (not valid since the 2.6.xx kernel)
ページング状態 (2.6.xx カーネルからは無効)
.TP
X
.\"O dead (should never be seen)
死んだ状態 (見えるべきではない)
.TP
Z
.\"O Defunct ("zombie") process, terminated but not reaped by its parent.
終了したが、親プロセスによって回収されなかった、
消滅した (ゾンビ) プロセス
.PD
.PP
.\"O For BSD formats and when the \fBstat\fR keyword is used, additional
.\"O characters may be displayed:
BSD 形式で \fBstat\fR キーワードが用いられたときは、
以下の添付文字が表示されることがある。
.PD 0
.TP 5
<
.\"O high\-priority (not nice to other users)
優先度の高いプロセス (他のユーザーに対して良くない)
.TP
N
.\"O low\-priority (nice to other users)
優先度の低いプロセス (他のユーザーに対して良い)
.TP
L
.\"O has pages locked into memory (for real\-time and custom\ IO)
実メモリのページをロックして利用している 
(リアルタイム処理やカスタム IO 向け)
.TP
s
.\"O is a session leader
セッションリーダ
.TP
l
.\"O is multi-threaded (using CLONE_THREAD, like NPTL pthreads\ do)
マルチスレッド化されている
(NPTL pthreads が行うように、CLONE_THREAD が使われている)
.TP
+
.\"O is in the foreground process group
フォアグラウンドのプロセスグループに含まれている
.PD
.PP
.PP
.\"O .SH "OBSOLETE SORT KEYS"
.SH 廃止されたソートキー
.\"O These keys are used by the BSD \fBO\fR option (when it is used for
.\"O sorting).  The GNU \fB\-\-sort\fR option doesn't use these keys, but the
.\"O specifiers described below in the \fBSTANDARD FORMAT SPECIFIERS\fR
.\"O section. Note that the values used in sorting are the internal
.\"O values \fBps\fR uses and not the "cooked" values used in some of
.\"O the output format fields (e.g. sorting on tty will sort into
.\"O device number, not according to the terminal name displayed).
これらのキーは BSD の \fBO\fR オプションで使用される
(ソートに使われるとき)。
GNU の \fB\-\-sort\fR オプションはこれらのキーを使わないが、
下記の「\fB標準的なフォーマット指定子\fR」のセクションで説明されている
指定子を使用する。
ソートで使用される値は、\fBps\fR が内部で使用する値であり、
出力フォーマットフィールドで使用される
「加工 (cook) された」値ではない点に注意すること
(例えば端末 (tty) でソートする場合は、デバイス番号でソートするのであって、
表示される端末名でソートするのではない)。
.\"O Pipe \fBps\fR output into the \fIsort\fR(1) command if you want
.\"O to sort the cooked values.
加工された値でソートしたい場合は、
\fBps\fR の出力を \fIsort\fR(1) コマンドにパイプすること。

.TS
l l lw(3i).
.\"O \fBKEY	LONG	DESCRIPTION\fR
\fBキー	長い形式	説明\fR
.\"O c	cmd	simple name of executable
c	cmd	実行ファイルの短い名前
.\"O C	pcpu	cpu utilization
C	pcpu	cpu 使用率
.\"O f	flags	flags as in long format F field
f	flags	フラグ (長い形式の F フィールドの書式)
.\"O g	pgrp	process group ID
g	pgrp	プロセスのグループ ID
.\"O G	tpgid	controlling tty process group ID
G	tpgid	制御端末プロセスグループ ID
.\"nakano でいいのか？
.\"O j	cutime	cumulative user time
j	cutime	累積したユーザー時間
.\"O J	cstime	cumulative system time
J	cstime	累積したシステム時間
.\"O k	utime	user time
k	utime	ユーザー時間
.\"O m	min_flt	number of minor page faults
m	min_flt	マイナーページフォルトの回数
.\"O M	maj_flt	number of major page faults
M	maj_flt	メジャーページフォルトの回数
.\"O n	cmin_flt	cumulative minor page faults
n	cmin_flt	マイナーページフォルトの累積数
.\"O N	cmaj_flt	cumulative major page faults
N	cmaj_flt	マイナーページフォルトの累積数
.\"O o	session	session ID
o	session	セッション ID
.\"O p	pid	process ID
p	pid	プロセス ID
.\"O P	ppid	parent process ID
P	ppid	親プロセスのプロセス ID
.\"O r	rss	resident set size
r	rss	常駐セットの大きさ
.\"O R	resident	resident pages
R	resident	常駐ページ数
.\"O s	size	memory size in kilobytes
s	size	メモリサイズ (キロバイト単位)
.\"O S	share	amount of shared pages
S	share	占めているページの量
.\"O t	tty	the device number of the controling tty
t	tty	制御端末のデバイス番号
.\"O T	start_time	time process was started
T	start_time	プロセスが起動した時刻
.\"O U	uid	user ID number
U	uid	ユーザー ID 番号
.\"O u	user	user name
u	user	ユーザー名
.\"O v	vsize	total VM size in kB
v	vsize	仮想メモリの全サイズ (kB 単位)
.\"O y	priority	kernel scheduling priority
y	priority	カーネルスケジューリングの優先度
.\"O .\"K	stime	system time (conflict, system vs. start time)
.\"K	stime	システム時間 (システム時間と起動時刻が衝突する)
.TE
.PP
.PP
.\"O .SH "AIX FORMAT DESCRIPTORS"
.SH AIX フォーマット記述子
.\"O This \fBps\fR supports AIX format descriptors, which work somewhat like the
.\"O formatting codes of \fIprintf\fR(1) and \fIprintf\fR(3). For example, the normal
.\"O default output can be produced with this:  \fBps\ \-eo\ "%p\ %y\ %x\ %c"\fR.
この \fBps\fR は AIX のフォーマット記述子をサポートしている。
これは \fIprintf\fR(1) や \fIprintf\fR(3) の
書式コードと似たような動作をする。
例えば通常のデフォルト出力は
\fBps\ \-eo\ "%p\ %y\ %x\ %c"\fR のようにつくることができる。
.\"O The\ \fBNORMAL\fR codes are described in the next section.
\fB通常の\fRコードは次のセクションで説明されている。
.TS
l l l.
.\"O \fBCODE	NORMAL	HEADER\fR
\fBコード	通常形式	ヘッダ\fR
%C	pcpu	%CPU
%G	group	GROUP
%P	ppid	PPID
%U	user	USER
%a	args	COMMAND
%c	comm	COMMAND
%g	rgroup	RGROUP
%n	nice	NI
%p	pid	PID
%r	pgid	PGID
%t	etime	ELAPSED
%u	ruser	RUSER
%x	time	TIME
%y	tty	TTY
%z	vsz	VSZ
.TE

.\"O .SH "STANDARD FORMAT SPECIFIERS"
.SH 標準フォーマット指定子
.\"O Here are the different keywords that may be used to control the output
.\"O format (e.g. with option \fB\-o\fR) or to sort the selected processes
.\"O with the GNU\-style \fB\-\-sort\fR option.
出力フォーマット (たとえば \fB\-o\fR オプション) を制御したり、
GNU 形式の \fB\-\-sort\fR オプションで
選択されたプロセスをソートしたりするための
いくつかのキーワードがある。

.\"O For example:  \fBps\ \-eo\ pid,user,args\ \-\-sort\ user\fR
例:  \fBps\ \-eo\ pid,user,args\ \-\-sort\ user\fR

.\"O This version of \fBps\fR tries to recognize most of the keywords used in
.\"O other implementations of \fBps\fR.
このバージョンの \fBps\fR は
他の \fBps\fR の実装で使われている多くのキーワードを認識しようとする。

.\"O The following user\-defined format specifiers may contain
.\"O spaces: \fBargs\fR, \fBcmd\fR, \fBcomm\fR, \fBcommand\fR, \fBfname\fR,
.\"O \fBucmd\fR, \fBucomm\fR,
.\"O \fBlstart\fR, \fBbsdstart\fR, \fBstart\fR.
以下のユーザー定義フォーマット指定子はスペースを含むことができる:
\fBargs\fR, \fBcmd\fR, \fBcomm\fR, \fBcommand\fR, \fBfname\fR,
\fBucmd\fR, \fBucomm\fR,
\fBlstart\fR, \fBbsdstart\fR, \fBstart\fR.

.\"O Some keywords may not be available for sorting.
いくつかのキーワードはソートには使えない。

.\" #######################################################################
.\" lB1 lB1 lB1 lB1 s s s
.\" lB1 l1  l1  l1  s s s.
.\"
.\" lB1 lB1 lBw(5.5i)
.\" lB1 l1  l.
.\"
.TS
expand;
lB1 lB1 lBw(\n[ColSize]n)
lB1 l1  l.
.\"O CODE	HEADER	DESCRIPTION
コード	ヘッダ	説明

%cpu	%CPU	T{
.\"O cpu utilization of the process in "##.#" format.  Currently, it is the CPU time
.\"O used divided by the time the process has been running (cputime/realtime
.\"O ratio), expressed as a percentage. It will not add up to 100% unless you
.\"O are lucky.  (alias\ \fBpcpu\fR).
プロセスの cpu 使用率は "##.#" というフォーマットである。
現在のところ CPU 使用率は、プロセスの生存期間中に
実行に利用した時間のパーセンテージで表される。
これを全部足しても 100% になることは (よほど幸運でなければ) ない。
(別名\ \fBpcpu\fR)。
T}

%mem	%MEM	T{
.\"O ratio of the process's resident set size  to the physical memory on
.\"O the machine, expressed as a percentage.  (alias\ \fBpmem\fR).
マシンの物理メモリに対するプロセスの常駐セットサイズのパーセンテージ。
(別名\ \fBpmem\fR)。
T}

args	COMMAND	T{
.\"O command with all its arguments as a string. Modifications to the arguments
.\"O may be shown. The output in this column may contain spaces.
文字列の引き数がついたコマンド。
引き数を変更したものが表示されるかも知れない。
このカラムの出力には空白が含まれる場合がある。
.\"O A\ process marked <defunct> is partly dead, waiting
.\"O to be fully destroyed by its parent. Sometimes the process args
.\"O will be unavailable; when this happens, \fBps\fR will instead
.\"O print the executable name in brackets.
.\"O (alias\ \fBcmd\fR,\ \fBcommand\fR). See also the \fBcomm\fR format
.\"O keyword, the \fB\-f\fR option, and the \fBc\fR option.
<defunct> というマークがついたプロセスは、部分的に死んでいて、
親プロセスによって完全に破壊されるのを待っている。
プロセスの引き数が取得できない場合もある。
その場合、\fBps\fR は代わりに実行ファイル名を括弧の中に表示する。
(別名\ \fBcmd\fR,\ \fBcommand\fR)。
\fBcomm\fR フォーマットキーワード・
\fB\-f\fR オプション・\fBc\fR オプションも参照すること。
.br
.\"O When specified last, this column will extend to the edge of the display.
.\"O If \fBps\fR can not determine display width, as when output is redirected
.\"O (piped) into a file or another command, the output width is undefined.
.\"O (it may be 80, unlimited, determined by the \fBTERM\fR variable, and so on)
最後に指定された場合、このカラムは画面の端まで拡張される。
出力がファイルや他のコマンドにリダイレクト (パイプ) されるときなど、
\fBps\fR がディスプレイの幅を決定できない場合は、
出力幅は定義されない
(80 文字・制限なし・\fBTERM\fR 変数で決定されるなどがありえる)。
.\"O The \fBCOLUMNS\fR environment variable or \fB\-\-cols\fR option may
.\"O be used to exactly determine the width in this case.
.\"O The \fBw\fR or \fB\-w\fR option may be also be used to adjust width.
このような場合は、\fBCOLUMNS\fR 環境変数や
\fB\-\-cols\fR オプションを使えば、幅を正確に決定できる。
\fBw\fR または \fB\-w\fR オプションを使っても幅を調整できる。
T}

blocked	BLOCKED	T{
.\"O mask of the blocked signals, see \fIsignal\fR(7).
.\"O According to the width of the field,
.\"O a\ 32\-bit or 64\-bit mask in hexadecimal format is displayed.
.\"O (alias\ \fBsig_block\fR,\ \fBsigmask\fR).
ブロックされたシグナルのマスク。\fIsignal\fR(7) を参照。
フィールドの幅に応じて、32 ビットまたは 64 ビットのマスクが
16 進数フォーマットで表示される。
(別名\ \fBsig_block\fR,\ \fBsigmask\fR)。
T}

bsdstart	START	T{
.\"O time the command started.  If the process was started less
.\"O than 24 hours ago, the output format is "\ HH:MM",
.\"O else it is "mmm\ dd"
.\"O (where mmm is the three letters of the month).
コマンドが起動した時刻。
プロセスが 24 時間以内に起動されていた場合、
出力フォーマットは "\ HH:MM" であり、
24 時間以前の場合は "mmm\ dd" である。
(ここで mmm は月の名前の 3 文字である)。
T}

bsdtime	TIME	T{
.\"O accumulated cpu time, user\ +\ system.  The display format is usualy
.\"O "MMM:SS", but can be shifted to the right if the process used more than 999
.\"O minutes of cpu time.
ユーザーとシステムの cpu 時間の合計。
表示フォーマットは通常は "MMM:SS" であるが、
プロセスが cpu 時間を 999 分より多く使っている場合は、右側へシフトする。
T}

c	C	T{
.\"O processor utilization. Currently, this is the integer value of
.\"O the percent usage over the lifetime of the process.  (see\ \fB%cpu\fR).
プロセッサ使用率。
現在のところ、プロセスの生存期間中に利用したパーセンテージを表す整数である。
(\fB%cpu\fR を参照)。
T}

caught	CAUGHT	T{
.\"O mask of the caught signals, see \fIsignal\fR(7).  According to the
.\"O width of the field, a 32 or 64 bits mask in hexadecimal format is
.\"O displayed.  (alias\ \fBsig_catch\fR,\ \fBsigcatch\fR).
キャッチされたシグナルのマスク。
\fIsignal\fR(7) を参照。
フィールドの幅に応じて、32 ビットまたは 64 ビットのマスクが
16 進数フォーマットで表示される。
(別名\ \fBsig_catch\fR,\ \fBsigcatch\fR)。
T}

class	CLS	T{
.\"O scheduling class of the process.  (alias\ \fBpolicy\fR,\ \fBcls\fR).
.\"O Field's possible values are:
プロセスのスケジューリングのクラス。
(別名\ \fBpolicy\fR,\ \fBcls\fR)。
フィールドに表示される可能性のある値は、以下の通り:
.br
.\"O \-	not reported
\-	報告されていない
.br
TS	SCHED_OTHER
.br
FF	SCHED_FIFO
.br
RR	SCHED_RR
.br
.\"O ?	unknown value
?	不明な値
T}

cls	CLS	T{
.\"O scheduling class of the process.  (alias\ \fBpolicy\fR,\ \fBclass\fR).
.\"O Field's possible values are:
プロセスのスケジューリングのクラス。
(別名\ \fBpolicy\fR,\ \fBclass\fR)。
フィールドに表示される可能性のある値は、以下の通り:
.br
.\"O \-	not reported
\-	報告されていない
.br
TS	SCHED_OTHER
.br
FF	SCHED_FIFO
.br
RR	SCHED_RR
.br
.\"O ?	unknown value
?	不明な値
T}

cmd	CMD	T{
.\"O see \fBargs\fR.  (alias\ \fBargs\fR,\ \fBcommand\fR).
\fBargs\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBargs\fR,\ \fBcommand\fR)。
T}

comm	COMMAND	T{
.\"O command name (only\ the executable\ name).  Modifications to the command
.\"O name will not be shown. A\ process marked <defunct> is partly dead, waiting
.\"O to be fully destroyed by its parent. The output in this
.\"O column may contain spaces.  (alias\ \fBucmd\fR,\ \fBucomm\fR).
コマンド名 (実行ファイル名のみ)。
引き数を変更したものは表示されない。
<defunct> というマークがついたプロセスは、部分的に死んでいて、
親プロセスによって完全に破壊されるのを待っている。
このカラムの出力には空白が含まれる場合がある。
(別名\ \fBucmd\fR,\ \fBucomm\fR)。
.\"O See also the \fBargs\fR format
.\"O keyword, the \fB\-f\fR option, and the \fBc\fR option.
\fBargs\fR フォーマットキーワード・
\fB\-f\fR オプション・\fBc\fR オプションも参照すること。
.br
.\"O When specified last, this column will extend to the edge of the display.
.\"O If \fBps\fR can not determine display width, as when output is redirected
.\"O (piped) into a file or another command, the output width is undefined.
.\"O (it may be 80, unlimited, determined by the \fBTERM\fR variable, and so on)
最後に指定された場合、このカラムは画面の端まで拡張される。
出力がファイルや他のコマンドにリダイレクト (パイプ) されるときなど、
\fBps\fR がディスプレイの幅を決定できない場合は、
出力幅は定義されない
(80 文字・制限なし・\fBTERM\fR 変数で決定されるなどがありえる)。
.\"O The \fBCOLUMNS\fR environment variable or \fB\-\-cols\fR option may
.\"O be used to exactly determine the width in this case.
.\"O The \fBw\fR or \fB\-w\fR option may be also be used to adjust width.
このような場合は、\fBCOLUMNS\fR 環境変数や
\fB\-\-cols\fR オプションを使えば、幅を正確に決定できる。
\fBw\fR または \fB\-w\fR オプションを使っても幅を調整できる。
T}

command	COMMAND	T{
.\"O see \fBargs\fR.  (alias\ \fBargs\fR,\ \fBcmd\fR).
\fBargs\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBargs\fR,\ \fBcmd\fR)。
T}

cp	CP	T{
.\"O per\-mill (tenths of a percent) CPU usage.  (see\ \fB%cpu\fR).
パーミル (パーセントの 1/10) で表した CPU 使用率。(\fB%cpu\fR を参照)。
T}

cputime	TIME	T{
.\"O cumulative CPU time, "[dd\-]hh:mm:ss" format.  (alias\ \fBtime\fR).
累積した CPU 時間。"[dd\-]hh:mm:ss" というフォーマットで表示される。
(別名\ \fBtime\fR)。
T}

egid	EGID	T{
.\"O effective group ID number of the process as a decimal integer.
プロセスの実効グループ ID 番号を 10 進の整数で表示する。
.\"O (alias\ \fBgid\fR).
(別名\ \fBgid\fR)。
T}

egroup	EGROUP	T{
.\"O effective group ID of the process.  This will be the textual group ID,
.\"O if it can be obtained and the field width permits, or a decimal
.\"O representation otherwise.  (alias\ \fBgroup\fR).
プロセスの実効グループ ID。
テキストのグループ ID が取得できて、かつフィールド幅が許せば、
テキストで表示される。
それ以外の場合は 10 進数で表示される。
(別名\ \fBgroup\fR).
T}

eip	EIP	T{
.\"O instruction pointer.
命令ポインタ。
T}

esp	ESP	T{
.\"O stack pointer.
スタックポインタ
T}

etime	ELAPSED	T{
.\"O elapsed time since the process was started,
.\"O in\ the form\ [[dd\-]hh:]mm:ss.
プロセスが起動されてからの経過時間。
[[dd\-]hh:]mm:ss というフォーマットで表示される。
T}

euid	EUID	T{
.\"O effective user\ ID. (alias\ \fBuid\fR).
実効ユーザー ID。(別名\ \fBuid\fR)。
T}

euser	EUSER	T{
.\"O effective user\ name.  This will be the textual
.\"O user\ ID, if\ it can be obtained and the field width permits,
.\"O or\ a\ decimal representation otherwise.
実効ユーザー名。
テキストのユーザー ID が取得できて、かつフィールド幅が許せば、
テキストで表示される。
それ以外の場合は 10 進数で表示される。
.\"O The\ \fBn\fR\ option can be used
.\"O to force the decimal representation.
.\"O (alias\ \fBuname\fR,\ \fBuser\fR).
\fBn\fR\ オプションを使って 10 進数表示を強制できる。
(別名\ \fBuname\fR,\ \fBuser\fR)。
T}

f	F	T{
.\"O flags associated with the process, see the \fBPROCESS FLAGS\fR section.
.\"O (alias\ \fBflag\fR,\ \fBflags\fR).
プロセスに関連づけられたフラグ。「\fBプロセスフラグ\fR」のセクションを参照。
(別名\ \fBflag\fR,\ \fBflags\fR)。
T}

fgid	FGID	T{
.\"O filesystem access group\ ID.  (alias\ \fBfsgid\fR).
ファイルシステムアクセスグループ\ ID。(別名\ \fBfsgid\fR)。
T}

fgroup	FGROUP	T{
.\"O filesystem access group\ ID.
.\"O This will be the textual user\ ID, if\ it can be obtained
.\"O and the field width permits,
.\"O or\ a\ decimal representation otherwise.
.\"O (alias\ \fBfsgroup\fR).
ファイルシステムアクセスグループ\ ID。
テキストのグループ ID が取得できて、かつフィールド幅が許せば、
テキストで表示される。
それ以外の場合は 10 進数で表示される。
(別名\ \fBfsgroup\fR).
T}

flag	F	T{
.\"O see\ \fBf\fR.  (alias\ \fBf\fR,\ \fBflags\fR).
\fBf\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBf\fR,\ \fBflags\fR)。
T}

flags	F	T{
.\"O see\ \fBf\fR.  (alias\ \fBf\fR,\ \fBflag\fR).
\fBf\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBf\fR,\ \fBflag\fR)。
T}

fname	COMMAND	T{
.\"O first 8 bytes of the base name of the process's executable file.
プロセスの実行ファイルのベース名の先頭 8 バイト。
.\"O The output in this column may contain spaces.
このカラムの出力にはスペースが含まれる場合がある。
T}

fuid	FUID	T{
.\"O filesystem access user\ ID.  (alias\ \fBfsuid\fR).
ファイルシステムアクセスユーザー\ ID。(別名\ \fBfsuid\fR)。
T}

fuser	FUSER	T{
.\"O filesystem access user\ ID.  This will be the textual user\ ID,
.\"O if\ it can be obtained and the field width permits,
.\"O or\ a\ decimal representation otherwise.
ファイルシステムアクセスユーザー\ ID。
テキストのユーザー ID が取得できて、かつフィールド幅が許せば、
テキストで表示される。
それ以外の場合は 10 進数で表示される。
T}

gid	GID	T{
.\"O see\ \fBegid\fR.  (alias\ \fBegid\fR).
\fBegid\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBegid\fR)。
T}

group	GROUP	T{
.\"O see\ \fBegroup\fR.  (alias\ \fBegroup\fR).
\fBegroup\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBegroup\fR)。
T}

ignored	IGNORED	T{
.\"O mask of the ignored signals, see \fIsignal\fR(7).  According to the
.\"O width of the field, a\ 32\-bit or 64\-bit mask in hexadecimal format
.\"O is displayed.  (alias \fBsig_ignore\fR, \fBsigignore\fR).
無視されたシグナルのマスク。\fIsignal\fR(7) を参照。
フィールドの幅に応じて、32 ビットまたは 64 ビットのマスクが
16 進数フォーマットで表示される。
(別名 \fBsig_ignore\fR, \fBsigignore\fR)。
T}

label	LABEL	T{
.\"O security label, most commonly used for SE\ Linux context data.
.\"O This is for the \fIMandatory Access Control\fR ("MAC") found on
.\"O high\-security systems.
セキュリティラベル。
最も一般的に使われるのは SE\ Linux のコンテキストデータである。
これはセキュリティレベルの高いシステムにある
\fI強制アクセス制御\fR (Mandatory Access Control, "MAC") のために存在する。
T}

lstart	STARTED	T{
.\"O time the command started.
コマンドが起動された時刻。
T}

lwp	LWP	T{
.\"O lwp (light weight process, or thread) ID of the lwp being reported.
.\"O (alias\ \fBspid\fR,\ \fBtid\fR).
lwp (軽量プロセス (light weight process) またはスレッド) の ID が表示される。
(別名\ \fBspid\fR,\ \fBtid\fR)。
T}

ni	NI	T{
.\"O nice value. This ranges from 19 (nicest) to \-20 (not\ nice to\ others),
.\"O see\ \fInice\fR(1).  (alias\ \fBnice\fR).
nice 値。
この値の範囲は 19 (最も良い) から \-20 (他のプロセスに対して良くない) である。
\fInice\fR(1) を参照。(別名\ \fBnice\fR)。
T}

nice	NI	T{
.\"O see\ \fBni\fR.  (alias\ \fBni\fR).
\fBni\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBni\fR)。
T}

nlwp	NLWP	T{
.\"O number of lwps (threads) in the process.  (alias\ \fBthcount\fR).
プロセスにおける lwp (スレッド) の数。(別名\ \fBthcount\fR)。
T}

nwchan	WCHAN	T{
.\"O address of the kernel function where the process is sleeping
.\"O (use \fBwchan\fR if you want the kernel function name).
.\"O Running tasks will display a dash ('\-') in this column.
プロセスが休止しているカーネル関数のアドレス
(カーネル関数名が必要な場合は \fBwchan\fR を使うこと)。
実行中のタスクは、このカラムにダッシュ ('\-') を表示する。
T}

pcpu	%CPU	T{
.\"O see\ \fB%cpu\fR.  (alias\ \fB%cpu\fR).
\fB%cpu\fR を参照。(別名\ \fB%cpu\fR)。
T}

pending	PENDING	T{
.\"O mask of the pending signals. See\ \fIsignal\fR(7).  Signals pending on
.\"O the process are distinct from signals pending on individual threads.
.\"O Use the \fBm\fR option or the \fB\-m\fR option to see both.
.\"O According to the width of the field, a\ 32\-bit or 64\-bit mask in
.\"O hexadecimal format is displayed.  (alias\ \fBsig\fR).
待機中 (pending) シグナルのマスク。\fIsignal\fR(7) を参照。
プロセスに待機しているシグナルは、
各スレッドに待機しているシグナルと区別される。
両方を見たい場合は、\fBm\fR オプションまたは \fB\-m\fR オプションを使うこと。
フィールドの幅に応じて、32 ビットまたは 64 ビットのマスクが
16 進数フォーマットで表示される。
(別名\ \fBsig\fR)。
T}

pgid	PGID	T{
.\"O process group\ ID or, equivalently, the process\ ID of the
.\"O process group leader.  (alias\ \fBpgrp\fR).
プロセスグループ ID。
また、これはプロセスグループリーダのプロセス ID と等しい。
(別名\ \fBpgrp\fR)。
T}

pgrp	PGRP	T{
.\"O see\ \fBpgid\fR.  (alias\ \fBpgid\fR).
\fBpgid\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBpgid\fR)。
T}

pid	PID	T{
.\"O process\ ID number of the process.
プロセスのプロセス ID 番号。
T}

pmem	%MEM	T{
.\"O see\ \fB%mem\fR.  (alias\ \fB%mem\fR).
\fB%mem\fR を参照。(別名\ \fB%mem\fR)。
T}

policy	POL	T{
.\"O scheduling class of the process.  (alias\ \fBclass\fR,\ \fBcls\fR).
.\"O Possible values are:
プロセスのスケジューリングのクラス。
(別名\ \fBclass\fR,\ \fBcls\fR)。
表示される可能性のある値は、以下の通り:
.br
.\"O \-	not reported
\-	報告されていない
.br
TS	SCHED_OTHER
.br
FF	SCHED_FIFO
.br
RR	SCHED_RR
.br
.\"O ?	unknown value
?	不明な値
T}

ppid	PPID	T{
.\"O parent process ID.
親プロセスのプロセス ID。
T}

psr	PSR	T{
.\"O processor that process is currently assigned to.
プロセスが現在割り当てられているプロセッサ。
T}

rgid	RGID	T{
.\"O real group ID.
実グループ ID。
T}

rgroup	RGROUP	T{
.\"O real group name.  This will be the textual group\ ID, if\ it can be
.\"O obtained and the field width permits,
.\"O or\ a\ decimal representation otherwise.
実グループ名。
テキストのグループ ID が取得できて、かつフィールド幅が許せば、
テキストで表示される。
それ以外の場合は 10 進数で表示される。
T}

rss	RSS	T{
.\"O resident set size, the non\-swapped physical memory that
.\"O a task has used (in\ kiloBytes).
.\"O (alias\ \fBrssize\fR,\ \fBrsz\fR).
常駐セットの大きさ。
タスクが使用しているスワップされていない物理メモリ (kB 単位)。
(別名\ \fBrssize\fR,\ \fBrsz\fR)。
T}

rssize	RSS	T{
.\"O see\ \fBrss\fR.  (alias\ \fBrss\fR,\ \fBrsz\fR).
\fBrss\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBrss\fR,\ \fBrsz\fR)。
T}

rsz	RSZ	T{
.\"O see\ \fBrss\fR.  (alias\ \fBrss\fR,\ \fBrssize\fR).
\fBrss\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBrss\fR,\ \fBrssize\fR)。
T}

rtprio	RTPRIO	T{
.\"O realtime priority.
リアルタイム優先度。
T}

ruid	RUID	T{
.\"O real user\ ID.
実ユーザー ID。
T}

ruser	RUSER	T{
.\"O real user\ ID.  This will be the textual user\ ID,
.\"O if\ it can be obtained and the field width permits,
.\"O or\ a\ decimal representation otherwise.
実ユーザー ID。
テキストのユーザー ID が取得できて、かつフィールド幅が許せば、
テキストで表示される。
それ以外の場合は 10 進数で表示される。
T}

s	S	T{
.\"O minimal state display (one\ character).
.\"O See\ section \fBPROCESS STATE CODES\fR for the different values.
.\"O See\ also \fBstat\fR if you want additionnal
.\"O information displayed.  (alias\ \fBstate\fR).
最小限の状態表示 (1 文字)。
それぞれの値については、
「\fBプロセスの状態コード\fR」のセクションを参照すること。
その他の情報を表示させたい場合は、\fBstat\fR も参照すること。
(別名\ \fBstate\fR)。
T}

sched	SCH	T{
.\"O scheduling policy of the process.  The policies sched_other, sched_fifo,
.\"O and sched_rr are respectively displayed as 0,\ 1,\ and\ 2.
プロセスのスケジューリングのポリシー。
ポリシー sched_other, sched_fifo, sched_rr は
それぞれ 0,\ 1,\ 2 として表示される。
T}

sess	SESS	T{
.\"O session\ ID or, equivalently, the process\ ID of the session\ leader.
.\"O (alias\ \fBsession\fR,\ \fBsid\fR).
セッション ID。
また、これはセッションリーダのプロセス ID と等しい。
(別名\ \fBsession\fR,\ \fBsid\fR)。
T}

sgi_p	P	T{
.\"O processor that the process is currently executing on.
.\"O Displays "*" if the process is not currently running or runnable.
そのプロセスが現在実行されているプロセッサ。
プロセスが現在のところ実行中でない場合、
または実行可能でない場合、"*" が表示される。
T}

sgid	SGID	T{
.\"O saved group\ ID.
.\"O (alias\ \fBsvgid\fR).
保存グループ ID。
(別名\ \fBsvgid\fR)。
T}

sgroup	SGROUP	T{
.\"O saved group\ name.  This will be the textual group\ ID,
.\"O if\ it can be obtained and the field width permits,
.\"O or\ a\ decimal representation otherwise.
保存グループ名。
テキストのグループ ID が取得できて、かつフィールド幅が許せば、
テキストで表示される。
それ以外の場合は 10 進数で表示される。
T}

sid	SID	T{
.\"O see\ \fBsess\fR.  (alias\ \fBsess\fR,\ \fBsession\fR).
\fBsess\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBsess\fR,\ \fBsession\fR)。
T}

sig	PENDING	T{
.\"O see\ \fBpending\fR.  (alias\ \fBpending\fR,\ \fBsig_pend\fR).
\fBpending\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBpending\fR,\ \fBsig_pend\fR)。
T}

sigcatch	CAUGHT	T{
.\"O see\ \fBcaught\fR.  (alias\ \fBcaught\fR,\ \fBsig_catch\fR).
\fBcaught\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBcaught\fR,\ \fBsig_catch\fR)。
T}

sigignore	IGNORED	T{
.\"O see\ \fBignored\fR.  (alias\ \fBignored\fR,\ \fBsig_ignore\fR).
\fBignored\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBignored\fR,\ \fBsig_ignore\fR)。
T}

sigmask	BLOCKED	T{
.\"O see\ \fBblocked\fR.  (alias\ \fBblocked\fR,\ \fBsig_block\fR).
\fBblocked\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBblocked\fR,\ \fBsig_block\fR)。
T}

size	SZ	T{
.\"O approximate amount of swap space that would be required
.\"O if the process were to dirty all writable pages and then
.\"O be swapped out.
.\"O This number is very\ rough!
プロセスの全ての書き込み可能なページがダーティ (dirty) で、
スワップアウトされると仮定したときの、
必要とされるスワップ空間の概算の大きさ。
この数値はとても大雑把である！
T}

spid	SPID	T{
.\"O see \fBlwp\fR.  (alias\ \fBlwp\fR,\ \fBtid\fR).
\fBlwp\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBlwp\fR,\ \fBtid\fR)。
T}

stackp	STACKP	T{
.\"O address of the bottom (start) of stack for the process.
プロセスのスタックの最下位 (開始) アドレス。
T}

start	STARTED	T{
.\"O time the command started.
.\"O If the process was started less than 24 hours ago,
.\"O the output format is "HH:MM:SS",
.\"O else it is "\ \ mmm\ dd"
.\"O (where mmm is a three\-letter month\ name).
コマンドが起動した時刻。
プロセスが 24 時間以内に起動されていた場合、
出力フォーマットは "\ HH:MM:SS" であり、
24 時間以前の場合は "\ \ mmm\ dd" である。
(ここで mmm は月の名前の 3 文字である)。
T}

start_time	START	T{
.\"O starting time or date of the process.
.\"O Only the year will be displayed if the process was not
.\"O started the same year \fBps\fR was invoked,
.\"O or\ "mmmdd" if\ it was not started the same day,
.\"O or\ "HH:MM" otherwise.
プロセスの起動時刻または起動日。
\fBps\fR が起動されたのと同じ年に
プロセスが起動されていない場合は、年のみが表示される。
同じ日に起動されていない場合は "mmmdd" である。
それ以外は "HH:MM" である。
T}

stat	STAT	T{
.\"O multi\-character process state.
.\"O See\ section \fBPROCESS STATE CODES\fR
.\"O for the different values meaning.
複数文字のプロセス状態。
それぞれの値の意味は、
「\fBプロセスの状態コード\fR」のセクションを参照すること。
.\"O See also \fBs\fR and \fBstate\fR if you just want
.\"O the first character displayed.
最初の文字のみを表示したい場合は、
\fBs\fR と \fBstate\fR も参照すること。
T}

state	S	T{
.\"O see\ \fBs\fR.  (alias\ \fBs\fR).
\fBs\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBs\fR)。
T}

suid	SUID	T{
.\"O saved user\ ID.  (alias\ \fBsvuid\fR).
保存ユーザー ID。(別名\ \fBsvuid\fR)。
T}

suser	SUSER	T{
.\"O saved user name.  This will be the textual user\ ID,
.\"O if\ it can be obtained and the field width permits,
.\"O or\ a\ decimal representation otherwise.
保存ユーザー名。
テキストのユーザー ID が取得できて、かつフィールド幅が許せば、
テキストで表示される。
それ以外の場合は 10 進数で表示される。
.\"O (alias\ \fBsvuser\fR).
(別名\ \fBsvuser\fR)。
T}

svgid	SVGID	T{
.\"O see\ \fBsgid\fR.  (alias\ \fBsgid\fR).
\fBsgid\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBsgid\fR).
T}

svuid	SVUID	T{
.\"O see\ \fBsuid\fR.  (alias\ \fBsuid\fR).
\fBsuid\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBsuid\fR)。
T}

sz	SZ	T{
.\"O size in physical pages of the core image of the process.
.\"O This includes text, data, and stack space.
プロセスのコアイメージの物理ページサイズ。
これにはテキスト・データ・スタック空間が含まれる。
.\"O Device mappings are currently excluded; this is subject to change.
.\"O See \fBvsz\fR and \fBrss\fR.
デバイスマッピングは現在のところ除外されているが、これは変更される。
\fBvsz\fR と \fBrss\fR を参照。
T}

thcount	THCNT	T{
.\"O see \fBnlwp\fR.  (alias\ \fBnlwp\fR).
.\"O number of kernel threads owned by the process.
\fBnlwp\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBnlwp\fR)。
プロセスが所有するカーネルスレッドの数。
T}

tid	TID	T{
.\"O see\ \fBlwp\fR.  (alias\ \fBlwp\fR).
\fBlwp\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBlwp\fR)。
T}

time	TIME	T{
.\"O cumulative CPU\ time, "[dd\-]hh:mm:ss" format.  (alias\ \fBcputime\fR).
累積した CPU 時間。"[dd\-]hh:mm:ss" フォーマットで表示される。
(別名\ \fBcputime\fR)。
T}

tname	TTY	T{
.\"O controlling tty (terminal).
.\"O (alias\ \fBtt\fR,\ \fBtty\fR).
制御端末 (tty)。
(別名\ \fBtt\fR,\ \fBtty\fR)。
T}

tpgid	TPGID	T{
.\"O ID of the foreground process group on the tty (terminal) that
.\"O the process is connected to, or \-1 if the process is not connected
.\"O to a tty.
プロセスが接続されている端末 (tty) 上の
フォアグラウンドプロセスグループの ID。
プロセスが端末に接続されていない場合は \-1 である。
T}

tt	TT	T{
.\"O controlling tty (terminal).  (alias\ \fBtname\fR,\ \fBtty\fR).
制御端末 (tty)。(別名\ \fBtname\fR,\ \fBtty\fR)。
T}

tty	TT	T{
.\"O controlling tty (terminal).  (alias\ \fBtname\fR,\ \fBtt\fR).
制御端末 (tty)。(別名\ \fBtname\fR,\ \fBtt\fR)。
T}

ucmd	CMD	T{
.\"O see \fBcomm\fR.  (alias\ \fBcomm\fR,\ \fBucomm\fR).
\fBcomm\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBcomm\fR,\ \fBucomm\fR)。
T}

ucomm	COMMAND	T{
.\"O see \fBcomm\fR.  (alias\ \fBcomm\fR,\ \fBucmd\fR).
\fBcomm\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBcomm\fR,\ \fBucmd\fR)。
T}

uid	UID	T{
.\"O see \fBeuid\fR.  (alias\ \fBeuid\fR).
\fBeuid\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBeuid\fR)。
T}

uname	USER	T{
.\"O see \fBeuser\fR.  (alias\ \fBeuser\fR,\ \fBuser\fR).
\fBeuser\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBeuser\fR,\ \fBuser\fR)。
T}

user	USER	T{
.\"O see \fBeuser\fR.  (alias\ \fBeuser\fR,\ \fBuname\fR).
\fBeuser\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBeuser\fR,\ \fBuname\fR)。
T}

vsize	VSZ	T{
.\"O see \fBvsz\fR.  (alias\ \fBvsz\fR).
\fBvsz\fR を参照。(別名\ \fBvsz\fR)。
T}

vsz	VSZ	T{
.\"O virtual memory size of the process in KiB (1024\-byte\ units).
.\"O Device mappings are currently excluded; this is subject to change.
.\"O (alias\ \fBvsize\fR).
プロセスの仮想メモリサイズ (KiB, 1024 バイト単位)。
デバイスマッピングは現在のところ除外されているが、これは変更される。
(別名\ \fBvsize\fR)。
T}

wchan	WCHAN	T{
.\"O name of the kernel function in which the process is sleeping,
.\"O a\ "\-"\ if the process is running,
.\"O or a "*"\ if the process is multi\-threaded and
.\"O \fBps\fR is not displaying threads.
プロセスがスリープしているカーネル関数の名前。
プロセスが実行中の場合は "\-" である。
プロセスがマルチスレッドで、
かつ \fBps\fR がスレッドを表示していない場合は、"*" である。
T}
.TE
.\" #######################################################################
.PP
.PP
.\"O .SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.SH 環境変数
.\"O The following environment variables could affect \fBps\fR:
以下の環境変数が \fBps\fR に影響する:
.TP 3
.B COLUMNS
.\"O Override default display width.
デフォルトのディスプレイの幅を変更する。
.TP
.B LINES
.\"O Override default display height.
デフォルトのディスプレイの高さを変更する。
.TP
.B PS_PERSONALITY
.\"O Set to one of posix, old, linux, bsd, sun, digital...
posix, old, linux, bsd, sun, digital のどれかに設定する。
.\"O (see\ section\ \fBPERSONALITY\fR\ below).
(以下の「\fB流儀\fR\」のセクションを参照)。
.TP
.B CMD_ENV
.\"O Set to one of posix, old, linux, bsd, sun, digital...
posix, old, linux, bsd, sun, digital のどれかに設定する。
.\"O (see\ section\ \fBPERSONALITY\fR\ below).
(以下の「\fB流儀\fR\」のセクションを参照)。
.TP
.B I_WANT_A_BROKEN_PS
.\"O Force obsolete command line interpretation.
obsolete なコマンドラインの解釈に強制する。
.TP
.B LC_TIME
.\"O Date format.
日付のフォーマット。
.TP
.B PS_COLORS
.\"O Not currently supported.
現在のところサポートされていない。
.TP
.B PS_FORMAT
.\"O Default output format override. You may set this to a format
.\"O string of the type used for the \fB\-o\fR option.
デフォルトの出力フォーマットを上書きする。
\fB\-o\fR オプションで使われるタイプを表す
フォーマット文字列にこの値を設定できる。
.\"O The \fBDefSysV\fR and \fBDefBSD\fR values are particularly useful.
\fBDefSysV\fR と \fBDefBSD\fR という値が特に役立つ。
.TP
.B PS_SYSMAP
.\"O Default namelist (System.map) location.
名前リスト (System.map) のデフォルトの場所。
.TP
.B PS_SYSTEM_MAP
.\"O Default namelist (System.map) location.
名前リスト (System.map) のデフォルトの場所。
.TP
.B POSIXLY_CORRECT
.\"O Don't find excuses to ignore bad "features".
良くない「仕様」を無視する際に言い訳をしない。
.TP
.B POSIX2
.\"O When set to "on", acts as \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR.
"on" に設定されると、\fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR として振舞う。
.TP
.B UNIX95
.\"O Don't find excuses to ignore bad "features".
良くない「仕様」を無視する際に言い訳をしない。
.TP
.B _XPG
.\"O Cancel \fBCMD_ENV\fI=irix\fR non\-standard behavior.
\fBCMD_ENV\fI=irix\fR の非標準的な振舞いをキャンセルする。
.PP
.\"O In general, it\ is a bad idea to set these variables.
一般にはこれらの変数を設定するのはあまり良い考えではない。
.\"O The one exception is \fBCMD_ENV\fR or \fBPS_PERSONALITY\fR,
.\"O which could be set to Linux for normal systems.
唯一の例外は \fBCMD_ENV\fR または \fBPS_PERSONALITY\fR である。
これらは Linux を正常なシステムにする。
.\"O Without that setting,
.\"O \fBps\fR follows the useless and bad parts of the Unix98 standard.
この設定を行わないと、\fBps\fR は Unix98 標準における
役に立たない悪い部分に従う。
.PP
.PP
.\"O .SH "PERSONALITY"
.SH 流儀
.TS
l	l.
.\"O 390	like the S/390 OpenEdition \fBps\fR
390	S/390 OpenEdition の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O aix	like AIX \fBps\fR
aix	AIX の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O bsd	like FreeBSD \fBps\fR (totally\ non\-standard)
bsd	FreeBSD の \fBps\fR のように振舞う (全く標準的ではない)
.\"O compaq	like Digital Unix \fBps\fR
compaq	Digital Unix の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O debian	like the old Debian \fBps\fR
debian	古い Debian の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O digital	like Tru64 (was Digital\ Unix, was OSF/1) \fBps\fR
digital	Tru64 (かつての Digital\ Unix または OSF/1) の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O gnu	like the old Debian \fBps\fR
gnu	古い Debian の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O hp	like HP\-UX \fBps\fR
hp	HP\-UX の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O hpux	like HP\-UX \fBps\fR
hpux	HP\-UX の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O irix	like Irix \fBps\fR
irix	Irix の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O linux	***** RECOMMENDED *****
linux	***** 推奨される *****
.\"O old	like the original Linux \fBps\fR (totally\ non\-standard)
old	古い Linux の \fBps\fR のように振舞う (全く標準的ではない)
.\"O os390	like OS/390 Open Edition \fBps\fR
os390	OS/390 Open Edition の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O posix	standard
posix	標準
.\"O s390	like OS/390 Open Edition \fBps\fR
s390	OS/390 Open Edition の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O sco	like SCO \fBps\fR
sco	SCO の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O sgi	like Irix \fBps\fR
sgi	Irix の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O solaris2	like Solaris 2+ (SunOS 5) \fBps\fR
solaris2	Solaris 2+ (SunOS 5) の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O sunos4	like SunOS 4 (Solaris 1) \fBps\fR (totally\ non\-standard)
sunos4	SunOS 4 (Solaris 1) の \fBps\fR のように振舞う (全く標準的ではない)
.\"O svr4	standard
svr4	標準
.\"O sysv	standard
sysv	標準
.\"O tru64	like Tru64 (was Digital\ Unix, was OSF/1) \fBps\fR
tru64	Tru64 (かつての Digital\ Unix または OSF/1) の \fBps\fR のように振舞う
.\"O unix	standard
unix	標準
.\"O unix95	standard
unix95	標準
.\"O unix98	standard
unix98	標準
.TE
.PP
.PP
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
\fItop\fR(1), \fIpgrep\fR(1), \fIpstree\fR(1), \fIproc\fR(5).
.PP
.PP
.\"O .SH STANDARDS
.SH 準拠
.\"O This \fBps\fR conforms to:
この \fBps\fR は以下に準拠する:
.PP
.PD 0
.IP 1 4
Version 2 of the Single Unix Specification
.IP 2 4
The Open Group Technical Standard Base Specifications, Issue\ 6
.IP 3 4
IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004\ Edition
.IP 4 4
X/Open System Interfaces Extension [UP\ XSI]
.IP 5 4
ISO/IEC 9945:2003
.PD
.PP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O \fBps\fR was originally written by Branko Lankester <lankeste@fwi.uva.nl>. 
Branko Lankester <lankeste@fwi.uva.nl> が最初に \fBps\fR を書いた。
.\"O Michael
.\"O K. Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com> re\-wrote it significantly to use the proc
.\"O filesystem, changing a few things in the process. 
Michael K. Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com> は
proc ファイルシステムに対応させるための大幅な書き換えを行った。
プロセス内のいくつかの項目を変更した。
.\"O Michael Shields
.\"O <mjshield@nyx.cs.du.edu> added the pid\-list feature. 
Michael Shields <mjshield@nyx.cs.du.edu> は pid リスト機能を追加した。
.\"O Charles Blake
.\"O <cblake@bbn.com> added multi\-level sorting, the dirent\-style library, the
.\"O device name\-to\-number mmaped database, the approximate binary search
.\"O directly on System.map, and many code and documentation cleanups. 
Charles Blake <cblake@bbn.com> は、複数レベルのソート・
dirent 形式のライブラリ・デバイス名−番号間の mmap データベース・
直接 System.map を二分木的に探索する手法、を追加し、
コードとドキュメントの大幅な整理を行った。
.\"O David
.\"O Mossberger\-Tang wrote the generic BFD support for psupdate. 
David Mosberger-Tang は psupdate のジェネリックな BFD サポートを書いた。
.\"O Albert Cahalan
.\"O <albert@users.sf.net> rewrote ps for full Unix98 and BSD support, along with
.\"O some ugly hacks for obsolete and foreign syntax.
Albert Cahalan <albert@users.sf.net>
は ps を書き直して Unix98 と BSD への完全な対応を行った。
obsolete な文法や外来の文法に関するあまり美しくないハックも行った。

.\"O Please send bug reports to <procps\-feedback@lists.sf.net>.
.\"O No\ subscription is required or suggested.
バグ報告は <procps\-feedback@lists.sf.net> まで送って欲しい。
(訳註: このメーリングリストの) 購読の必要もないし、奨めもしない。
