'\" t
.\" (The preceding line is a note to broken versions of man to tell
.\" them to pre-process this man page with tbl)
.\" Man page for skill and snice.
.\" Licensed under version 2 of the GNU General Public License.
.\" Written by Albert Cahalan, converted to a man page by
.\" Michael K. Johnson
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Jul 15 02:16:51 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH SKILL 1 "March 12, 1999" "Linux" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O skill, snice \- send a signal or report process status
.SH 名前
skill, snice \- プロセスにシグナルを送る / プロセスの優先度を変更する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
skill [signal to send] [options] process selection criteria
snice [new priority] [options] process selection criteria
.fi

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The default signal for skill is TERM. Use -l or -L to list available signals.
.\"O Particularly useful signals include HUP, INT, KILL, STOP, CONT, and 0.
.\"O Alternate signals may be specified in three ways: -9 -SIGKILL -KILL.
skill のデフォルトのシグナルは TERM である。
-l や -L を用いると、指定できるシグナルをリストできる。
特に便利なシグナルには HUP, INT, KILL, STOP, CONT, 0 などがある。
デフォルト以外のシグナルの指定方法は 3 つある。 -9 -SIGKILL -KILL。

.\"O The default priority for snice is +4. (snice +4 ...)
.\"O Priority numbers range from +20 (slowest) to -20 (fastest).
.\"O Negative priority numbers are restricted to administrative users.
snice のデフォルトの優先度は +4 である (snice +4 ...)。
優先度の番号は +20 (最も遅い) から -20 (最も速い) までである。
負の優先度の数値は管理権限のあるメンバーしか指定できない。

.\"O .SH "GENERAL OPTIONS"
.SH 一般のオプション
.TS
l l l.
.\"O -f	fast mode	This is not currently useful.
.\"O -i	interactive use	T{
.\"O You will be asked to approve each action.
.\"O T}
.\"O -v	verbose output	T{
.\"O Display information about selected processes.
.\"O T}
.\"O -w	warnings enabled	This is not currently useful.
.\"O -n	no action	This only displays the process ID.
.\"O -V	show version	Displays version of program.
-f	高速モード	今のところあまり効果がない
-i	対話モード	T{
各アクションの前に確認を求める
T}
-v	詳細表示モード	T{
選択されたプロセスに関する情報を表示する
T}
-w	警告を有効にする	今のところあまり効果がない
-n	非実行モード	プロセス ID の表示だけを行う
-V	バージョン表示	プログラムのバージョンを表示する
.TE

.\"O .SH "PROCESS SELECTION OPTIONS"
.SH プロセス選択オプション
.\"O Selection criteria can be: terminal, user, pid, command.
.\"O The options below may be used to ensure correct interpretation.
プロセス選択基準 (process selection criteria) は、
端末・ユーザー名・プロセスID・コマンド名のいずれかである。
以下のオプションを指定すると、解釈方法を明示できる。
.\"O Do not blame Albert for this interesting interface.
このおもしろいインタフェースについては Albert を責めないで欲しい。
.TS
l l.
.\"O -t	The next argument is a terminal (tty or pty).
.\"O -u	The next argument is a username.
.\"O -p	The next argument is a process ID number.
.\"O -c	The next argument is a command name.
-t	次の引数は端末である (tty または pty)
-u	次の引数はユーザー名である
-p	次の引数はプロセス ID 番号である
-c	次の引数はコマンド名である
.TE

.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O The signals listed below may be available for use with skill.
.\"O When known, numbers and default behavior are shown.
以下に skill で使える可能性のあるシグナルのリストを示す。
わかるものについては番号とデフォルトの動作も示す。
.TS
lB rB lB lB
lfCW r l l.
.\"O Name	Num	Action	Description
名前	番号	アクション	説明
.TH
.\"O 0	0	n/a	exit code indicates if a signal may be sent
0	0	n/a	シグナルを送った場合の終了コードを取得する
ALRM	14	exit
HUP	1	exit
INT	2	exit
.\"O KILL	9	exit	this signal may not be blocked
KILL	9	exit	このシグナルはブロックされない
PIPE	13	exit
POLL		exit
PROF		exit
TERM	15	exit
USR1		exit
USR2		exit
VTALRM		exit
.\"O STKFLT		exit	may not be implemented
STKFLT		exit	実装されていないかもしれない
.\"O PWR		ignore	may exit on some systems
PWR		ignore	T{
システムによっては終了 (exit) するかもしれない
T}
WINCH		ignore
CHLD		ignore
URG		ignore
.\"O TSTP		stop	may interact with the shell
TSTP		stop	シェルと相互作用するかもしれない
.\"O TTIN		stop	may interact with the shell
TTIN		stop	シェルと相互作用するかもしれない
.\"O TTOU		stop	may interact with the shell
TTOU		stop	シェルと相互作用するかもしれない
.\"O STOP		stop	this signal may not be blocked
STOP		stop	このシグナルはブロックされない
.\"O CONT		restart	continue if stopped, otherwise ignore
CONT		restart	停止 (stop) 状態なら再開、その他なら無視
ABRT	6	core
FPE	8	core
ILL	4	core
QUIT	3	core
SEGV	11	core
TRAP	5	core
.\"O SYS		core	may not be implemented
.\"O EMT		core	may not be implemented
.\"O BUS		core	core dump may fail
.\"O XCPU		core	core dump may fail
.\"O XFSZ		core	core dump may fail
SYS		core	実装されていないかもしれない
EMT		core	実装されていないかもしれない
BUS		core	コアダンプは失敗するかもしれない
XCPU		core	コアダンプは失敗するかもしれない
XFSZ		core	コアダンプは失敗するかもしれない
.TE

.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.TS
lB lB
lfCW l.
.\"O Command	Description
コマンド	説明
.TC
.\"O snice seti crack +7	Slow down seti and crack
.\"O skill -KILL -v /dev/pts/*	Kill users on new-style PTY devices
.\"O skill -STOP viro lm davem	Stop 3 users
.\"O snice -17 root bash	Give priority to root's shell
snice seti crack +7	seti と crack の速度を落とす
skill -KILL -v /dev/pts/*	T{
新スタイルの PTY デバイスのユーザーを kill する
T}
skill -STOP viro lm davem	3 人のユーザーを stop する
snice -17 root bash	root のシェルを優先する
.TE

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O killall(1) pkill(1) kill(1) renice(1) nice(1) signal(7) kill(2)
.BR killall (1),
.BR pkill (1),
.BR kill (1),
.BR renice (1),
.BR nice (1),
.BR signal (7),
.BR kill (2)

.\"O .SH STANDARDS
.SH 準拠
.\"O No standards apply.
対応する標準はない。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Albert Cahalan <albert@users.sf.net> wrote skill and snice in 1999 as a
.\"O replacement for a non-free version, and is the current maintainer of the
.\"O procps collection. Please send bug reports to <procps-feedback@lists.sf.net>.
Albert Cahalan <albert@users.sf.net> が 1999 年に
non-free 版の代わりとして skill と snice を書き、
procps コレクションの現在のメンテナである。
バグ報告は <procps-feedback@lists.sf.net> まで送って欲しい。
