.\" slabtop.1 - manpage for the slabtop(1) utility, part of procps
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2003 Chris Rivera
.\" Licensed under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License, v2
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Nov  6 12:32:35 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	criteria	基準
.\"
.TH SLABTOP 1 "13 Sep 2003" "Linux" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O slabtop \- display kernel slab cache information in real time
slabtop \- リアルタイムにカーネル slab キャッシュ情報を表示する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "slabtop [ " options " ] "

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR slabtop (1)
.\"O displays detailed kernel slab cache information in real time.  It displays a
.\"O listing of the top caches sorted by one of the listed sort criterias.  It also
.\"O displays a statistics header filled with slab layer information.
.BR slabtop (1)
はリアルタイムに詳細なカーネル slab キャッシュ情報を表示する。
キャッシュ情報の上位を、ソート基準に挙げられている
基準のいずれかでソートして、リストで表示する。
また slab レイヤ情報が書かれた統計情報ヘッダも表示する。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O Normal invocation of 
.\"O .BR slabtop (1)
.\"O does not require any options.  The behavior, however, can be fine-tuned by
.\"O specifying one or more of the following flags:
通常は
.BR slabtop (1)
の起動にオプションは必要ない。
しかし以下のオプションを 1 つ以上指定することで、動作を微調整できる。
.TP
.B \-\^\-delay=n, \-d n
.\"O Refresh the display every n seconds.  By default,
.\"O .BR slabtop (1)
.\"O refreshes the display every three seconds.  To exit the program, hit
.\"O .BR q.
n 秒毎に表示を更新する。
デフォルトでは
.BR slabtop (1)
は 3 秒毎に表示を更新する。
プログラムを終了するには
.B q
を入力すること。
.TP
.B \-\^\-sort=S, \-s S
.\"O Sort by S, where S is one of the sort criteria.
S でソートする。ここで S はいずれかのソート基準である。
.TP
.B \-\^\-once, \-o
.\"O Display the output once and then exit.
出力を 1 回表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-\^\-version, \-V
.\"O Display version information and exit.
バージョン情報を表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-\^\-help
.\"O Display usage information and exit.
使用法の情報を表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH SORT CRITERIA
.SH ソート基準
.\"O The following are valid sort criteria used to sort the individual slab caches
.\"O and thereby determine what are the "top" slab caches to display.  The default
.\"O sort criteria is to sort by the number of objects ("o").
以下は各 slab キャッシュのソートに使用できる有効なソート基準であり、
表示する「上位 (top)」の slab キャッシュがどれであるかを決定する。
デフォルトのソート基準はオブジェクト数によるソート ("o") である。

.\"O The sort criteria can also be changed while slabtop is running by pressing
.\"O the associated character.
slabtop の実行中に対応する文字を押すことにより、
ソート基準を変更することができる。
.TP
.BR a: 
.\"O sort by number of active objects
アクティブなオブジェクト数でソートする。
.TP
.BR b: 
.\"O sort by objects per slab
slab 毎のオブジェクト数でソートする。
.TP
.BR c: 
.\"O sort by cache size
キャッシュサイズでソートする。
.TP
.BR l: 
.\"O sort by number of slabs
slab 数でソートする。
.TP
.BR v
.\"O sort by number of active slabs
アクティブな slab 数でソートする。
.TP
.BR n: 
.\"O sort by name
名前でソートする。
.TP
.BR o: 
.\"O sort by number of objects
オブジェクト数でソートする。
.TP
.BR p: 
.\"O sort by pages per slab
slab 毎のページ数でソートする。
.TP
.BR s: 
.\"O sort by object size
オブジェクトサイズでソートする。
.TP
.BR u: 
.\"O sort by cache utilization
キャッシュ利用率でソートする。

.\"O .SH COMMANDS
.SH コマンド
.\"O .BR slabtop (1)
.\"O accepts keyboard commands from the user during use.  The following are
.\"O supported.  In the case of letters, both cases are accepted.
.BR slabtop (1)
は実行中にユーザからのキーボードコマンドを受け付ける。
以下のコマンドがサポートされている。
文字の場合は大文字・小文字ともに受け付ける。

.\"O Each of the valid sort characters are also accepted, to change the sort
.\"O routine. See the section
.\"O .IR "SORT CRITERIA" .
有効な各ソート文字も受け付け、ソートルーチンを変更する。
\fI「ソート基準」\fRのセクションを参照すること。

.TP
.\"O .BR <SPACEBAR>
.BR <スペースバー>
.\"O Refresh the screen.
スクリーンを再描画する。
.TP
.BR Q
.\"O Quit the program.
プログラムを終了する。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .IR /proc/slabinfo " \-\- slab information"
.IR /proc/slabinfo " \-\- slab 情報"

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR free (1),
.BR ps (1),
.BR top (1),
.BR vmstat (8)

.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Currently,
.\"O .BR slabtop (1)
.\"O requires a 2.4 or later kernel (specifically, a version 1.1 or later
.\"O .IR /proc/slabinfo ).
現在のところ、
.BR slabtop (1)
は 2.4 以降のカーネル (特にバージョン 1.1 またはそれ以降の
.IR /proc/slabinfo )
が必要である。
.\"O Kernel 2.2 should be supported in the future.
カーネル 2.2 は将来サポートされるだろう。

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O Written by Chris Rivera and Robert Love.
Chris Rivera と Robert Love によって書かれた。

.\"O .BR slabtop (1)
.\"O was inspired by Martin Bligh's perl script,
.\"O .BR vmtop .
.BR slabtop (1)
は Martin Bligh の perl スクリプト
.B vmtop
に触発されて書かれた。

.\"O The procps package is maintained by Robert Love and was created by Michael
.\"O Johnson.
procps パッケージは Robert Love によってメンテナンスされており、
Michael Johnson によって作られた。

.\"O Send bug reports to <procps-list@redhat.com>.
バグ報告は <procps-list@redhat.com> まで送って欲しい。
