.\"             -*-Nroff-*-
.\"  This page Copyright (C) 1993 Matt Welsh, mdw@tc.cornell.edu.
.\"  Freely distributable under the terms of the GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH TLOAD 1 "20 Mar 1993 " "Cohesive Systems" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O tload \- graphic representation of system load average
.SH 名前
tload \- システムの負荷をグラフィカルに表示する
.\"nakano 「負荷平均」はなんか変な気がするので...
.\"nakano 「ロードアベレージ」でしょうか。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B tload
.RB [ "\-V" "] [" "\-s"
.IR scale "] ["
.BI "\-d" " delay"
.RI "] [" tty ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBtload\fP prints a graph of the current system load average to the 
.\"O specified \fItty\fP (or the tty of the tload process if none is specified).
.B tload
は現在のシステムの負荷 (load average) を、
指定された
.I tty
にグラフで表示する
(指定されなければ tload プロセスの tty に表示する)。
.\"O .SS Options
.SS オプション
.\"O The
.\"O .BI "\-s" " scale"
.\"O option allows a vertical scale to be specified for the
.\"O display (in characters between graph ticks); thus, a smaller value
.\"O represents a larger scale, and vice versa.
.BI "\-s" " scale"
オプションは画面上の縦軸を設定する。
load average 1 に対応するグラフのひと目盛が、
.I scale
文字分になる。したがって小さい値を設定すると
スケールは大きくなる。逆も同じ。

.\"O The
.\"O .BI "\-d" " delay"
.\"O sets the delay between graph updates in seconds.
.BI "\-d" " delay"
はグラフの更新間隔を秒単位で指定する。
.PP
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /proc/loadavg
.\"O load average information
負荷情報

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ps (1),
.BR top (1),
.BR uptime (1),
.BR w (1)

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The
.\"O .BI "\-d" " delay"
.\"O option sets the time argument for an
.\"O .BR alarm (2);
.\"O if -d 0 is specified, the alarm is set to 0, which will never send the
.\"O .B SIGALRM
.\"O and update the display.
.BI "\-d" " delay"
オプションは引き数の時間を
.BR alarm (2)
に設定する。 \-d 0 を指定すると alarm は 0 となり、
.B SIGALRM
は決して送信されず、画面は更新されない。

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O Branko Lankester, David Engel <david@ods.com>, and 
.\"O Michael K. Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com>.
Branko Lankester, David Engel <david@ods.com> および
Michael K. Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com>。

.\"O Please send bug reports to <albert@users.sf.net>
バグ報告は <albert@users.sf.net> まで送って欲しい。

