.ig
. manual page for NEW top
. Copyright (c) 2002, by:      JC Warner & Associates, Ltd.
.
. Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
. under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
. any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
. with no Front-Cover Texts, no Back-Cover Texts, and with the following
. Invariant Sections (and any sub-sections therein):
.   all .ig sections, including this one
.   STUPID TRICKS Sampler
.   AUTHOR
.
. A copy of the Free Documentation License is included in the section
. entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".
.
. [ that section is found near the end of this document & ]
. [ can be made printable by disabling the .ig directive! ]
.
..
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Dec 17 12:21:22 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	cumulative mode		累積モード
.\"WORD:	collating sequence	照合順序
.\"
.\" Setup ////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
\#  ** Comment out '.nr' or set to 0 to eliminate WIDTH fiddlin' !
.nr half_xtra 4
.
.ll +(\n[half_xtra] + \n[half_xtra])
.
\#                      Our darn Bullet style ----------------------------
.de Jbu
.IP "-" 3
..
\#                          - bullet continuation paragraph
.de Jp
.IP "" 3
..
\#                      New features/differences style -------------------
.de New
.IP "-*-" 5
..
.
.\"O \#                      Commonly used strings (for consistency) ----------
\#                      一般に使われる文字列 (一貫性のため) ----------
\#                          - a real em-dash, darn-it
.ds EM \ \fB\-\-\ \fR
\#                          - these two are for chuckles, makes great grammar
.ds Me top
.ds ME \fBtop\fR
\#                          - other misc strings for consistent usage/emphasis
.ds F \fIOff\fR
.ds O \fIOn\fR
.
.\"O .ds AM alternate\-display mode
.ds AM 別形式の表示モード
.\"O .ds AS asterisk ('*')
.ds AS アスタリスク ('*')
.\"O .ds CF configuration file
.ds CF 設定ファイル
.\"O .ds CI interactive command
.ds CI 対話的コマンド
.\"O .ds CO command\-line option
.ds CO コマンドラインオプション
.\"O .ds CW \'current' window
.ds CW \「カレント」ウィンドウ
.\"O .ds FM full\-screen mode
.ds FM フルスクリーンモード
.\"O .ds MP \fBphysical\fR memory
.ds MP \fB物理\fRメモリ
.\"O .ds MS \fBshared\fR memory
.ds MS \fB共有\fRメモリ
.\"O .ds MV \fBvirtual\fR memory
.ds MV \fB仮想\fRメモリ
.\"O .ds NT \fBNote\fR:
.ds NT \fB注意\fR:
.ds PU CPU
.ds Pu cpu
.\"O .ds SA summary area
.ds SA サマリーエリア
.\"O .ds TA task area
.ds TA タスクエリア
.\"O .ds TD task display
.ds TD タスク表示
.\"O .ds TW task window
.ds TW タスクウィンドウ
\#                          - xref's that depend on commands or topic names
.\"O .ds XC See the
.\"O .ds Xc see the
.\"O .ds XT See topic
.\"O .ds Xt see topic
.ds XC を参照すること
.ds Xc を参照すること
.ds XT の話題を参照すること
.ds Xt の話題を参照すること
.
.\" //////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH TOP 1 "September 2002" "Linux" "Linux User's Manual"
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O top \- display Linux tasks
top \- Linux のタスクを表示する


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
\*(ME \-\fBhv\fR | \-\fBbcisS\fR \-\fBd\fI delay\fR \-\fBn\fI
iterations\fR \-\fBp\fI pid\fR [,\fI pid\fR ...]

.\"O The traditional switches '-' and whitespace are optional.
昔からのスイッチ '-' と空白の指定は任意である。


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The \*(ME program provides a dynamic real-time view of a running system.
\*(ME プログラムは稼働中のシステムの
動的なリアルタイムの概要を報告する。
.\"O It can display\fB system\fR summary information as well as a list of\fB
.\"O tasks\fR currently being managed by the Linux kernel.
Linux カーネルが現在管理している\fBタスク\fRの一覧だけでなく、
\fBシステム\fRの概要情報も表示できる。
.\"O The types of system summary information shown and the types, order and
.\"O size of information displayed for tasks are all user configurable and
.\"O that configuration can be made persistent across restarts.
表示されるシステムの概要情報のタイプと
各タスクについて表示される情報のタイプ・順序・サイズは、
ユーザーが全て設定可能で、その設定は次に起動したときにも保存できる。

.\"O The program provides a limited interactive interface for process
.\"O manipulation as well as a much more extensive interface for personal
.\"O configuration \*(EM encompassing every aspect of its operation.
このプログラムはプロセスの操作に関する
限定された対話型インタフェースだけでなく、
個人用の設定についての特に拡張されたインタフェースも提供している。
\*(EM 操作の全ての面についての包括的なインタフェースを提供している。
.\"O And while \*(ME is referred to throughout this document, you are free
.\"O to name the program anything you wish.
このプログラムは、この文書を通して \*(ME という名前で呼ばれているが、
希望する任意の名前にすることができる。
.\"O That new name, possibly an alias, will then be reflected on \*(Me's display
.\"O and used when reading and writing a \*(CF.
新しい名前 (エイリアスでもよい) は、\*(Me の表示に反映され、
\*(CFを読み書きの際に使用される。

.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH OVERVIEW
.SH 概要
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS Documentation
.SS ドキュメント
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The remaining Table of Contents
これ以降の目次
.\"O     1. COMMAND\-LINE Options
    1. コマンドラインオプション
.\"O     2. FIELDS / Columns
.\"O        a. DESCRIPTIONS of Fields
.\"O        b. SELECTING and ORDERING Columns
    2. フィールド / カラム
       a. フィールドの説明
       b. カラムの選択と順序指定
.\"O     3. INTERACTIVE Commands
.\"O        a. GLOBAL Commands
.\"O        b. SUMMARY Area Commands
.\"O        c. TASK Area Commands
.\"O        d. COLOR Mapping
    3. 対話的コマンド
       a. グローバルなコマンド
       b. サマリーエリアのコマンド
       c. タスクエリアのコマンド
       d. カラーマップ
.\"O     4. ALTERNATE\-DISPLAY Mode
.\"O        a. WINDOWS Overview
.\"O        b. COMMANDS for Windows
    4. 別形式の表示モード
       a. ウィンドウの概要
       b. ウィンドウのコマンド
.\"O     5. FILES
.\"O        a. SYSTEM Configuration File
.\"O        b. PERSONAL Configuration File
    5. ファイル
       a. システム設定ファイル
       b. 個人設定ファイル
.\"O     6. STUPID TRICKS Sampler
.\"O        a. Kernel Magic
.\"O        b. Bouncing Windows
.\"O        c. The Big Bird Window
    6. くだらないトリックの例
       a. カーネルのトリック
       b. バウンドするウィンドウ
       c. 大きな雛鳥のようなウィンドウ
.\"O     7. BUGS, 8. HISTORY Former top, 9. AUTHOR, 10. SEE ALSO
    7. バグ, 8. 以前の top の履歴, 9. 著者, 10. 関連項目

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS Operation
.SS 操作
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O When operating \*(Me, the two most important keys are help ('h' or '?') and
.\"O quit ('q') key.
.\"O Alternatively, you could simply use the traditional interrupt key ('^C')
.\"O when you're done.
\*(Me を操作するときの最も重要な 2 つのキーは、
ヘルプ ('h' または '?') と終了 ('q') キーである。
終了させるときには、代わりとして、
単純に昔からの割り込みキー ('^C') を使うこともできる。

.\"O When you start \*(Me for the first time, you'll be presented with the
.\"O traditional screen elements: 1) Summary Area; 2) Message/Prompt Line;
.\"O 3) Columns Header; 4) Task Area.
.\"O There will, however, be some differences when compared to the former top.
最初に \*(Me を起動する場合、
昔からの以下のスクリーンの要素が表示される: 
1) サマリーエリア; 2) メッセージ/プロンプト行
3) カラムヘッダ; 4) タスクエリア。
しかし、以前の \*(Me と比較すると、いくつかの違いがある。

.TP 3
.\"O .B Highlighting
.B ハイライト
.\"O .I Summary_Area\fR:
.I サマリーエリア\fR:
.\"O There is no highlighting for load/uptime and only values are highlighted for
.\"O other elements.
負荷 (load) / 稼働時間 (uptime) の値はハイライトされず、
その他の要素の値のみがハイライトされる。

.\"O .I Task_Area\fR:
.\"O Tasks running (or ready to run) will be highlighted, and bold is only one way
.\"O of emphasizing such processes.
.I タスクエリア\fR:
実行中 (または実行の準備がされている) のタスクがハイライトされる。
これらのプロセスを強調する唯一の手段は太字で表示することである。

.TP 3
.\"O .B Content/Labels
.B 内容/ラベル
.\"O .I Summary_Area\fR:
.I サマリーエリア\fR:
.\"O The program name is shown, perhaps a symlink or alias.
プログラム名が表示される。
シンボリックリンク名またはエイリアスが表示される場合もある。
.\"O The Cpu(s) state label hints at other possibilities.
Cpu(s) 状態ラベルは他のものが表示される可能性を暗に示している。
.\"O The memory stats use a lower case 'k'.
メモリ統計では小文字 'k' が使用される。

.\"O .I Columns_Header\fR:
.\"O Will show a new field and some changed labels.
.\"O More new fields will be found as you customize your \*(Me.
.I カラムヘッダ\fR:
新しいフィールドといくつかの変更されたラベルが表示される。
\*(Me をカスタマイズすれば新しいフィールドが更に表示される。

.PP
.\"O \*(NT the width of \*(Me's display will be limited to 512 positions.
.\"O Displaying all fields requires a minimum of 160 characters.
.\"O The remaining width could be used for the 'Command' column.
\*(NT \*(Me の表示は 512 文字に制限される。
全てのフィールドを表示するためには最低 160 文字が必要である。
残りの幅は 'Command' カラムに使用できる。

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS Startup Defaults
.SS 起動時のデフォルト値
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The following startup defaults assume no \*(CF, thus no user customizations.
.\"O Even so, items shown with an \*(AS could be overridden through the
.\"O command-line.
以下の起動時のデフォルトは、\*(CFの使用を仮定していないので、
ユーザーはカスタマイズできない。
しかし、\*(AS の付いたコマンドはコマンドラインで上書きできる。

.\"O     \fIGlobal_defaults\fR
.\"O        'A' - Alt display      Off (full-screen)
.\"O      * 'd' - Delay time       3.0 seconds
.\"O        'I' - Irix mode        On\ \ (no, 'solaris' smp)
.\"O      * 'p' - PID monitoring   Off
.\"O      * 's' - Secure mode      Off (unsecured)
.\"O        'B' - Bold disable     Off
    \fI全体のデフォルト\fR
       'A' - 別形式表示       Off (全画面)
     * 'd' - 遅延時間         3.0 秒
       'I' - Irix モード      On\ \ ('solaris' smp ではない)
     * 'p' - PID の監視       Off
     * 's' - セキュアモード     Off (非セキュアモード)
       'B' - 太字表示         Off
.\"O     \fISummary_Area_defaults\fR
.\"O        'l' - Load Avg/Uptime  On\ \ (thus program name)
.\"O        't' - Task/Cpu states  On\ \ (1+1 lines, see '1')
.\"O        'm' - Mem/Swap usage   On\ \ (2 lines worth)
.\"O        '1' - Single Cpu       On\ \ (thus 1 line if smp)
    \fIサマリーエリアのデフォルト\fR
       'l' - 負荷平均/稼働時間      On\ \ (プログラム名が表示される)
       't' - タスク/Cpu 統計        On\ \ (1+1 行。'1' を参照)
       'm' - メモリ/スワップ使用量  On\ \ (2 行を使う)
       '1' - シングル Cpu           On\ \ (smp の場合 1 行になる)
.\"O     \fITask_Area_defaults\fR
.\"O        'b' - Bold hilite      On\ \ (not 'reverse')
.\"O      * 'c' - Command line     Off (name, not cmdline)
.\"O      * 'i' - Idle tasks       On\ \ (show all tasks)
.\"O        'R' - Reverse sort     On\ \ (pids high-to-low)
.\"O      * 'S' - Cumulative time  Off (no, dead children)
.\"O        'x' - Column hilite    Off\ (no, sort field)
.\"O        'y' - Row hilite       On\ \ (yes, running tasks)
.\"O        'z' - color/mono       Off\ (no, colors)
    \fIタスクエリアのデフォルト\fR
       'b' - 太字によるハイライト   On\ \ (背景と前景を「反転」しない)
     * 'c' - コマンドライン         Off (コマンドラインではない名前)
     * 'i' - アイドルタスク         On\ \ (全てのタスクを表示する)
       'R' - 逆順ソート             On\ \ (pid の降順でソートする)
     * 'S' - 累積時間               Off (死んだ子プロセスを累積しない)
       'x' - カラムのハイライト     Off\ (フィールドをソートする)
       'y' - 行のハイライト         On\ \ (実行中のタスクが表示される)
       'z' - カラー/単色            Off\ (カラー表示しない)


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH 1. COMMAND-LINE Options
.SH 1. コマンドラインオプション
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The command-line syntax for \*(Me consists of:
\*(Me のコマンドラインの書式は、以下のように構成される:

     \-\fBhv\fR\ |\ -\fBbcisS\fR\ \-\fBd\fI\ delay\fR\ \-\fBn\fI\ iterations\
\fR\ \-\fBp\fI\ pid\fR\ [,\fIpid\fR...]

.\"O The typically mandatory switches ('-') and even whitespace are completely
.\"O optional.
一般には必須とされているスイッチ ('-') と空白でさえ、完全にオプションである。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBb\fR :\fB Batch mode\fR operation
\-\fBb\fR :\fB バッチモード\fR 操作
.\"O Starts \*(Me in 'Batch mode', which could be useful for sending output
.\"O from \*(Me to other programs or to a file.
.\"O In this mode, \*(Me will not accept input and runs until the iterations
.\"O limit you've set with the '-n' \*(CO or until killed.
\*(Me を「バッチモード」で起動する。
\*(Me の出力を他のプログラムやファイルに送る場合に役立つ。
このモードでは、\*(Me は入力を受け付けず、
\&'-n' \*(COで設定された繰り返し回数に達するか、
kill されるまで実行を続ける。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBc\fR :\fB Command line/Program name\fR toggle
\-\fBc\fR :\fB コマンドライン/プログラム名\fR トグル
.\"O Starts \*(Me with the last remembered 'c' state reversed.
.\"O Thus, if \*(Me was displaying command lines, now that field will show program
.\"O names, and visa versa.
.\"O \*(XC 'c' \*(CI for additional information.
最後に記録された 'c' の状態を逆にして、\*(Me を起動する。
よって、\*(Me がコマンドラインを表示していた場合は、プログラム名を表示する。
プログラム名を表示していた場合は、コマンドラインを表示する。
より詳しい情報は\*(CI 'c' \*(XC。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBd\fR :\fB Delay time\fR interval as:\ \ \fB-d ss.tt\fR (\fIseconds\fR.\fItenths\fR)
\-\fBd\fR :\fB 遅延時間\fR 間隔:\ \ \fB-d ss.tt\fR (\fI秒\fR.\fI1/10秒\fR)
.\"O Specifies the delay between screen updates, and overrides the corresponding
.\"O value in one's personal \*(CF or the startup default.
.\"O Later this can be changed with the 'd' or 's' \*(CIs.
スクリーンを更新する間隔を指定する。
ユーザー個人の\*(CFにあるこれに対応する値、
または起動時のデフォルトの値を上書きする。
実行後に\*(CI 'd' または 's' で変更できる。 

.\"O Fractional seconds are honored, but a negative number is not allowed.
.\"O In all cases, however, such changes are prohibited if \*(Me is running
.\"O in 'Secure mode', except for root (unless the 's' \*(CO was used).
.\"O For additional information on 'Secure mode' \*(Xt 5a. SYSTEM Configuration File.
小数点以下の秒も指定できるが、負数は許可されない。
しかし全ての場合において、
\*(Me が「セキュアモード」で実行されているときには、
このような変更は禁止されている。
ただし root の場合 (かつ\*(CO 's' が使われていない場合) は除く。
「セキュアモード」についてのより詳しい情報は、
「5a. システム設定ファイル」\*(Xt。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBh\fR :\fB Help\fR
\-\fBh\fR :\fB ヘルプ\fR
.\"O Show library version and the usage prompt, then quit.
ライブラリのバージョンと使用法のプロンプトを表示して、終了する。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBi\fR :\fB Idle Processes\fR toggle
\-\fBi\fR :\fB アイドルプロセス\fR トグル
.\"O Starts \*(Me with the last remembered 'i' state reversed.
.\"O When this toggle is \*F, tasks that are idled or zombied will not be displayed.
最後に記録された 'i' の状態を逆にして、\*(Me を起動する。
トグルが \*F の場合、アイドルタスクまたはゾンビタスクは表示されない。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBn\fR :\fB Number of iterations\fR limit as:\fB\ \ -n number\fR
\-\fBn\fR :\fB 繰り返し回数\fR 制限:\fB\ \ -n number\fR
.\"O Specifies the maximum number of iterations, or frames, \*(Me should
.\"O produce before ending.
\*(Me が終了するまでの繰り返し回数またはフレームの最大数を指定する。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBu\fR :\fB Monitor by user\fR as:\fB\ \ -u somebody
\-\fBu\fR :\fB ユーザーを指定して監視する\fR:\fB\ \ -u somebody
.\"O Monitor only processes with an effective UID or user name
.\"O matching that given.
指定された実効 UID または実効ユーザー名にマッチするプロセスのみを監視する。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBU\fR :\fB Monitor by user\fR as:\fB\ \ -U somebody
\-\fBU\fR :\fB ユーザーを指定して監視する\fR:\fB\ \ -U somebody
.\"O Monitor only processes with a UID or user name matching that given.
.\"O This matches real, effective, saved, and filesystem UIDs.
指定された UID またはユーザー名にマッチするプロセスのみを監視する。
実・実効・保存・ファイルシステム UID とマッチするものが選ばれる。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBp\fR :\fB Monitor PIDs\fR as:\fB\ \ -pN1 -pN2 ...\fR\ \ or\fB\ \ -pN1, N2 [,...]
\-\fBp\fR :\fB PID を指定して監視する\fR:\fB\ \ -pN1 -pN2 ...\fR\ \ または\fB\ \ -pN1, N2 [,...]
.\"O Monitor only processes with specified process IDs.
.\"O This option can be given up to 20 times, or you can provide a comma delimited
.\"O list with up to 20 pids.
.\"O Co-mingling both approaches is permitted.
指定されたプロセス ID とマッチするプロセスのみを監視する。
このオプションを 20 個まで指定するか、
コンマで区切った 20 個までのプロセス ID を指定することができる。
両方を混ぜて使用することもできる。

.\"O This is a \*(CO only.
.\"O And should you wish to return to normal operation, it is not necessary
.\"O to quit and and restart \*(Me \*(EM just issue the '=' \*(CI.
これは\*(COでのみ指定できる。
通常の操作に戻したい場合は、\*(Me を終了して再起動する必要はなく
\*(EM \*(CI '=' を実行するだけでよい。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBs\fR :\fB Secure mode\fR operation
\-\fBs\fR :\fB セキュアモード\fR 操作
.\"O Starts \*(Me with secure mode forced, even for root.
.\"O This mode is far better controlled through the system \*(CF
.\"O (\*(Xt 5. FILES).
たとえ root であっても、強制的にセキュアモードにして \*(Me を起動する。
このモードはシステムの\*(CFで制御する方が、更に良い。
(「5. ファイル」\*(Xt)。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBS\fR :\fB Cumulative time mode\fR toggle
\-\fBS\fR :\fB 累積時間モード\fR トグル
.\"O Starts \*(Me with the last remembered 'S' state reversed.
.\"O When 'Cumulative mode' is \*O, each process is listed with the \*(Pu
.\"O time that it and its dead children have used.
.\"O \*(XC 'S' \*(CI for additional information regarding this mode.
最後に記録された 'S' の状態を逆にして、\*(Me を起動する。
「累積モード」が \*O の場合、各プロセスは
そのプロセスとそのプロセスの終了した子プロセスで使われた
\*(Pu 時間とともに表示される。
このモードのより詳しい情報については、\*(CI 'S' \*(XC。

.TP 5
.\"O \-\fBv\fR :\fB Version\fR
\-\fBv\fR :\fB バージョン\fR
.\"O Show library version and the usage prompt, then quit.
ライブラリのバージョンと使用法のプロンプトを表示して、終了する。


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH 2. FIELDS / Columns
.SH 2. フィールド / カラム
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 2a. DESCRIPTIONS of Fields
.SS 2a. フィールドの説明
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O Listed below are \*(Me's available fields.
.\"O They are always associated with the letter shown, regardless of the position
.\"O you may have established for them with the 'o' (Order fields) \*(CI.
\*(Me で表示可能なフィールドを以下にリストする。
これらのフィールドは、
\*(CI 'o' (フィールドの順序変更) で指定できる位置に関わらず、
以下で示す文字と常に関連付けられている。

.\"O Any field is selectable as the sort field, and you control whether they
.\"O are sorted high-to-low or low-to-high.
.\"O For additional information on sort provisions \*(Xt 3c. TASK Area Commands.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: provision を何と訳すべきか？
.\"Osato: とりあえずは「機能」としておく。
.\"Osato: 
全てのフィールドはソート対象として選択可能であり、
降順でソートするか昇順でソートするかを制御できる。
ソート機能についての詳しい情報は「3c. タスクエリアコマンド」\*(Xt。

.TP 3
.\"O a:\fB PID\fR \*(EM Process Id\fR
a:\fB PID\fR \*(EM プロセス ID\fR
.\"O The task's unique process ID, which periodically wraps,
.\"O though never restarting at zero.
タスクの一意なプロセス ID。
定期的に同じ番号が使われるが、0 から再スタートすることはない。

.TP 3
.\"O b:\fB PPID\fR \*(EM Parent Process Pid\fR
b:\fB PPID\fR \*(EM 親プロセスのプロセス ID\fR
.\"O The process ID of a task's parent.
タスクの親タスクのプロセス ID。

.TP 3
.\"O c:\fB RUSER\fR \*(EM Real User Name\fR
c:\fB RUSER\fR \*(EM 実ユーザー名\fR
.\"O The real user name of the task's owner.
タスクの所有者の実ユーザー名。

.TP 3
.\"O d:\fB UID\fR \*(EM User Id\fR
d:\fB UID\fR \*(EM ユーザー ID\fR
.\"O The effective user ID of the task's owner.
タスクの所有者の実効ユーザー ID。

.TP 3
.\"O e:\fB USER\fR \*(EM User Name\fR
e:\fB USER\fR \*(EM ユーザー名\fR
.\"O The effective user name of the task's owner.
タスクの所有者の実効ユーザー名。

.TP 3
.\"O f:\fB GROUP\fR \*(EM Group Name\fR
f:\fB GROUP\fR \*(EM グループ名\fR
.\"O The effective group name of the task's owner.
タスクの所有者の実効グループ名。

.TP 3
.\"O g:\fB TTY\fR \*(EM Controlling Tty
g:\fB TTY\fR \*(EM 制御端末
.\"O The name of the controlling terminal.
制御端末の名前。
.\"O This is usually the device (serial port, pty, etc.) from which the
.\"O process was started, and which it uses for input or output.
通常はプロセスが開始されたデバイス
(シリアルポート、疑似端末 (pty) など) であり、入出力に使われる。
.\"O However, a task need not be associated with a terminal, in which case
.\"O you'll see '?' displayed.
しかしタスクは端末に関連付ける必要はなく、その場合は '?' が表示される。

.TP 3
.\"O h:\fB PR\fR \*(EM Priority
h:\fB PR\fR \*(EM 優先度
.\"O The priority of the task.
タスクの優先度

.TP 3
.\"O i:\fB NI\fR \*(EM Nice value
i:\fB NI\fR \*(EM nice 値
.\"O The nice value of the task.
.\"O A negative nice value means higher priority, whereas a positive nice value
.\"O means lower priority.
.\"O Zero in this field simply means priority will not be adjusted in determining a
.\"O task's dispatchability.
タスクの nice 値。
負の nice 値は高い優先度を意味し、正の nice 値は低い優先度を意味する。
このフィールドが 0 の場合、タスクの割り当て (dispatchability) を決定する際に
優先度を調整していないこと意味する。

.TP 3
.\"O j:\fB P\fR \*(EM Last used \*(PU (SMP)
j:\fB P\fR \*(EM 最後に使用された \*(PU (SMP)
.\"O A number representing the last used processor.
.\"O In a true SMP environment this will likely change frequently since the kernel
.\"O intentionally uses weak affinity.
.\"O Also, the very act of running \*(Me may break this weak affinity and cause more
.\"O processes to change \*(PUs more often (because of the extra demand for
.\"O \*(Pu time).
最後に利用されたプロセッサを表す値。
カーネルはわざと weak affinity を使っているので、
本当の SMP 環境では、この値は頻繁に変わりやすくなる。
また実行中の \*(Me の動作そのものが
(\*(Pu 時間に対する余分な要求となることによって)
weak affinity を壊すかもしれず、
プロセスの \*(PU 変更がより多くなるかもしれない。

.TP 3
.\"O k:\fB %CPU\fR \*(EM \*(PU usage
k:\fB %CPU\fR \*(EM \*(PU 使用率
.\"O The task's share of the elapsed \*(PU time since the last screen update, expressed
.\"O as a percentage of total \*(PU time.
前回のスクリーン更新からの、タスクの所要 CPU 時間の占有率。
総 \*(PU 時間のパーセンテージで表される。
.\"O In a true SMP environment, if 'Irix mode' is \*F, \*(Me will operate in
.\"O \'Solaris mode' where a task's \*(Pu usage will be divided by the total
.\"O number of \*(PUs.
.\"O You toggle 'Irix/Solaris' modes with the 'I' \*(CI.
本当の SMP 環境では、「Irix モード」が \*F の場合、
\*(Me は「Solaris モード」で操作し、
タスクの \*(Pu 使用率は総 \*(PU 数で割り算される。
\'Irix/Solaris' モードは\*(CI 'I' でトグルできる。

.TP 3
.\"O l:\fB TIME\fR \*(EM \*(PU Time
l:\fB TIME\fR \*(EM \*(PU 時間
.\"O Total \*(PU time the task has used since it started.
.\"O When 'Cumulative mode' is \*O, each process is listed with the \*(Pu
.\"O time that it and its dead children has used.
タスクが開始してから利用した \*(PU 時間の総計。
「累積モード」が \*O の場合、
各プロセスは終了した子プロセスが使った \*(Pu 時間とともにリストされる。
.\"O You toggle 'Cumulative mode' with 'S', which is a \*(CO and an \*(CI.
.\"O \*(XC 'S' \*(CI for additional information regarding this mode.
「累積モード」は\*(COと\*(CIの 'S' でトグルできる。
このモードについての更なる情報は、\*(CI 'S' \*(XC。

.TP 3
.\"O m:\fB TIME+\fR \*(EM \*(PU Time, hundredths
m:\fB TIME+\fR \*(EM \*(PU 時間 (1/100 単位)
.\"O The same as 'TIME', but reflecting more granularity through hundredths of
.\"O a second.
\'TIME' と同じであるが、精度を 1/100 秒単位まで反映させる。

.TP 3
.\"O n:\fB %MEM\fR \*(EM Memory usage (RES)
n:\fB %MEM\fR \*(EM メモリ使用率 (RES)
.\"O A task's currently used share of available \*(MP.
タスクが現在使用している利用可能な\*(MPの占有率。

.TP 3
.\"O o:\fB VIRT\fR \*(EM Virtual Image (kb)
o:\fB VIRT\fR \*(EM 仮想イメージ (kb)
.\"O The total amount of \*(MV used by the task.
.\"O It includes all code, data and shared libraries plus pages that have been
.\"O swapped out.
タスクが使用している\*(MVの総量。
コード・データ・共有ライブラリ・スワップアウトされているページが含まれる。

VIRT = SWAP + RES.

.TP 3
.\"O p:\fB SWAP\fR \*(EM Swapped size (kb)
p:\fB SWAP\fR \*(EM スワップされたサイズ (kb)
.\"O The swapped out portion of a task's total \*(MV image.
タスクの総\*(MVイメージのうちスワップアウトされた部分。

.TP 3
.\"O q:\fB RES\fR \*(EM Resident size (kb)
q:\fB RES\fR \*(EM 常駐サイズ (kb)
.\"O The non-swapped \*(MP a task has used.
タスクが使用しているスワップされていない\*(MP。

RES = CODE + DATA.

TP 3
.\"O r:\fB CODE\fR \*(EM Code size (kb)
r:\fB CODE\fR \*(EM コードサイズ (kb)
.\"O The amount of \*(MP devoted to executable code, also known as
.\"O the 'text resident set' size or TRS.
実行可能コードに割かれる\*(MPの総量。
「テキスト常駐サイズ (text resident set)」または TRS とも呼ばれる。

.TP 3
.\"O s:\fB DATA\fR \*(EM Data+Stack size (kb)
s:\fB DATA\fR \*(EM 「データ+スタック」のサイズ (kb)
.\"O The amount of \*(MP devoted to other than executable code, also known as
.\"O the 'data resident set' size or DRS.
実行可能コード以外に割かれる\*(MPの総量。
「データ常駐サイズ (data resident set)」または DRS とも呼ばれる。

.TP 3
.\"O t:\fB SHR\fR \*(EM Shared Mem size (kb)
t:\fB SHR\fR \*(EM 共有メモリサイズ (kb)
.\"O The amount of \*(MS used by a task.
.\"O It simply reflects memory that could be potentially shared with
.\"O other processes.
タスクが利用している共有メモリの総量。
他のプロセスと共有される可能性のあるメモリを単純に反映している。

.TP 3
.\"O u:\fB nFLT\fR \*(EM Page Fault count
u:\fB nFLT\fR \*(EM ページフォールト回数
.\"O The number of\fB major\fR page faults that have occurred for a task.
.\"O A page fault occurs when a process attempts to read from or write to a virtual
.\"O page that is not currently present in its address space.
.\"O A major page fault is when disk access is involved in making that
.\"O page available.
あるタスクに対して起こった\fBメジャー\fRページフォールトの回数。
ページフォールトは、現在、アドレス空間にない
仮想ページに対してプロセスが読み書きしようとしたときに起こる。
メジャーページフォールトとは、あるページを利用可能にするために
ディスクアクセスが起こる場合のことである。

.TP 3
.\"O v:\fB nDRT\fR \*(EM Dirty Pages count
v:\fB nDRT\fR \*(EM ダーティページ数
.\"O The number of pages that have been modified since they were last
.\"O written to disk.
.\"O Dirty pages must be written to disk before the corresponding physical memory
.\"O location can be used for some other virtual page.
最後に書き込まれてから変更されたページの数。
ダーティページは、対応する物理メモリの場所が他の仮想ページで使用される前に、
ディスクに書き込まれなければならない。

.TP 3
.\"O w:\fB S\fR \*(EM Process Status
w:\fB S\fR \*(EM プロセス状態
.\"O The status of the task which can be one of:
.\"O    '\fBD\fR' = uninterruptible sleep
.\"O    '\fBR\fR' = running
.\"O    '\fBS\fR' = sleeping
.\"O    '\fBT\fR' = traced or stopped
.\"O    '\fBZ\fR' = zombie
タスクの状態は以下のいずれかである:
   '\fBD\fR' = 割り込み不可能なスリープ状態
   '\fBR\fR' = 実行中
   '\fBS\fR' = スリープ状態
   '\fBT\fR' = トレース中/停止された
   '\fBZ\fR' = ゾンビ

.\"O Tasks shown as running should be more properly thought of as 'ready to run'
.\"O \*(EM their task_struct is simply represented on the Linux run-queue.
.\"O Even without a true SMP machine, you may see numerous tasks in this state
.\"O depending on \*(Me's delay interval and nice value.
実行中と表示されるタスクは「実行準備済み」と考えるのがより正しいだろう。
\*(EM タスクの task_struct は Linux の実行キューで表現されている。
本当の SMP マシン以外でさえ、\*(Me の遅延間隔と nice 値に依っては、
この状態のタスクを非常に多く目にするだろう。

.TP 3
.\"O x:\fB Command\fR \*(EM Command\fB line\fR or Program\fB name\fR
x:\fB Command\fR \*(EM コマンド\fBライン\fRまたはプログラム\fB名\fR
.\"O Display the command line used to start a task or the name of the associated
.\"O program.
.\"O You toggle between command\fI line\fR and\fI name\fR with 'c', which is both
.\"O a \*(CO and an \*(CI.
タスクを開始するのに使ったコマンドライン、
またはタスクに関連づけられたプログラムの名前を表示する。
コマンド\fIライン\fRとプログラム\fI名\fRは、
\*(COと\*(CIの 'c' でトグルできる。

.\"O When you've chosen to display command lines, processes without a command
.\"O line (like kernel threads) will be shown with only the program name in
.\"O parentheses, as in this example:
コマンドラインの表示を選択した場合、
(カーネルスレッドのように) コマンドラインのないプロセスは、
以下の例のように、プログラム名だけが括弧で括られて表示される。
      \fR( mdrecoveryd )

.\"O Either form of display is subject to potential truncation if it's too long to
.\"O fit in this field's current width.
コマンドライン・プログラム名の表示が
現在のフィールド幅に対して長すぎる場合は、切り詰められる場合がある。
フィールド幅はその他に選択されているフィールド・フィールドの順番・
現在のスクリーン幅に依存する。

.\"O \*(NT The 'Command' field/column is unique, in that it is not fixed-width.
.\"O When displayed, this column will be allocated all remaining screen width (up
.\"O to the maximum 512 characters) to provide for the potential growth of program
.\"O names into command lines.
\*(NT 'Command' フィールド/カラムは固定幅でないという点が特殊である。
表示の際、このカラムは残りの全てのスクリーン幅
(最大 512 文字) が割り当てられる。
これは、プログラム名からコマンドラインへの切り替えで
文字数が増える場合に備えるためである。

.TP 3
.\"O y:\fB WCHAN\fR \*(EM Sleeping in Function
.\"O Depending on the availability of the kernel link map ('System.map'), this field
.\"O will show the name or the address of the kernel function in which the task is
.\"O currently sleeping.
.\"O Running tasks will display a dash ('-') in this column.
y:\fB WCHAN\fR \*(EM スリープしている関数
カーネルリンクマップ ('System.map') が利用可能かに否かによって、
タスクが現在スリープしているカーネル関数の名前またはアドレスが表示される。
実行中のタスクでは、このカラムにダッシュ ('-') が表示される。

.\"O \*(NT By displaying this field, \*(Me's own working set will be increased by
.\"O over 700Kb.
.\"O Your only means of reducing that overhead will be to stop and restart \*(Me.
\*(NT このフィールドを表示すると、
\*(Me 自身のワーキングセットが 700Kb 増加する。
このオーバーヘッドを減らす唯一の方法は、\*(Me を停止して再起動することである。

.TP 3
.\"O z:\fB Flags\fR \*(EM Task Flags
z:\fB Flags\fR \*(EM タスクフラグ
.\"O This column represents the task's current scheduling flags which are
.\"O expressed in hexadecimal notation and with zeros suppressed.
このカラムにはタスクの現在のスケジューリングフラグが
0 を省略した 16 進数で表示される。
.\"O These flags are officially documented in <linux/sched.h>.
.\"O Less formal documentation can also be found on the 'Fields select'
.\"O and 'Order fields' screens.
これらのフラグは公式には <linux/sched.h> に書かれている。
公式なものではないが、「フィールド選択」スクリーンと
「フィールド順序指定」スクリーンにも説明がある。

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 2b. SELECTING and ORDERING Columns
.SS 2b. カラムの選択と順序指定
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O After pressing the \*(CIs 'f' (Fields select) or \'o' (Order fields) you will
.\"O be shown a screen containing the current \fBfields string\fR followed by names
.\"O and descriptions for all fields.
\*(CI 'f' (フィールド選択) または \'o' (フィールド順序指定) を入力すると、
現在の\fBフィールド文字列\fRとその説明が記述されたスクリーンが表示される。

.\"O Here is a sample\fB fields string\fR from one of \*(Me's four windows/field
.\"O groups and an explanation of the conventions used:
以下は、\*(Me の 4 つのウィンドウ・フィールドグループのうちの 1 つの
サンプルの\fBフィールド文字列\fRと、
使用される代表的なフィールドの説明である。
.Jbu
.\"O Sample fields string:
サンプルのフィールド文字列:
   \fIANOPQRSTUVXbcdefgjlmyzWHIK\fR
.Jbu
.\"O The order of displayed fields corresponds to the order of the letters
.\"O in that string.
表示されるフィールドの順番は、文字列中の文字の順番に対応する。
.Jbu
.\"O If the letter is\fI upper case\fR the corresponding field itself will
.\"O then be shown as part of the \*(TD (screen width permitting).
.\"O This will also be indicated by a leading \*(AS, as in this excerpt:
文字が\fI大文字\fRの場合、(スクリーン幅が許すならば)
そのフィールド自身が\*(TDの一部として表示される。
これは以下の抜粋のように、先頭の\*(ASでも示される:
    \fR...
    \fB* K: %CPU       = CPU usage
    \fR  l: TIME       = CPU Time
    \fR  m: TIME+      = CPU Time, hundredths
    \fB* N: %MEM       = Memory usage (RES)
    \fB* O: VIRT       = Virtual Image (kb)
    \fR...

.TP
.\"O .B Fields select\fR screen \*(EM the 'f' \*(CI
.\"O You\fI toggle\fR the\fB display\fR of a field by simply pressing the
.\"O corresponding letter.
.B フィールド選択\fRスクリーン \*(EM \*(CI 'f'
対応する文字を入力することで\fB表示\fRを\fIトグル\fRできる。

.TP
.\"O .B Order fields\fR screen \*(EM the 'o' \*(CI
.\"O You\fI move\fR a field to the\fB left\fR by pressing the corresponding\fB
.\"O upper case\fR letter and to the\fB right\fR with the\fB lower case\fR
.\"O letter.
.B フィールド順序指定\fRスクリーン \*(EM \*(CI 'o'
対応する\fB大文字\fRを入力することでフィールドを\fB左\fRに\fI移動\fRできる。
また\fB小文字\fRを入力することで\fB右\fRに\fI移動\fRできる。


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH 3. INTERACTIVE Commands
.SH 3. 対話的コマンド
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O Listed below is a brief index of commands within categories.
.\"O Some commands appear more than once \*(EM their meaning or scope may vary
.\"O depending on the context in which they are issued.
以下に挙げたものは、コマンドをカテゴリ分けした簡単な索引である。
いくつかのコマンドは 1 回以上書かれている
\*(EM これはコマンドの意味やスコープが、
そのコマンドが発行された状況に依存するためである。

.\"O   3a.\fI GLOBAL_Commands\fR
  3a.\fI グローバルなコマンド\fR
        <Ret/Sp> ?, =, A, B, d, G, h, I, k, q, r, s, W, Z
.\"O   3b.\fI SUMMARY_Area_Commands\fR
  3b.\fI サマリーエリアのコマンド\fR
        l, m, t, 1
.\"O   3c.\fI TASK_Area_Commands\fR
  3c.\fI タスクエリアのコマンド\fR
.\"O         Appearance:  b, x, y, z
        外観:    b, x, y, z
.\"O         Content:     c, f, o, S, u
        内容:    c, f, o, S, u
.\"O         Size:        #, i, n
        サイズ:  #, i, n
.\"O         Sorting:     <, >, F, O, R
        ソート:  <, >, F, O, R
.\"O   3d.\fI COLOR_Mapping\fR
  3d.\fI カラーマッピング\fR
        <Ret>, a, B, b, H, M, q, S, T, w, z, 0 - 7
.\"O   4b.\fI COMMANDS_for_Windows\fR
  4b.\fI ウィンドウのコマンド\fR
        -, _, =, +, A, a, G, g, w

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 3a. GLOBAL Commands
.SS 3a. グローバルなコマンド
.\"O The global \*(CIs are\fB always\fR available\fR in both \*(FM and \*(AM.
.\"O However, some of these \*(CIs are\fB not available\fR when running
.\"O in 'Secure mode'.
グローバルな\*(CIは\fB常に\fR\*(FMと\*(AMで使用可能である。
しかし「セキュアモード」で動作している場合には、
これらの\*(CIのいくつかは\fB使用できなくなる\fR。

.\"O If you wish to know in advance whether or not your \*(Me has been secured,
.\"O simply ask for help and view the system summary on the second line.
\*(Me がセキュアモードか否かを前もって知りたい場合は、
ヘルプコマンドを実行し、2 行目のシステムサマリーを見るだけでよい。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \<\fBEnter\fR> or <\fBSpace\fR> :\fIRefresh_Display\fR
\ \ \<\fBEnter\fR> または <\fBSpace\fR> :\fI表示の再描画\fR
.\"O These commands do nothing, they are simply ignored.
.\"O However, they will awaken \*(Me and following receipt of any input
.\"O the entire display will be repainted.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: awake がうまく訳せない。
.\"Osato: 
これらのコマンドは何も行わず、単に無視される。
しかし、これらのコマンドは \*(Me を目覚めさせ、
(最後の画面更新の) 後で表示全体が再描画される入力が
受け付けられていた場合はそれを知らせる。

.\"O Use either of these keys if you have a large delay interval and wish to
.\"O see current status,
遅延間隔が長いときに現在の状態を知りたい場合は、
これらのキーのいずれかを使うこと。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fB?\fR\' or \'\fBh\fR\' :\fIHelp\fR
\ \ \'\fB?\fR\' または \'\fBh\fR\' :\fIヘルプ\fR
.\"O There are two help levels available.
.\"O The first will provide a reminder of all the basic \*(CIs.
.\"O If \*(Me is\fI secured\fR, that screen will be abbreviated.
2 つのヘルプレベルが使用可能である。
1 つ目では全ての基本的な\*(CIのメモを表示する。
\*(Me が\fIセキュアな\fR場合、このスクリーンは省略される。

.\"O Typing 'h' or '?' on that help screen will take you to help for those \*(CIs
.\"O applicable to \*(AM.
ヘルプスクリーンで 'h' または '?' を入力すると、
\*(AMの\*(CIのヘルプに移動する。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fB=\fR\' :\fIExit_Task_Limits\fR
\ \ \'\fB=\fR\' :\fIタスク制限の終了\fR
.\"O Removes restrictions on which tasks are shown.
.\"O This command will reverse any 'i' (idle tasks) and 'n' (max tasks) commands
.\"O that might be active.
.\"O It also provides for an 'exit' from PID monitoring.
.\"O See the '-p' \*(CO for a discussion of PID monitoring.
表示されるタスクの制限をなくす。
このコマンドは有効になっている 'i' (アイドルタスク) コマンドと
\'n' (最大タスク数) コマンドを無効にする。
このコマンドは PID を指定した監視の「終了」も行う。
PID を指定した監視についての議論は、\*(CO '-p' を参照すること。

.\"O When operating in \*(AM this command has a slightly broader meaning.
\*(AMで実行すると、このコマンドは少し広い意味を持つ。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBA\fR\' :\fIAlternate_Display_Mode_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBA\fR\' :\fI別形式の表示モードのトグル\fR
.\"O This command will switch between \*(FM and \*(AM.
.\"O \*(XT 4. ALTERNATE\-DISPLAY Mode and the 'G' \*(CI for insight into
.\"O \*(CWs and field groups.
このコマンドは\*(FMと\*(AMを切り替える。
\*(CWとフィールドグループについて知るには、
4. 別形式の表示モードと\*(CI 'G' \*(XT。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBB\fR\' :\fIBold_Disable/Enable_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBB\fR\' :\fI太字の有効／無効のトグル\fR
.\"O This command will influence use of the 'bold' terminfo capability and
.\"O alters\fB both\fR the \*(SA and \*(TA for the \*(CW.
.\"O While it is intended primarily for use with dumb terminals, it can be
.\"O applied anytime.
このコマンドは terminfo の「太字」機能を使用するか否かに影響し、
\*(SAと\*(TAの\fB両方\fRの\*(CWを変更する。
このコマンドは本来はダム端末での使用を意図したものであるが、
いつでも適用できる。

.\"O \*(NT When this toggle is \*O and \*(Me is operating in monochrome mode,
.\"O the\fB entire display\fR will appear as normal text.
\*(NT このトグルが \*O で \*(Me がモノクロモードで動作している場合、
\fB表示全体\fRが通常のテキストになる。
.\"O Thus, unless the 'x' and/or 'y' toggles are using reverse for emphasis,
.\"O there will be no visual confirmation that they are even on.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: 上記の文章がうまく訳せない。
.\"Osato: they = x and/or y toggles なのか？
.\"Osato: 
よって、'x' と 'y' (またはその一方) のトグルを使って、
強調のために表示状態を逆にしない限り、
これらのトグルが \*O になっていても、表示上は確認できない。

.TP 7
.\"O *\ \'\fBd\fR\' or \'\fBs\fR\' :\fIChange_Delay_Time_interval\fR
*\ \'\fBd\fR\' または \'\fBs\fR\' :\fI遅延時間間隔の変更\fR
.\"O You will be prompted to enter the delay time, in seconds, between
.\"O display updates.
秒単位の遅延時間 (表示を更新する間隔) を入力するための
プロンプトが表示される。

.\"O Fractional seconds are honored, but a negative number is not allowed.
.\"O Entering 0 causes (nearly) continuous updates, with an unsatisfactory
.\"O display as the system and tty driver try to keep up with \*(Me's demands.
.\"O The delay value is inversely proportional to system loading,
.\"O so set it with care.
小数以下の秒も受け付けるが、負の数は許されない。
0 を入力すると (ほぼ) 連続で更新され、
システムと端末ドライバが \*(Me の要求に遅れないようするので、
不満足な表示になってしまう。
システムの負荷は遅延の値に反比例するので、
気をつけて設定すること。

.\"O If at any time you wish to know the current delay time, simply ask for help
.\"O and view the system summary on the second line.
現在の遅延時間を知りたい場合は、好きなときに単にヘルプコマンドを実行して、
システムサマリーの 2 行目を見ればよい。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBG\fR\' :\fIChoose_Another_Window/Field_Group\fR
\ \ \'\fBG\fR\' :\fI別ウィンドウ/フィールドグループの選択\fR
.\"O You will be prompted to enter a number between 1 and 4 designating the
.\"O window/field group which should be made the \*(CW.
.\"O You will soon grow comfortable with these 4 windows, especially after
.\"O experimenting with \*(AM.
1 から 4 までの数字を入力するためのプロンプトが表示される。
この数字は\*(CWに設定するウィンドウ/フィールドグループを示す。
特に\*(AMを試してみると、
すぐにこれらの 4 つのウィンドウの満足度が増すだろう。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBI\fR\' :\fIIrix/Solaris_Mode_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBI\fR\' :\fIIrix/Solaris モードのトグル\fR
.\"O When operating in 'Solaris mode' ('I' toggled \*F), a task's \*(Pu usage
.\"O will be divided by the total number of \*(PUs.
.\"O After issuing this command, you'll be informed of the new state of this toggle.
「Solaris モード」('I' トグルの \*F) で動作している場合、
タスクの \*(Pu 使用率は \*(PU の個数で割り算される。
このコマンドを実行すると、このトグルの新しい状態が表示される。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBu\fR\' :\fIselect a user\fR
\ \ \'\fBu\fR\' :\fIユーザーの選択\fR
.\"O You will be prompted for a UID or username. Only processes
.\"O belonging to the selected user will be displayed. This option
.\"O matches on the effective UID.
UID またはユーザー名を入力するプロンプトが出る。
選択されたユーザーに属するプロセスのみが表示される。
このオプションは実効 UID にマッチする。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBU\fR\' :\fIselect a user\fR
\ \ \'\fBU\fR\' :\fIユーザーの選択\fR
.\"O You will be prompted for a UID or username. Only processes
.\"O belonging to the selected user will be displayed. This option
.\"O matches on the real, effective, saved, and filesystem UID.
UID またはユーザー名を入力するプロンプトが出る。
選択されたユーザーに属するプロセスのみが表示される。
このオプションは実・実効・保存・ファイルシステム UID にマッチする。

.TP 7
.\"O *\ \'\fBk\fR\' :\fIKill_a_task\fR
*\ \'\fBk\fR\' :\fIタスクの kill\fR
.\"O You will be prompted for a PID and then the signal to send.
.\"O The default signal, as reflected in the prompt, is SIGTERM.
.\"O However, you can send any signal, via number or name.
最初に PID を入力するプロンプトが出され、
その後、送信するシグナルを入力するプロンプトが出される。
プロンプトから反映されるデフォルトのシグナルは SIGTERM である。
しかし、数値または名前を指定して任意のシグナルを送ることができる。

.\"O If you wish to abort the kill process, do one of the following
.\"O depending on your progress:
.\"O    1) at the pid prompt, just press <Enter>
.\"O    2) at the signal prompt, type 0
kill を行う手順から抜けたい場合は、
どこまで進んだかによって、以下の何れかを行えばよい:
   1) pid プロンプトでは、単に <Enter> を押す。
   2) シグナルプロンプトでは、0 を入力する。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBq\fR\' :\fIQuit\fR
\ \ \'\fBq\fR\' :\fI終了\fR

.TP 7
.\"O *\ \'\fBr\fR\' :\fIRenice_a_Task\fR
*\ \'\fBr\fR\' :\fIタスクの renice\fR
.\"O You will be prompted for a PID and then the value to nice it to.
.\"O Entering a positive value will cause a process to lose priority.
.\"O Conversely, a negative value will cause a process to be viewed more
.\"O favorably by the kernel.
最初に PID を入力するプロンプトが出され、
その後、そのプロセスに設定する nice の値を入力するプロンプトが出される。
正の値を入力すると、プロセスの優先度は低くなる。
逆に負の値を入力すると、そのプロセスはカーネルから現在より有利に扱われる。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBW\fR\' :\fIWrite_the_Configuration_File\fR
\ \ \'\fBW\fR\' :\fI設定ファイルの書き出し\fR
.\"O This will save all of your options and toggles plus the current
.\"O display mode and delay time.
オプション・トグル・現在のディスプレイモード・遅延時間の全てを保存する。
.\"O By issuing this command just before quitting \*(Me, you will be able restart
.\"O later in exactly that same state.
\*(Me を終了する直前にこのコマンドを発行すると、
全く同じ状態で後から再起動できる。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBZ\fR\' :\fIChange_Color_Mapping
\ \ \'\fBZ\fR\' :\fIカラーマッピングの変更\fR
.\"O This key will take you to a separate screen where you can change the
.\"O colors for the \*(CW, or for all windows.
.\"O For details regarding this \*(CI \*(Xt 3d. COLOR Mapping.
このキーを入力すると、\*(CWまたは全てのウィンドウの色を
変更する別のスクリーンに移る。
この\*(CIについての詳細は、3d. カラーマッピング\*(Xt。

.IP "*" 3
.\"O The commands shown with an \*(AS are not available in 'Secure mode',
.\"O nor will they be shown on the level-1 help screen.
\*(AS が付いたコマンドは「セキュアモード」では使用できない。
また、これらのコマンドはレベル 1 のヘルプスクリーンに表示されない。

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 3b. SUMMARY Area Commands
.SS 3b. サマリーエリアにおけるコマンド
.\"O The \*(SA \*(CIs are\fB always available\fR in both \*(FM and \*(AM.
.\"O They affect the beginning lines of your display and will determine the position
.\"O of messages and prompts.
\*(SAの\*(CIは\*(FMと\*(AMの両方において\fB常に利用可能\fRである。
これらは表示の先頭行に影響し、メッセージとプロンプトの位置を決定する。

.\"O These commands always impact just the \*(CW/field group.
.\"O \*(XT 4. ALTERNATE\-DISPLAY Mode and the 'G' \*(CI for insight into
.\"O \*(CWs and field groups.
これらのコマンドは常に\*(CW/フィールドグループにだけ影響を与える。
\*(CWとフィールドグループについての洞察は、
4. 別形式の表示モードと\*(CI 'G' \*(XT。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBl\fR\' :\fIToggle_Load_Average/Uptime\fR \*(EM On/Off
.\"O This is also the line containing the program name (possibly an alias) when
.\"O operating in \*(FM or the \*(CW name when operating in \*(AM.
\ \ \'\fBl\fR\' :\fI負荷平均/uptime のトグル\fR \*(EM On/Off
\*(FMで動作している場合は、
プログラム名 (エイリアスの可能性もある) の行も含まれる。
また\*(AMで動作している場合は、\*(CW名も含まれる。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBm\fR\' :\fIToggle_Memory/Swap_Usage\fR \*(EM On/Off
\ \ \'\fBm\fR\' :\fIメモリ/スワップ利用量のトグル\fR \*(EM On/Off
.\"O This command affects two \*(SA lines.
このコマンドは\*(SAの 2 行に影響する。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBt\fR\' :\fIToggle_Task/Cpu_States\fR \*(EM On/Off
\ \ \'\fBt\fR\' :\fIタスク/CPU 状態のトグル\fR \*(EM On/Off
.\"O This command affects from 2 to many \*(SA lines, depending on the state
.\"O of the '1' toggle and whether or not \*(Me is running under true SMP.
このコマンドは、'1' トグルの状態と \*(Me が本当の SMP で
動作しているか否かによって、\*(SAの 2 行以上に影響する。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fB1\fR\' :\fIToggle_Single/Separate_Cpu_States\fR \*(EM On/Off
\ \ \'\fB1\fR\' :\fI1 つに纏めた CPU 状態/個々の CPU 状態のトグル\fR \*(EM On/Off
.\"O This command affects how the 't' command's Cpu States portion is shown.
.\"O Although this toggle exists primarily to serve massively-parallel SMP machines,
.\"O it is not restricted to solely SMP environments.
このコマンドは 't' コマンドで CPU 状態の部分をどのように表示するかに影響する。
このコマンドは元々は大規模並列な SMP マシンで使用するためにあるが、
SMP 環境にのみ限定されるわけではない。

.\"O When you see 'Cpu(s):' in the \*(SA, the '1' toggle is \*O and all
.\"O \*(Pu information is gathered in a single line.
.\"O Otherwise, each \*(Pu is displayed separately as: 'Cpu0, Cpu1, ...'
\*(SA で 'Cpu(s):' と表示されている場合、'1' トグルは \*O であり、
全ての \*(Pu 情報が 1 行に集計される。
そうでないの場合、各 \*(Pu は 'Cpu0, Cpu1, ...' のように分けて表示される。

.PP
.\"O \*(NT If the entire \*(SA has been toggled \*F for any window, you would be left
.\"O with just the\fB message line\fR.
.\"O In that way, you will have maximized available task rows but (temporarily)
.\"O sacrificed the program name in \*(FM or the \*(CW name when in \*(AM.
\*(NT どのウィンドウにおいても\*(SA全体のトグルが \*F の場合は、
\fBメッセージ行\fRのみが残される。
このようにして、\*(FMにおけるプログラム名
または\*(AMにおける\*(CW名を (一時的に) 犠牲にして、
利用可能なタスク行を最大化できる。


.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 3c. TASK Area Commands
.SS 3c. タスクエリアにおけるコマンド
.\"O The \*(TA \*(CIs are\fB always\fR available in \*(FM.
\*(TAの\*(CIは\*(FMにおいて\fB常に\fR利用可能である。

.\"O The \*(TA \*(CIs are\fB never available\fR in \*(AM\fI if\fR the \*(CW's
.\"O \*(TD has been toggled \*F (\*(Xt 4. ALTERNATE\-DISPLAY Mode).
\*(TAの\*(CIは、\*(CWの\*(TDが \*F になっている場合
(4. 別形式の表示モード\*(Xt) は、\*(AM\fIでは\fB全く利用できない\fR。

.PP
.\" .........................
.\"O .B APPEARANCE\fR of \*(TW
\*(TWの\fB外観\fR
.br
.in +2
.\"O The following commands will also be influenced by the state of the
.\"O global 'B' (bold disable) toggle.
以下のコマンドもグローバルな 'B' (太字の無効) トグルの状態に影響を受ける。
.in

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBb\fR\' :\fIBold/Reverse_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBb\fR\' :\fI太字/反転のトグル\fR
.\"O This command will impact how the 'x' and 'y' toggles are displayed.
.\"O Further, it will only be available when at least one of those toggles is \*O.
このコマンドは 'x' と 'y' トグルがどのように表示されるかに影響する。
さらにこのコマンドはこれらのトグルのうち
少なくとも 1 つが \*O になっている時にのみ利用可能である。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBx\fR\' :\fIColumn_Highlight_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBx\fR\' :\fIカラムのハイライトのトグル\fR
.\"O Changes highlighting for the current sort field.
.\"O You probably don't need a constant visual reminder of the sort field and
.\"O \*(Me hopes that you always run with 'column highlight' \*F, due to the cost
.\"O in path-length.
現在のソートフィールドのハイライトを変更する。
ソートフィールドを常に視覚的に知らせる必要はたぶんない。
またパスが長くなってしまうので、ユーザーは常に
「カラムのハイライト」を \*F にして実行するだろうと \*(Me は仮定している。

.\"O If you forget which field is being sorted this command can serve as a quick
.\"O visual reminder.
どのフィールドでソートされているかを忘れてしまった場合、
このコマンドはすぐに視覚的に知らせてくれる。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBy\fR\' :\fIRow_Highlight_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBy\fR\' :\fI行のハイライトのトグル\fR
.\"O Changes highlighting for "running" tasks.
.\"O For additional insight into this task state, \*(Xt 2a. DESCRIPTIONS of Fields,
.\"O Process Status.
「実行中」のタスクのハイライトを変更する。
このタスク状態についての更なる考察は、
2a. フィールドとプロセス状態の説明\*(Xt。

.\"O Use of this provision provides important insight into your system's health.
.\"O The only costs will be a few additional tty escape sequences.
この機能はシステムの健康状態をみるための重要な情報を提供する。
このコマンドのコストは、端末のエスケープシーケンスするだけで、
わずかなものである。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBz\fR\' :\fIColor/Monochrome_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBz\fR\' :\fIカラー/モノクロのトグル\fR
.\"O Switches the \*(CW between your last used color scheme and the older form
.\"O of black-on-white or white-on-black.
.\"O This command will alter\fB both\fR the \*(SA and \*(TA but does not affect the
.\"O state of the 'x', 'y' or 'b' toggles.
\*(CWの色を、最も最近使われたカラー形式と、
白地に黒または黒地に白という古くからの形式で切り替える。
このコマンドは\*(SAと\*(TAの\fB両方\fRを変更するが、
\'x', 'y', 'b' トグルの状態には影響しない。

.PP
.\" .........................
.\"O .B CONTENT\fR of \*(TW
\*(TWの\fB内容\fR
.PD 0
.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBc\fR\' :\fICommand_Line/Program_Name_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBc\fR\' :\fIコマンドライン/プログラム名のトグル\fR
.\"O This command will be honored whether or not the 'Command' column
.\"O is currently visible.
.\"O Later, should that field come into view, the change you applied will be seen.
このコマンドは「コマンド」カラムが
現在表示されているか否かによらず、受け付けられる。
後でコマンドフィールドが表示に含まれるようになると、
ユーザーが適用した変更はすぐに反映される。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBf\fR\' and \'\fBo\fR\' :\fIFields_select\fR or \fIOrder_fields\fR
\ \ \'\fBf\fR\' と \'\fBo\fR\' :\fIフィールド選択\fRまたは\fI順序指定\fR
.\"O These keys display separate screens where you can change which
.\"O fields are displayed and their order.
.\"O For additional information on these \*(CIs
.\"O \*(Xt 2b. SELECTING and ORDERING Columns.
これらのキーを押すと、別のスクリーンが表示される。
このスクリーンでは、どのフィールドを表示するかと
フィールドの順序が変更できる。
これらの\*(CIについての更なる情報は、
2b. カラムの選択と順序指定\*(Xt。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBS\fR\' :\fICumulative_Time_Mode_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBS\fR\' :\fI累積時間モードのトグル\fR
.\"O When 'Cumulative mode' is \*O, each process is listed with the \*(Pu
.\"O time that it and its dead children have used.
「累積モード」が \*O の場合、各プロセスはそのプロセス自身と
そのプロセスの死んだ子プロセスの \*(Pu 時間とともにリストされる。

.\"O When \*F, programs that fork into many separate tasks will appear
.\"O less demanding.
.\"O For programs like 'init' or a shell this is appropriate but for others,
.\"O like compilers, perhaps not.
.\"O Experiment with two \*(TWs sharing the same sort field but with different 'S'
.\"O states and see which representation you prefer.
\*F の場合、多くの別々のタスクにフォークするプログラムは、現れづらい
\'init' やシェルのようなプログラムは表示されるが、
その他のコンパイラなどはたぶん表示されない。
ソートフィールドが等しく 'S' の状態が異なる 2 つの\*(TWを試して、
どちらの表示法がよいか見て欲しい。

.\"O After issuing this command, you'll be informed of the new state of this toggle.
.\"O If you wish to know in advance whether or not 'Cumulative mode' is in
.\"O effect, simply ask for help and view the window summary on the second line.
このコマンドを発行すると、このトグルの新しい状態が表示される。
「累積モード」が有効になっているかを前もって知りたい場合は、
単にヘルプを実行して、ウィンドウサマリーの 2 行目を見ればよい。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBu\fR\' :\fIShow_Specific_User_Only\fR
\ \ \'\fBu\fR\' :\fI指定されたユーザーのみの表示\fR
.\"O You will be prompted to enter the name of the user to display.
.\"O Thereafter, in that \*(TW only matching User ID's will be shown, or possibly
.\"O no tasks will be shown.
表示するユーザーの名前を入力するプロンプトが出される。
それ以降は、\*(TWにはマッチするユーザー ID のみが表示される。
タスクが何も表示されなくなる場合もある。

.\"O Later, if you wish to monitor all tasks again, re-issue this command but
.\"O just press <Enter> at the prompt, without providing a name.
後になって全てのタスクを再び監視したくなった場合は、
このコマンドを再度発行すればよい。
ただし、プロンプトに名前は入力せず、単に <Enter> を押す。

.PP
.\" .........................
.\"O .B SIZE\fR of \*(TW
\*(TWの\fBサイズ\fR
.PD 0
.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBi\fR\' :\fIIdle_Processes_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBi\fR\' :\fIアイドルプロセスのトグル\fR
.\"O Displays all tasks or just active tasks.
.\"O When this toggle is \*F, idled or zombied processes will not be displayed.
全てのタスクまたはアクティブなタスクのみを表示する。
このトグルが \*F の場合、アイドルプロセスまたはゾンビプロセスは表示されない。

.\"O If this command is applied to the last \*(TD when in \*(AM, then it will not
.\"O affect the window's size, as all prior \*(TDs will have already been painted.
\*(AMにおいて最後の\*(TDに対してこのコマンドが適用されても、
それより前の全ての\*(TDは既に表示されているので、
ウィンドウのサイズには影響しない。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBn\fR\' or \'#\' :\fISet_Maximum_Tasks\fR
\ \ \'\fBn\fR\' または \'#\' :\fI最大タスク数の設定\fR
.\"O You will be prompted to enter the number of tasks to display.
.\"O The lessor of your number and available screen rows will be used.
表示するタスク数を入力するプロンプトが出される。
ユーザーが指定した数以下で、
かつ利用可能なスクリーンの行数が使用される。

.\"O When used in \*(AM, this is the command that gives you precise control over
.\"O the size of each currently visible \*(TD, except for the very last.
.\"O It will not affect the last window's size, as all prior \*(TDs will have
.\"O already been painted.
\*(AMにおいて使用されると、
このコマンドは、最後の\*(TDを除き、
現在表示されている各\*(TDのサイズを正確に制御できる。
それより前の全ての\*(TDは既に描画されているので、
最後のウィンドウのサイズには影響しない。

.\"O \*(NT If you wish to increase the size of the last visible \*(TD when in \*(AM,
.\"O simply decrease the size of the \*(TD(s) above it.
\*(NT \*(AMにおいて最後に表示される\*(TDのサイズを大きくしたい場合は、
それより前の\*(TDのサイズを小さくすること。

.PP
.\" .........................
.\"O .B SORTING\fR of \*(TW
\*(TWの\fBソート\fR
.br
.in +2
.\"O For compatibility, this \*(Me supports most of the former \*(Me sort keys.
.\"O Since this is primarily a service to former \*(Me users, these commands do
.\"O not appear on any help screen.
互換性のため、この \*(Me は以前の \*(Me で使われていた
多くのソートキーをサポートしている。
元来これは以前の \*(Me のユーザーへのサービスなので、
これらのコマンドはヘルプスクリーンには現れない 。
.\"O    command   sorted field                  supported
.\"O      A         start time (non-display)      No
   コマンド  ソートフィールド              サポート
     A         開始時間 (非表示)             No
     M         %MEM                          Yes
     N         PID                           Yes
     P         %CPU                          Yes
     T         TIME+                         Yes

.\"O Before using any of the following sort provisions, \*(Me suggests that you
.\"O temporarily turn on column highlighting using the 'x' \*(CI.
.\"O That will help ensure that the actual sort environment matches your intent.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: top が 'x' を使うようにというメッセージを
.\"Osato: 表示するわけではないようなので、
.\"Osato: 以下の訳文では \*(Me は省略しました。
.\"Osato: 
以下のソート機能を使う前に、\*(CI 'x' を使って
カラムのハイライトを一時的に有効にすることを奨める。
これは実際のソート環境がユーザーの意図に合っているかを確認する助けになる。

.\"O The following \*(CIs will\fB only\fR be honored when the
.\"O current sort field is\fB visible\fR.
.\"O The sort field might\fI not\fR be visible because:
.\"O      1) there is insufficient\fI Screen Width\fR
.\"O      2) the 'f' \*(CI turned it \*F
現在のソートフィールドが\fB表示されている\fR場合に\fBのみ\fR、
以下の\*(CIを受け付ける。
ソートフィールドは次の理由により表示されて\fIいない\fRかもしれない:
     1) \fIスクリーン幅\fRが足りない。
     2) \*(CI 'f' が \*F である。
.in

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fB<\fR\' :\fIMove_Sort_Field_Left\fR
\ \ \'\fB<\fR\' :\fIソートフィールドを左へ移動\fR
.\"O Moves the sort column to the left unless the current sort field is
.\"O the first field being displayed.
ソートフィールドが表示されている最初のフィールドでない限り、
ソートカラムを左へ移動する。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fB>\fR\' :\fIMove_Sort_Field_Right\fR
\ \ \'\fB>\fR\' :\fIソートフィールドを右へ移動\fR
.\"O Moves the sort column to the right unless the current sort field is
.\"O the last field being displayed.
ソートフィールドが表示されている最後のフィールドでない限り、
ソートカラムを右へ移動する。

.PP
.in +2
.\"O The following \*(CIs will\fB always\fR be honored whether or not
.\"O the current sort field is visible.
現在のソートフィールドが表示されているか否かに関わらず、
以下の\*(CIは\fB常に\fR受け付ける。
.in

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBF\fR\' or \'\fBO\fR\' :\fISelect_Sort_Field\fR
\ \ \'\fBF\fR\' または \'\fBO\fR\' :\fIソートフィールドの選択\fR
.\"O These keys display a separate screen where you can change which field
.\"O is used as the sort column.
これらのキーは別のスクリーンを表示させる。
このスクリーンでは、どのフィールドをソートカラムとするかを変更できる。

.\"O If a field is selected which was not previously being displayed, it will
.\"O be forced \*O when you return to the \*(Me display.
以前には表示されていなかったフィールドが選択された場合、
そのフィールドは \*(Me の表示に戻るときに強制的に \*O にされる。
.\"O However, depending upon your screen width and the order of your fields,
.\"O this sort field may not be displayable.
しかし、スクリーン幅と選択したフィールドの順序によっては、
ソートフィールドは表示されないかもしれない。

.\"O This \*(CI can be a convienent way to simply verify the current sort field,
.\"O when running \*(Me with column highlighting turned \*F.
この\*(CIは、カラムのハイライトを\*Fにして \*(Me を実行しているときに、
現在のソートフィールドをとても簡単に確認できる便利な方法である。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBR\fR\' :\fIReverse/Normal_Sort_Field_toggle\fR
\ \ \'\fBR\fR\' :\fIソートフィールドの逆順/正順のトグル\fR
.\"O Using this \*(CI you can alternate between high-to-low and low-to-high sorts.
この\*(CIを使うと、「高い方から低い方」と「低い方から高い方」を
切り替えることができる。

.PP
.in +2
.\"O \*(NT Field sorting uses internal values, not those in column display.
.\"O Thus, the TTY and WCHAN fields will violate strict ASCII collating sequence.
\*(NT フィールドのソートには、カラムに表示されている値ではなく、
内部的な値を使っている。
よって、TTY と WCHAN フィールドは厳密な ASCII 照合順序
(collating sequence) には違反するかもしれない。
.in

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 3d. COLOR Mapping
.SS 3d. カラーマッピング
.\"O When you issue the 'Z' \*(CI, you will be presented with a separate screen.
.\"O That screen can be used to change the colors in just the \*(CW or
.\"O in all four windows before returning to the \*(Me display.
\*(CI 'Z' を発行すると、別のスクリーンが表示される。
このスクリーンでは、\*(Me の表示に戻る前に、
\*(CWのみまたは 4 つのウィンドウ全ての色を変更できる。

.P
.\"O .B Available \*(CIs
.\"O     \fB4\fR upper case letters to select a\fB target\fR
.\"O     \fB8\fR numbers to select a\fB color\fR
.B 利用可能な\*(CI
    \fB4\fR つの大文字で\fB対象\fRを選択する。
    \fB8\fR つの数字で\fB色\fRを選択する。
.\"O     normal toggles available\fR
.\"O         'B'       :bold disable/enable
.\"O         'b'       :running tasks "bold"/reverse
.\"O         'z'       :color/mono
    通常のトグルが利用可能である\fR
        'B'       :太字の無効/有効
        'b'       :実行中のタスクを「太字」/反転
        'z'       :カラー/モノクロ
.\"O     other commands available\fR
.\"O         'a'/'w'   :apply, then go to next/prior
.\"O         <Enter>   :apply and exit
.\"O         'q'       :abandon current changes and exit
    その他のコマンドも利用可能である\fR
        'a'/'w'   :適用し、次／前へ行く。
        <Enter>   :適用し、終了する。
        'q'       :現在の変更を破棄し、終了する。

.\"O If your use 'a' or 'w' to cycle the targeted window, you will
.\"O have applied the color scheme that was displayed when you left that window.
.\"O You can, of course, easily return to any window and reapply different
.\"O colors or turn colors \*F completely with the 'z' toggle.
\'a' または 'w' を使って対象となるウィンドウを順番に選択し、
そのウィンドウを抜けるときに表示されているカラー形式を適用できる。
もちろん、任意のウィンドウに戻って別な色を再適用したり、
\'z' トグルで色を完全に \*F にすることも簡単にできる。

.\"O The Color Mapping screen can also be used to change the \*(CW/field group
.\"O in either \*(FM or \*(AM.
.\"O Whatever was targeted when 'q' or <Enter> was pressed will be made current
.\"O as you return to the \*(Me display.
カラーマッピングスクリーンは、\*(FMまたは\*(AMにおける
\*(CW/フィールドグループを変更するのにも使える。
\'q' または <Enter> が押されたときに対象とされていたフィールドは、
\*(Me の表示に戻ったときにカレントフィールドにされる。

.\"O .SH 4. ALTERNATE\-DISPLAY Mode
.SH 4. 別形式の表示モード
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 4a. WINDOWS Overview
.SS 4a. ウィンドウの概要
.TP
.\"O .B Field Groups/Windows\fR:
.B フィールドグループ/ウィンドウ\fR:
.br
.\"O In \*(FM there is a single window represented by the entire screen.
.\"O That single window can still be changed to display 1 of 4 different\fB field
.\"O groups\fR (\*(Xc 'G' \*(CI, repeated below).
\*(FMでは、スクリーン全体で表される単一のウィンドウがある。
この単一のウィンドウは、
4 つの異なる\fBフィールドグループ\fR
(以下で繰り返し出てくる\*(CI 'G' \*(Xc) のうち
1 つのフィールドグループの表示に変更することもできる。
.\"O Each of the 4 field groups has a unique separately configurable\fB \*(SA\fR
.\"O and its own configurable\fB \*(TA\fR.
4 つのフィールドグループの各々には、
個別に設定可能な\fB\*(SA\fRとフィールドグループ毎の\fB\*(TA\fRがある。

.\"O In \*(AM, those 4 underlying field groups can now be made visible
.\"O simultaneously, or can be turned \*F individually at your command.
\*(AMでは、これら 4 つのフィールドグループは同時に表示することもできるし、
コマンドで個別に \*F にすることもできる。

.\"O The \*(SA will always exist, even if it's only the message line.
.\"O At any given time only\fI one\fR \*(SA can be displayed.
.\"O However, depending on your commands, there could be from\fI zero\fR
.\"O to\fI four\fR separate \*(TDs currently showing on the screen.
\*(SAは、たとえそのメッセージ行だけであっても、常に存在する。
どの時点でも\fI1 つの\fR\*(SAだけを表示することができる。
しかし、コマンドによっては、\fI0\fR から \fI4\fR 個までの
別々の\*(TDがスクリーンに表示されているかもしれない。

.TP
.\"O .B Current Window\fR:
.B カレントウィンドウ\fR:
.br
.\"O The \*(CW is the window associated with the \*(SA and the window to which
.\"O task related commands are always directed.
.\"O Since in \*(AM you can toggle the \*(TD \*F, some commands might be
.\"O restricted for the \*(CW.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: direct の良い訳が思い浮かばない。
.\"Osato: 
\*(CWとは、\*(SAに関連づけられたウィンドウと、
タスクに関連するコマンドが常に送られるウィンドウである。
\*(AMでは、\*(TD のトグルを \*F できるので、
いくつかのコマンドは\*(CWでは制限されるかもしれない。

.\"O A further complication arises when you have toggled the first \*(SA
.\"O line \*F.
.\"O With the loss of the window name (the 'l' toggled line), you'll not easily
.\"O know what window is the \*(CW.
\*(SAの先頭行のトグルを \*F にすると、更に複雑になる。
ウィンドウ名 ('l' でトグルされる行) がないと、
どのウィンドウが\*(CWなのか簡単に分からなくなる。

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 4b. COMMANDS for Windows
.SS 4b. ウィンドウにおけるコマンド
.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fB-\fR\' and \'\fB_\fR\' :\fIShow/Hide_Window(s)_toggles\fR
\ \ \'\fB-\fR\' と \'\fB_\fR\' :\fIウィンドウの表示/非表示のトグル\fR
.\"O The '-' key turns the \*(CW's \*(TD \*O and \*F.
.\"O When \*O, that \*(TA will show a minimum of the columns header you've
.\"O established with the 'f' and 'o' commands.
.\"O It will also reflect any other \*(TA options/toggles you've applied yielding
.\"O zero or more tasks.
\'-' キーは\*(CWの\*(TDを \*O または \*F にする。
\*O の場合、この\*(TAは 'f' と 'o' コマンドで確定した
最小限のカラムヘッダしか表示しない。
またこの\*(TAは、ユーザーが 0 個以上のタスクに対して適用した
他の\*(TAのオプション/トグルも反映する。

.\"O The '_' key does the same for all \*(TDs.
.\"O In other words, it switches between the currently visible \*(TD(s) and any
.\"O \*(TD(s) you had toggled \*F.
\'_' キーは同じことを全ての\*(TDに対して行う。
一方、このキーは現在表示されている\*(TDと
ユーザーがトグルを \*F にした\*(TDを切り替える。
.\"O If all 4 \*(TDs are currently visible, this \*(CI will leave the \*(SA
.\"O as the only display element.
4 つの\*(TDが現在全て表示されている場合、
この\*(CIは\*(SAのみを表示される要素として残す。

.TP 7
.\"O *\ \'\fB=\fR\' and \'\fB+\fR\' :\fIEqualize_(re-balance)_Window(s)\fR
*\ \'\fB=\fR\' と \'\fB+\fR\' :\fIウィンドウの均等化 (バランスの取り直し)\fR
.\"O The '=' key forces the \*(CW's \*(TD to be visible.
.\"O It also reverses any 'i' (idle tasks) and 'n' (max tasks) commands that might
.\"O be active.
\'=' キーは\*(CWの\*(TDを表示させる。
このキーは有効になっている 'i' (アイドルタスク) と
\'n' (最大タスク数) コマンドを無効にする。

.\"O The '+' key does the same for all windows.
.\"O The four \*(TDs will reappear, evenly balanced.
.\"O They will also have retained any customizations you had previously applied,
.\"O except for the 'i' (idle tasks) and 'n' (max tasks) commands.
\'+' キーは同じことを全てのウィンドウに対して行う。
4 つの\*(TDは再度表示され、均等にバランスがとられる。
\*(TDには、ユーザーが以前に適用したカスタマイズも保持される。
ただし、\'i' (アイドルタスク) と 'n' (最大タスク数) コマンドは除く。

.TP 7
.\"O *\ \'\fBA\fR\' :\fIAlternate_Display_Mode_toggle\fR
*\ \'\fBA\fR\' :\fI別形式の表示モードのトグル\fR
.\"O This command will switch between \*(FM and \*(AM.
このコマンドは\*(FMと\*(AMを切り替える。

.\"O The first time you issue this command, all four \*(TDs will be shown.
.\"O Thereafter when you switch modes, you will see only the \*(TD(s) you've
.\"O chosen to make visible.
このコマンドを初めて発行すると、4 つの\*(TDが全て表示される。
その後、モードを切り替えると、表示対象として選んだ\*(TDのみが表示される。

.TP 7
.\"O *\ \'\fBa\fR\' and \'\fBw\fR\' :\fINext_Window_Forward/Backward\fR
*\ \'\fBa\fR\' と \'\fBw\fR\' :\fI次のウィンドウを前方/後方へ進める\fR
.\"O This will change the \*(CW, which in turn changes the window to which
.\"O commands are directed.
.\"O These keys act in a circular fashion so you can reach any desired \*(CW
.\"O using either key.
これらのキーは\*(CWを変更する。
コマンドが送られるウィンドウを順番に変更する。
これらのキーは巡回する形式で動作するので、
どちらのキーを使っても希望する \*(CW へ辿り着ける。

.\"O Assuming the window name is visible (you have not toggled 'l' \*F),
.\"O whenever the \*(CW name loses its emphasis/color, that's a reminder
.\"O the \*(TD is \*F and many commands will be restricted.
ウインドウ名が表示されている ('l' のトグルを \*F にしていない) 場合に、
\*(CWの名前が強調/色付き表示されていないときは、
\*(TD が \*F で多くのコマンドが制限されていることを知らせている。

.TP 7
.\"O *\ \'\fBG\fR\' :\fIChoose_Another_Window/Field_Group\fR
*\ \'\fBG\fR\' :\fI他のウィンドウ/フィールドグループの選択\fR
.\"O You will be prompted to enter a number between 1 and 4 designating the
.\"O window/field group which should be made the \*(CW.
1 から 4 まで数字を入力するプロンプトが出される。
この数字は\*(CWに設定するウィンドウ/フィールドグループを表す。

.\"O In \*(FM, this command is necessary to alter the \*(CW.
.\"O In \*(AM, it is simply a less convenient alternative to the 'a' and 'w'
.\"O commands.
\*(FMでは、このコマンドは\*(CWを変更するのに必須である。
\*(AMでは、'a' と 'w' コマンドに比べてあまり便利ではない、
単なる代替コマンドである。

.TP 7
.\"O \ \ \'\fBg\fR\' :\fIChange_Window/Field_Group_Name\fR
\ \ \'\fBg\fR\' :\fIウィンドウ/フィールドグループ名の変更\fR
.\"O You will be prompted for a new name to be applied to the \*(CW.
.\"O It does not require that the window name be visible
.\"O (the 'l' toggle to be \*O).
\*(CWに適用する新しい名前を入力するプロンプトが出される。
ウィンドウ名が表示されている ('l' のトグルが \*O になっている) 必要はない。

.IP "*" 3
.\"O The \*(CIs shown with an \*(AS have use beyond \*(AM.
.\"O     \'=', 'A', 'G'  are always available
.\"O     \'a', 'w'       act the same when color mapping
\*(ASが付いた\*(CIは、\*(AM以外でも使われる。
    \'=', 'A', 'G'  常に利用可能である。
    \'a', 'w'       カラーマッピングのときと同じ動作をする。


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH 5. FILES
.SH 5. ファイル
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 5a. SYSTEM Configuration File
.SS 5a. システムの設定ファイル
.\"O The presence of this file will influence which version of the 'help' screen
.\"O is shown to an ordinary user.
.\"O More importantly, it will limit what ordinary users are allowed
.\"O to do when \*(Me is running.
このファイルが存在すると、どのバージョンの「ヘルプ」スクリーンが
通常のユーザーに表示されるかに影響を与える。
より重要なのは、\*(Me の実行中に通常のユーザーに許可されることを、
このファイルで制限できることである。
.\"O They will not be able to issue the following commands.
.\"O    k         Kill a task
.\"O    r         Renice a task
.\"O    d or s    Change delay/sleep interval
通常のユーザーは以下のコマンドを発行できる。
   k             タスクを kill する。
   r             タスクを renice する。
   d または s    遅延時間/スリープの間隔を変更する。

.\"O The system \*(CF is\fB not\fR created by \*(Me.
.\"O Rather, you create this file manually and place it in the \fI/etc\fR
.\"O directory.
システムの\*(CFは\*(Meによって作成\fBされない\fR。
逆に、ユーザーがこのファイルを手動で作成し、\fI/etc\fR ディレクトリに置く。
.\"O Its name must be 'toprc' and must have no leading '.' (period).
.\"O It must have only two lines.
このファイル名は 'toprc' でなければならず、
先頭に '.' (ピリオド) が付いてはならない。
このファイルには 2 行だけしか書かれていてはならない。

.\"O Here is an example of the contents of\fI /etc/toprc\fR:
以下に \fI/etc/toprc\fR の内容の例を示す:
.\"O    s         # line 1: 'secure' mode switch
.\"O    5.0       # line 2: 'delay'\ \ interval in seconds
   s         # 1 行目: 「セキュア」モードのスイッチ
   5.0       # 2 行目: 「遅延」間隔 (秒単位)

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 5b. PERSONAL Configuration File
.SS 5b. 個人の設定ファイル
.\"O This file is written as '$HOME/.your-name-4-top' + 'rc'.
.\"O Use the 'W' \*(CI to create it or update it.
このファイルは '$HOME/.top に付けた名前' + 'rc' として書き出される。
\*(CI 'W' で、このファイルを作成または更新できる。

.\"O Here is the general layout:
以下に一般的なレイアウトを示す:
.\"O    global    # line 1: the program name/alias notation
.\"O      "       # line 2: id,altscr,irixps,delay,curwin
.\"O    per ea    # line a: winname,fieldscur
.\"O    window    # line b: winflags,sortindx,maxtasks
.\"O      "       # line c: summclr,msgsclr,headclr,taskclr
   グローバル      # 1 行目: プログラム名/エイリアス、メモ
       "           # 2 行目: id,altscr,irixps,delay,curwin
   ウィンドウ毎    # 行 a  : ウィンドウ名,fieldscur
       "           # 行 b  : winflags,sortindx,maxtasks
       "           # 行 c  : summclr,msgsclr,headclr,taskclr

.\"O If the $HOME variable is not present, \*(Me will try to write the
.\"O personal \*(CF to the current directory, subject to permissions.
環境変数 $HOME が存在しない場合、
\*(Me は個人の\*(CFをカレントディレクトリに書き込もうとする。
ただしカレントディレクトリの権限に従う。

.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH 6. STUPID TRICKS Sampler
.SH 6. くだらないトリックのサンプル
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O Many of these 'tricks' work best when you give \*(Me a scheduling boost.
.\"O So plan on starting him with a nice value of -10, assuming you've got
.\"O the authority.
これらの「トリック」の多くは、ユーザーが \*(Me の
スケジューリングを向上させた場合に、最もうまく動作する。
ここでは \*(Me を nice 値 -10 で開始するため、
ユーザーが権限を持っていると仮定している。

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 6a. Kernel Magic
.SS 6a. カーネルのマジック
.\" sorry, just can't help it -- don't ya love the sound of this?
.\"O For these stupid tricks, \*(Me needs \*(FM.
これらのくだらないトリックでは、\*(Me が\*(FMになっている必要がある。
.\" ( apparently AM static was a potential concern )

.New
.\"O The user interface, through prompts and help, intentionally implies
.\"O that the delay interval is limited to tenths of a second.
ユーザーインタフェース (プロンプトからヘルプまで) では、
意図的に遅延間隔が 1/10 秒までに制限されている。
.\"O However, you're free to set any desired delay.
.\"O If you want to see Linux at his scheduling best, try a delay of .09
.\"O seconds or less.
しかしユーザーは希望する遅延時間を自由に設定できる。
Linux が \*(Me に対して最も良いスケジューリングを行うのを見たいなら、
遅延時間を 0.09 秒以下にすればよい。

.\"O For this experiment, under x-windows open an xterm and maximize it.
.\"O Then do the following:
この実験では、X Window System で xterm をオープンして最大化する。
その後、以下を実行する:
.\"O   . provide a scheduling boost and tiny delay via:
.\"O       nice -n -10 top -d.09
  . スケジューリングを向上させ、遅延時間を短くする:
      nice -n -10 top -d.09
.\"O   . keep sorted column highlighting \*F to minimize
.\"O     path length
  . ソートされるカラムのハイライトを \*F にし、
    パスの長さを最小化する。
.\"O   . turn \*O reverse row highlighting for emphasis
  . 行の反転によるハイライトを \*O にして、強調する。
.\"O   . try various sort columns (TIME/MEM work well),
.\"O     and normal or reverse sorts to bring the most
.\"O     active processes into view
  . いろいろなソートカラム (TIME/MEM がうまく動作する) と
    正順・逆順のソートを試し、最もアクティブなプロセスが
    ビューに入るようにする。

.\"O What you'll see is a very busy Linux doing what he's always done for you,
.\"O but there was no program available to illustrate this.
Linux がユーザーのために常に動作し、
とても忙しくしているのが分かるだろう。
しかしこれを説明できるプログラムはなかった。

.New
.\"O Under an xterm using 'white-on-black' colors, try setting \*(Me's task color
.\"O to black and be sure that task highlighting is set to bold, not reverse.
.\"O Then set the delay interval to around .3 seconds.
xterm で「黒地に白」を使い、\*(Me のタスクの色を黒に設定し、
タスクのハイライトを反転でなく太字になっていることを確認して欲しい。
そして遅延間隔を 0.3 秒程度に設定する。

.\"O After bringing the most active processes into view, what you'll see are
.\"O the ghostly images of just the currently running tasks.
最もアクティブなプロセスがビューに入った後で、
現在実行中のタスクがゴーストのようなイメージとして見えるだろう。

.New
.\"O Delete the existing rcfile, or create a new symlink.
.\"O Start this new version then type 'T' (a secret key, \*(Xt 3c. TASK Area
.\"O Commands, Sorting) followed by 'W' and 'q'.
.\"O Finally, restart the program with -d0 (zero delay).
既存のリソースファイルを削除するか、新しいシンボリックリンクを作成する。
この新しいバージョンを起動し、'T' (隠しキー 3c. タスクエリアコマンド、
ソート\*(Xt) を入力し、続いて 'W' と 'q' を入力する。
最後に、プログラムを -d0 (遅延時間 0) で再度起動する。

.\"O Your display will be refreshed at three times the rate of the former \*(Me,
.\"O a 300% speed advantage.
.\"O As \*(Me climbs the TIME ladder, be as patient as you can while speculating
.\"O on whether or not \*(Me will ever reach the \*(Me.
この表示は前の \*(Me より 3 倍の割合で更新され、300% スピードアップする。
\*(Me は TIME で上位に上がってくるので、
\*(Me が最上位に到達するのに投資している間は、忍耐強く待って欲しい。

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 6b. Bouncing Windows
.SS 6b. バウンドするウィンドウ
.\"O For these stupid tricks, \*(Me needs \*(AM.
これらのくだらないトリックでは、\*(Me が\*(AMになっている必要がある。

.New
.\"O With 3 or 4 \*(TDs visible, pick any window other than the last
.\"O and turn idle processes \*F.
.\"O Depending on where you applied 'i', sometimes several \*(TDs are bouncing and
.\"O sometimes it's like an accordion, as \*(Me tries his best to allocate space.
3 個または 4 個の\*(TDで表示されているときに、
最後のウィンドウ以外を選択し、アイドルプロセスを \*F にする。
\'i' を適用しているかによって、いくつかの\*(TDがときどきバウンドし、
アコーディオンのようになる。
これは \*(Me がスペースを確保するのに最善を尽くしているためである。

.New
.\"O Set each window's summary lines differently: one with no memory; another with
.\"O no states; maybe one with nothing at all, just the message line.
.\"O Then hold down 'a' or 'w' and watch a variation on bouncing windows \*(EM
.\"O hopping windows.
各ウィンドウのサマリー行を別々に設定する:
メモリ使用量の表示なし・状態表示なし・何も表示しない・メッセージ行のみ。
そして 'a' または 'w' を押し続けると、バウンドするウィンドウの別バージョン
\*(EM 跳ね上がるウインドウが見られる。

.New
.\"O Display all 4 windows and for each, in turn, set idle processes to \*F.
.\"O You've just entered the "extreme bounce" zone.
4 つのウィンドウ全てを表示し、
各ウィンドウでアイドルプロセスの表示を \*F にする。
そうすると「非常にバウンドする」ゾーンに入るだろう。

.\" ......................................................................
.\"O .SS 6c. The Big Bird Window
.SS 6c. 大きな雛鳥のようなウィンドウ
.\"O This stupid trick also requires \*(AM.
このくだらないトリックでも\*(AMが必要である。

.New
.\"O Display all 4 windows and make sure that 1:Def is the \*(CW.
.\"O Then, keep increasing window size until the all the other \*(TDs
.\"O are "pushed out of the nest".
4 つのウィンドウ全てを表示し、1:Def が\*(CWになっているのを確認する。
そして他の全ての\*(TDが「巣から押し出される」まで、
ウィンドウサイズを大きくし続ける。

.\"O When they've all been displaced, toggle between all visible/invisible windows.
.\"O Then ponder this:
他のウィンドウがすべて置き換えられたら、
全ての表示/非表示ウィンドウをトグルする。
そして以下の言葉について良く考えてみよう:
.br
.\"O    is \*(Me fibbing or telling honestly your imposed truth?
   \*(Me は嘘をついているのか、ユーザーが強要した
   真実を正直に言っているのか?


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH 7. BUGS
.SH 7. バグ
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O Send bug reports to:
バグ報告は以下に送って欲しい:
   Albert D\. Cahalan, <albert@users.sf.net>


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH 8. HISTORY Former top
.SH 8. 以前の top の履歴
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The original top was written by Roger Binns,
.\"O based on Branko Lankester's <lankeste@fwi.uva.nl> ps program.
オリジナルの top は、Branko Lankester <lankeste@fwi.uva.nl> の
ps プログラムを元にして Roger Binns が書いた。

.\"O Robert Nation <nation@rocket.sanders.lockheed.com>
.\"O adapted it for the proc file system.
Robert Nation <nation@rocket.sanders.lockheed.com> は
これを proc ファイルシステムに適合させた。

.\"O Helmut Geyer <Helmut.Geyer@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de>
.\"O added support for configurable fields.
Helmut Geyer <Helmut.Geyer@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de> は
設定可能フィールドのサポートを追加した。

.\"O Plus many other individuals contributed over the years.
その他にも多くの人々が長年に渡って貢献してきた。


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH 9. AUTHOR
.SH 9. 著者
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O This entirely new and enhanced replacement was written by:
この全く新しく拡張された top の置き換え版は
   Jim / James C. Warner, <warnerjc@worldnet.att.net>
によって書かれた。
.ig
   ( as a means to learn Linux, can you believe it? )
   ( & he accidentally learned a little groff, too! )
..

.\"O With invaluable help from:
以下の方々からは、計り知れない助けをしてもらった:
   Albert D\. Cahalan, <albert@users.sf.net>
   Craig Small, <csmall@small.dropbear.id.au>

.ig
.rj 2
.B -*-\fR few though they are, some yet believe\fB -*-\fR
.B -*-\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\fRin-the-\fBart\fR-of-programming\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\fB-*-\fR
..

.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH 10. SEE ALSO
.SH 10. 関連項目
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.BR free (1),
.BR ps (1),
.BR uptime (1),
.BR atop (1),
.BR slabtop (1),
.BR vmstat (8),
.BR w (1).


.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.ig
.rj 1
\-*-
.PD
.in -3
Copyright (c) 2002 \*(EM JC Warner & Associates, Ltd.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Front-Cover Texts, no Back-Cover Texts, and with the following
Invariant Sections and any sub-sections therein:
.na
.hy 0
.in +3
STUPID\ TRICKS\ Sampler;
.br
AUTHOR
.in
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
\(dqGNU Free Documentation License\(dq.
..
.
.\" end: active doc ||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
.\" ||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||

.ig
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH GNU Free Documentation License
Version 1.1, March 2000

Copyright (C) 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

.SS 0. PREAMBLE
The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
written document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.  Secondarily,
this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.  It
complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does.  But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

.SS 1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a
notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed
under the terms of this License.  The "Document", below, refers to any
such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a licensee, and is
addressed as "you".

A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of
the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject
(or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly
within that overall subject.  (For example, if the Document is in part a
textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License.

The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed,
as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License.

A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, whose contents can be viewed and edited directly and
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup has been designed to thwart or discourage
subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.  A copy that is
not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML
or XML using a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple
HTML designed for human modification.  Opaque formats include
PostScript, PDF, proprietary formats that can be read and edited only
by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or
processing tools are not generally available, and the
machine-generated HTML produced by some word processors for output
purposes only.

The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page" means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

.SS 2. VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.

.SS 3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100,
and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose
the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a publicly-accessible computer-network location containing a complete
Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material, which the
general network-using public has access to download anonymously at no
charge using public-standard network protocols.  If you use the latter
option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin
distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location
until at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque
copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to
the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give
them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.

.SS 4. MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

.HP 3
.B A\fR.\ Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions (which should,
if there were any, be listed in the History section of the Document).
You may use the same title as a previous version if the original publisher of
that version gives permission.
.HP 3
.B B\fR.\ List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version,
together with at least five of the principal authors of the Document
(all of its principal authors, if it has less than five).
.HP 3
.B C\fR.\ State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified
Version, as the publisher.
.HP 3
.B D\fR.\ Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
.HP 3
.B E\fR.\ Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent
to the other copyright notices.
.HP 3
.B F\fR.\ Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of
this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
.HP 3
.B G\fR.\ Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
.HP 3
.B H\fR.\ Include an unaltered copy of this License.
.HP 3
.B I\fR.\ Preserve the section entitled "History", and its title, and add to it
an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the
Modified Version as given on the Title Page.
If there is no section entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating
the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its Title
Page, then add an item describing the Modified Version as stated in the
previous sentence.
.HP 3
.B J\fR.\ Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network
locations given in the Document for previous versions it was based on.
These may be placed in the "History" section.
You may omit a network location for a work that was published at least four
years before the Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version
it refers to gives permission.
.HP 3
.B K\fR.\ In any section entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", preserve
the section's title, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone of
each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
.HP 3
.B L\fR.\ Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their
text and in their titles.
Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.
.HP 3
.B M\fR.\ Delete any section entitled "Endorsements".
Such a section may not be included in the Modified Version.
.HP 3
.B N\fR.\ Do not retitle any existing section as "Endorsements" or to conflict
in title with any Invariant Section.

.PP
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

.SS 5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled "History"
in the various original documents, forming one section entitled
"History"; likewise combine any sections entitled "Acknowledgements",
and any sections entitled "Dedications".  You must delete all sections
entitled "Endorsements."

.SS 6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.

.SS 7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version
of the Document, provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the
compilation.  Such a compilation is called an "aggregate", and this
License does not apply to the other self-contained works thus compiled
with the Document, on account of their being thus compiled, if they
are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one quarter
of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that surround only the Document within the aggregate.
Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.

.SS 8. TRANSLATION
Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
translation of this License provided that you also include the
original English version of this License.  In case of a disagreement
between the translation and the original English version of this
License, the original English version will prevail.

.SS 9. TERMINATION
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other attempt to
copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However,
parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

.SS 10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License "or any later version" applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.

.SS ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents
To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:

.IP "" 3
Copyright (c)  YEAR  YOUR NAME.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the
terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any later version
published by the Free Software Foundation;\ \ with the Invariant Sections being
LIST THEIR TITLES, with the Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the
Back-Cover Texts being LIST.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".

If you have no Invariant Sections, write "with no Invariant Sections"
instead of saying which ones are invariant.  If you have no
Front-Cover Texts, write "no Front-Cover Texts" instead of
"Front-Cover Texts being LIST"; likewise for Back-Cover Texts.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.

.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH \fRend of\fB GNU Free Documentation License
.IP ""
.PP
..
.\" end: gfdl license ||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
.\" ||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
