.\"             -*-Nroff-*-
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Tanoshima Hidetohsi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Sep. 18, 1997   Tanoshima Hidetoshi <tano@sainet.or.jp> 
.\" Updated Mar  1 22:55:36 JST 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH UPTIME 1 "26 Jan 1993" "Cohesive Systems" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O uptime \- Tell how long the system has been running.
uptime \- システムがどのくらいの期間稼働し続けているかを表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B uptime
.br
.BR uptime " [" "\-V" ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B uptime
.\"O gives a one line display of the following information.
.B uptime
は以下の情報を１行で表示する。
.\"O The current time,
.\"O how long the system has been running,
.\"O how many users are currently logged on,
.\"O and the system load averages for the past 1, 5, and 15 minutes.
現在の時刻、
システムが稼働し続けている期間、
現在ログインしているユーザーの数、
過去 1, 5, 15 分のシステムの平均負荷。
.sp
.\"O This is the same information contained in the header line displayed by 
.\"O .BR w (1).
これは
.BR w (1)
を実行した際、ヘッダー行に表示されるものと同じ情報である。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .IR /var/run/utmp "	information about who is currently logged on"
.IR /var/run/utmp "	  現在ログインしているユーザー情報"
.br
.\"O .IR /proc "	process information"
.IR /proc "	       プロセス情報"
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.B uptime
は Larry Greenfield (greenfie@gauss.rutgers.edu) と
Michael K. Johnson (johnsonm@sunsite.unc.edu) が書いた。

.\"O Please send bug reports to <albert@users.sf.net>
バグレポートは <albert@users.sf.net> に送ってほしい。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ps (1),
.BR top (1),
.BR utmp (5),
.BR w (1)

