.\"             -*-Nroff-*-
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Tanoshima Hidetohsi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Sep 18, 1997   Tanoshima Hidetoshi <tano@sainet.or.jp> 
.\" Updated May  1 22:57:22 JST 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH W 1 "8 Dec 1993 " " " "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O w \- Show who is logged on and what they are doing.
w \- ログインしている人とその人がやっていることを表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B w \-
.RB [ husfV ]
.RI [ user ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B "w "
.\"O displays information about the users currently on the machine,
.\"O and their processes.
.B "w "
は現在マシンにいるユーザーとその人のプロセスについての情報を表示する。
.\"O The header shows, in this order,  the current time,
.\"O how long the system has been running,
.\"O how many users are currently logged on,
.\"O and the system load averages for the past 1, 5, and 15 minutes.
ヘッダには、現在の時刻、システムが稼働している期間、現在ログインしている
ユーザーの数、過去 1, 5, 15分でのシステムの平均負荷が順に表示
される。
.sp
.\"O The following entries are displayed for each user:
.\"O login name, the tty name, the remote host, login time, idle time, JCPU, PCPU,
.\"O and the command line of their current process.
以下のエントリがそれぞれのユーザーに対して表示される:
ログイン名、端末名、リモートホスト名、ログイン時刻、アイドル時間、
JCPU, PCPU, ユーザーのカレントプロセスのコマンドライン。
.sp
.\"O The JCPU time is the time used by all processes attached to the tty.  It
.\"O does not include past background jobs, but does include currently
.\"O running background jobs.
JCPU 時間はそのttyから実行されている全プロセスが使った時間である。これには
過去のバックグラウンドジョブは含まれないが、現在実行しているバックグラ
ウンドジョブは含まれる。
.sp
.\"O The PCPU time is the time used by the current process, named in the "what"
.\"O field.
PCPU 時間は "what" 項目で示されているカレントプロセスが使っている時間
である。

.PP
.\"O .SH "COMMAND\-LINE OPTIONS"
.SH オプション
.TP 0.5i
.B "\-h "
.\"O Don't print the header.
ヘッダを表示しない。
.TP 0.5i
.B "\-u "
.\"O Ignores the username while figuring out the current process and cpu
.\"O times.  To demonstrate this, do a "su" and do a "w" and a "w -u".
現在のプロセス時間と CPU 時間を計算するときに、(ログイン名と現在の)
ユーザー名(の違い)を無視する。このオプションについて理解するために、
"su" した後、"w" と "w -u" を実行してみるとよい。
.TP 0.5i
.B "\-s "
.\"O Use the short format.
短く表示する。
.\"O Don't print the login time, JCPU or PCPU times.
ログイン時刻、JCPU, PCPU を表示しない。
.TP 0.5i
.B "\-f "
.\"O Toggle printing the
.\"O .B from
.\"O (remote hostname) field.  The default as
.\"O released is for the
.\"O .B from
.\"O field to not be printed, although your system administrator or
.\"O distribution maintainer may have compiled a version in which the
.\"O .B from
.\"O field is shown by default.
.B from
(リモートホスト名) 項目を表示するかしないかのトグル。デフォルトでは無
効、つまり
.B from
項目は表示されない。しかし、システム管理者や
ディストリビューションの管理者はデフォルトで
.B from
フィールドを表示するようにコンパイルすることもできる。
.TP 0.5i
.B "\-V "
.\"O Display version information.
バージョン情報を表示する。
.TP 0.5i
.B "user "
.\"O Show information about the specified user only.
指定したユーザーの情報のみ表示する。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.I /var/run/utmp
.\"O information about who is currently logged on
現在ログインしているユーザーの情報
.TP
.I /proc
.\"O process information
プロセス情報
.PP

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR free (1),
.BR ps (1),
.BR top (1),
.BR uptime (1),
.BR utmp (5),
.BR who (1)

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O .B w
.\"O was re-written almost entirely by Charles Blake, based on the version by Larry
.\"O Greenfield <greenfie@gauss.rutgers.edu> and Michael K. Johnson
.\"O <johnsonm@redhat.com>.
.B w
は、Larry Greenfield (greenfie@gauss.rutgers.edu) と Michael K. Johnson
(johnsonm@sunsite.unc.edu) のバージョンを基にほとんど全部が 
Charles Blake によって書き直された。

.\"O Please send bug reports to <albert@users.sf.net>
バグレポートは <albert@users.sf.net> に送ってほしい。
