.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Jul 15 02:40:41 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated Wed Aug 10 15:51:58 JST 2011
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@kc5.so-net.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Thu Sep 15 19:00:32 JST 2011
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@kc5.so-net.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH WATCH 1 "1999 Apr 3" " " "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O watch \- execute a program periodically, showing output fullscreen
.SH 名前
watch \- プログラムを定期的に実行し、出力をフルスクリーンで表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B watch
.I [\-dhvt] [\-n <seconds>] [\-\-differences[=cumulative]] [\-\-help] [\-\-interval=<seconds>] [\-\-no\-title] [\-\-version] <command>
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR watch
.\"O runs
.\"O .I command
.\"O repeatedly, displaying its output (the first screenfull).  This allows you to
.\"O watch the program output change over time.  By default, the program is run
.\"O every 2 seconds; use 
.\"O .I -n
.\"O or
.\"O .I --interval
.\"O to specify a different interval.
.B watch
は
.I command
を繰り返し実行し、その出力を表示する (一画面に収まる一杯まで)。
.B watch
を用いると、プログラムの出力の経時変化を監視できる。
デフォルトでは、プログラムは 2 秒おきに実行される。
時間の間隔を変えたい場合は、
.IR -n " または " --interval
を用いる。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I -d
.\"O or
.\"O .I --differences
.\"O flag will highlight the differences between successive updates.  The 
.\"O .I --cumulative
.\"O option makes highlighting "sticky", presenting a running display of all
.\"O positions that have ever changed.  The
.IR -d " または " --differences
このフラグを指定すると、更新が行われたとき、
前回と異なっている部分をハイライト表示する。
.I cumulative
オプションをつけると、ハイライトが "sticky" になる。
すなわち、
実行が開始されてから変更があった全ての部分をハイライトで表示する。
.\"O .I -t
.\"O or
.\"O .I --no-title
.\"O option turns off the header showing the interval, command, and current
.\"O time at the top of the display, as well as the following blank line.
.IR -t " または " --no-title
このオプションを指定すると、画面の先頭行の
時間間隔・コマンド名・現在時刻を示すヘッダと、
その後の空行が表示されなくなる。
.PP
.\"O .BR watch
.\"O will run until interrupted.
.B watch
は中断されるまで実行を続ける。
.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.\"O Note that
.\"O .I command
.\"O is given to "sh -c"
.\"O which means that you may need to use extra quoting to get the desired effect.
.I command
は "sh -c" に与えられる。したがって
.I command
を望みの通りに動作させるには、クォートを余分に用いる必要があるかもしれない。
.PP
.\"O Note that POSIX option processing is used (i.e., option processing stops at
.\"O the first non-option argument).  This means that flags after
.\"O .I command
.\"O don't get interpreted by
.\"O .BR watch
.\"O itself.
POSIX のオプション処理が用いられる
(つまり、オプション処理は最初にオプション以外の引数が現れた時点で終了する)
ことに注意して欲しい。
つまり、
.I command
以降のフラグを
.B watch
は解釈しない。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.PP
.\"O To watch for mail, you might do
メールを監視する:
.IP
watch \-n 60 from
.PP
.\"O To watch the contents of a directory change, you could use
ディレクトリの中身の変化を監視する:
.IP
watch \-d ls \-l
.PP
.\"O If you're only interested in files owned by user joe, you might use 
ユーザー joe の所有するファイルのみを監視する:
.IP
watch \-d 'ls \-l | fgrep joe'
.PP
.\"O To see the effects of quoting, try these out
クォートの効果を見てみたい場合:
.IP
watch echo $$
.IP
watch echo '$$'
.IP
watch echo "'"'$$'"'"
.PP
.\"O You can watch for your administrator to install the latest kernel with
管理者による最新のカーネルのインストール状況を監視する:
.IP
watch uname -r
.PP
.\"O (Just kidding.)
(ただの冗談です)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Upon terminal resize, the screen will not be correctly repainted until the
.\"O next scheduled update.  All
.\"O .I --differences
.\"O highlighting is lost on that update as well.
端末のリサイズ時に、スクリーンは正しく再描画されない。
次の更新スケジュールを待たなければならない。
.I --differences
によるハイライト表示は、その更新の際に全て失われる。
.PP
.\"O Non-printing characters are stripped from program output.  Use "cat -v" as
.\"O part of the command pipeline if you want to see them.
非印字文字はプログラム出力から取り除かれる。
これらをみたい場合は、コマンドのパイプラインのどこかで
"cat -v" を用いること。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 作者
.\"O The original
.\"O .B watch
.\"O was written by Tony Rems <rembo@unisoft.com> in 1991, with mods and
.\"O corrections by Francois Pinard.  It was reworked and new features added by
.\"O Mike Coleman <mkc@acm.org> in 1999.
もともとの
.B watch
は Tony Rems <rembo@unisoft.com> が 1991 年に書いた。
Francois Pinard が修正・変更を行った。
Mike Coleman <mkc@acm.org> が 1999 年に書き直し、
新しい機能を追加した。
