.\" Access Control Lists manual pages
.\"
.\" (C) 2000 Andreas Gruenbacher, <a.gruenbacher@bestbits.at>
.\"
.\" This manual page may used unter the terms of the GNU LGPL license, either
.\" version 2 of this license, or (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jun  5 03:36:23 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.fam T
.TH GETFACL 1 "ACL File Utilities" "May 2000" "Access Control Lists"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O getfacl \- get file access control lists
getfacl \- ファイルのアクセス制御リスト (access control list) を取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式

.B getfacl
[\-dRLPvh] file ...

.B getfacl
[\-dRLPvh] \-

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O For each file, getfacl displays the file name, owner, the group,
.\"O and the Access Control List (ACL). If a directory has a default ACL,
.\"O getfacl also displays the default ACL. Non-directories cannot have default ACLs.
各ファイルについて、getfacl はファイル名・所有者・グループ・
アクセス制御リスト (ACL) を表示する。
ディレクトリがデフォルト ACL を持つ場合、
getfacl はデフォルト ACL も表示する。
ディレクトリ以外はデフォルト ACL を持つことができない。

.\"O If getfacl is used on a file system that does not support ACLs, getfacl
.\"O displays the access permissions defined by the traditional file mode permission
.\"O bits.
ACL をサポートしていないファイルシステム上で getfacl を使うと、
getfacl は伝統的なファイルモード許可ビットで定義される
アクセス許可を表示する。

.\"O The output format of getfacl is as follows:
getfacl の出力形式は以下のようなものである:
.fam C
.RS
.nf
 1:  # file: somedir/
 2:  # owner: lisa
 3:  # group: staff
 4:  user::rwx
 5:  user:joe:rwx               #effective:r\-x
 6:  group::rwx                 #effective:r\-x
 7:  group:cool:r\-x
 8:  mask:r\-x
 9:  other:r\-x
10:  default:user::rwx
11:  default:user:joe:rwx       #effective:r\-x
12:  default:group::r\-x
13:  default:mask:r\-x
14:  default:other:\-\-\-

.fi
.RE
.fam T

.\"O Lines 4, 6 and 9 correspond to the user, group and other fields of
.\"O the file mode permission bits. These three are called the base ACL
.\"O entries. Lines 5 and 7 are named user and named group entries. Line 8 is
.\"O the effective rights mask. This entry limits the effective rights granted
.\"O to all groups and to named users. (The file owner and others permissions
.\"O are not affected by the effective rights mask; all other entries are.)
4, 6, 9 行目はファイルモード許可ビットの
ユーザ・グループ・その他のフィールドに対応する。
これら 3 つは基本 (base) ACL エントリと呼ばれる。
5, 7 行目は指名ユーザ (named user) と指名グループ (named group) である。
8 行目は実効権 (effective right) マスクである。
このエントリは全てのグループと
指名ユーザに許可されている実効権を制限する。
(ファイル所有者とその他の許可は、実効権マスクに影響を受けない。
その他全てのエントリは影響を受ける。)
.\"O Lines 10\-\-14 display
.\"O the default ACL associated with this directory. Directories may
.\"O have a default ACL. Regular files never have a default ACL.
10\-14 行目はディレクトリに関連づけられているデフォルトの ACL を表示する。
ディレクトリはデフォルト ACL を持つことができる。
通常のファイルはデフォルト ACL を持つことはない。

.\"O The default behavior for getfacl is to display both the ACL and the
.\"O default ACL, and to include an effective rights comment for lines
.\"O where the rights of the entry differ from the effective rights.
getfacl のデフォルト動作では、ACL とデフォルト ACL の両方を表示し、
エントリの権利が実効権と異なるときは、実効権をコメントにして表示する。

.\"O If output is to a terminal, the effective rights comment is aligned to
.\"O column 40. Otherwise, a single tab character separates the ACL entry
.\"O and the effective rights comment.
出力が端末である場合、実効権のコメントは 40 桁目に配置される。
端末でない場合は、1 つのタブで ACL エントリと実効権のコメントを区切る。

.\"O The ACL listings of multiple files are separated by blank lines.
.\"O The output of getfacl can also be used as input to setfacl.
複数のファイルの ACL を表示する場合は、空行で区切る。
getfacl の出力は setfacl の入力に使うこともできる。

.\"O .SS PERMISSIONS
.SS 許可
.\"O Process with search access to a file (i.e., processes with read access
.\"O to the containing directory of a file) are also granted read access
.\"O to the file's ACLs.  This is analogous to the permissions required for
.\"O accessing the file mode.
ファイルの検索アクセス権を持つプロセス
(つまり、ファイルを保持するディレクトリの
読み込みアクセス権を持つプロセス) は、
ファイルの ACL の読み込みアクセスも許可される。
これはファイルモードへアクセスする許可と類似している。

.\"O .SS OPTIONS
.SS オプション
.TP 4
.I \-\-access
.\"O Display the file access control list.
ファイルアクセス制御リストを表示する。
.TP
.I \-d, \-\-default
.\"O Display the default access control list.
デフォルトアクセス制御リストを表示する。
.TP
.I \-\-omit-header
.\"O Do not display the comment header (the first three lines of each file's output).
コメントヘッダ (各ファイルの出力の最初の 3 行) を表示しない。
.TP
.I \-\-all-effective
.\"O Print all effective rights comments, even if identical to the rights defined by the ACL entry.
実効権が ACL エントリで定義される権利と同じであっても、
全ての実効権のコメントを表示する。
.TP
.I \-\-no-effective
.\"O Do not print effective rights comments.
実効権のコメントを表示しない。
.TP
.I \-\-skip-base
.\"O Skip files that only have the base ACL entries (owner, group, others).
基本 ACL エントリ (所有者・グループ・その他) しか持たない
ファイルをスキップする。
.TP
.I \-R, \-\-recursive
.\"O List the ACLs of all files and directories recursively.
全てのファイルとディレクトリの ACL を再帰的に一覧表示する。
.TP
.I \-L, \-\-logical
.\"O Logical walk, follow symbolic links. The default behavior is to follow
.\"O symbolic link arguments, and to skip symbolic links encountered in
.\"O subdirectories.
論理的に辿り、シンボリックリンクを辿る。
デフォルトの動作では、シンボリックリンク引き数を辿り、
サブディレクトリで見つかったシンボリックリンクはスキップする。
.TP
.I \-P, \-\-physical
.\"O Physical walk, skip all symbolic links. This also skips symbolic link
.\"O arguments.
物理的に辿り、全てのシンボリックリンクをスキップする。
シンボリックリンク引き数もスキップする。
.TP
.I \-\-tabular
.\"O Use an alternative tabular output format. The ACL and the default ACL are displayed side by side. Permissions that are ineffective due to the ACL mask entry are displayed capitalized. The entry tag names for the ACL_USER_OBJ and ACL_GROUP_OBJ entries are also displayed in capital letters, which helps in spotting those entries.
別の表出力形式を使う。
ACL とデフォルト ACL が一緒に表示される。
ACL マスクエントリにより無効になっている許可は、大文字で表示される。
ACL_USER_OBJ と ACL_GROUP_OBJ エントリのエントリタグ名も大文字で表示され、
これらのエントリを見つけるのに役立つ。
.TP
.I \-\-absolute-names
.\"O Do not strip leading slash characters (`/'). The default behavior is to
.\"O strip leading slash characters.
先頭のスラッシュ文字 (`/') を取り除かない。
デフォルトの動作では、先頭のスラッシュ文字が取り除かれる。
.TP
.I \-\-version
.\"O Print the version of getfacl and exit.
getfacl のバージョンを表示して、終了する。
.TP
.I \-\-help
.\"O Print help explaining the command line options.
コマンドラインオプションを説明するヘルプを表示する。
.TP
.I \-\-
.\"O End of command line options. All remaining parameters are interpreted as file names, even if they start with a dash character.
コマンドラインオプションの終わり。
残りの引き数は、たとえダッシュ文字で始まっていたとしても、
ファイル名として解釈される。
.TP
.I \-
.\"O If the file name parameter is a single dash character, getfacl reads a list of files from standard input.
ファイル名引き数が 1 つのダッシュ文字である場合、
getfacl は標準入力からファイルのリストを読み込む。

.\"O .SH CONFORMANCE TO POSIX 1003.1e DRAFT STANDARD 17
.SH POSIX 1003.1e DRAFT STANDARD 17 への準拠
.\"O If the environment variable POSIXLY_CORRECT is defined, the default behavior of getfacl changes in the following ways: Unless otherwise specified, only the ACL is printed. The default ACL is only printed if the
.\"O .I \-d
.\"O option is given. If no command line parameter is given,
.\"O .I getfacl
.\"O behaves as if it was invoked as ``getfacl \-''.
環境変数 POSIXLY_CORRECT が定義されている場合、
getfacl のデフォルトの動作は、以下のように変わる。
特に指定されていなければ、ACL のみが表示される。
.I \-d
オプションが指定された場合、デフォルト ACL のみが表示される。
コマンドライン引き数が指定されない場合、
.I getfacl
は ``getfacl \-'' として起動されたときと同様に動作する。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Andreas Gruenbacher,
.RI < a.gruenbacher@bestbits.at >.

.\"O Please send your bug reports and comments to the above address.
バグ報告と意見は上記のアドレスに送ってほしい。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR setfacl "(1), " acl (5)
