.\" @(#) $Id: pppdump.8,v 1.1 1999/04/01 11:44:55 paulus Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all right reserved,
.\" Translated Mon Nov 10 13:12:16 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@aisys-jp.com>
.\"
.TH PPPDUMP 8 "1 April 1999"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O pppdump \- convert PPP record file to readable format
.SH 名前
pppdump \- PPP 記録ファイルを人が読める形式に変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pppdump
[
.B -h
|
.B -p
[
.B -d
]] [
.B -r
] [
.B -m \fImru
] [
.I file \fR...
]
.ti 12
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B pppdump
.\"O utility converts the files written using the \fIrecord\fR option of
.\"O .B pppd
.\"O into a human-readable format.  If one or more filenames are specified,
.\"O .B pppdump
.\"O will read each in turn; otherwise it will read its standard input.  In
.\"O each case the result is written to standard output.
.B pppdump
ユーティリティは
.B pppd
の \fIrecord\fR オプションを使用して書かれたファイルを、人が読める形式に変換する。
ひとつもしくはそれ以上のファイル名が指定された場合
.B pppdump
は順番にそれぞれのファイルを読み込む; ファイル名が指定されなかった場合は、
標準入力から読み込みを行う。
いずれの場合も、結果は標準出力に出力される。
.PP
.\"O The options are as follows:
オプションは以下の通りである：
.TP
.B -h
.\"O Prints the bytes sent and received in hexadecimal.  If neither this
.\"O option nor the \fB-p\fR option is specified, the bytes are printed as
.\"O the characters themselves, with non-printing and non-ASCII characters
.\"O printed as escape sequences.
送受信されたバイトを 16 進数で印刷する。このオプションも \fB-p\fR オプションも
指定されない場合、バイトは文字そのものとして印字される。このとき、印字できない文字や
非アスキー文字はエスケープシーケンスとして印字される。
.TP
.B -p
.\"O Collects the bytes sent and received into PPP packets, interpreting
.\"O the async HDLC framing and escape characters and checking the FCS
.\"O (frame check sequence) of each packet.  The packets are printed as hex
.\"O values and as characters (non-printable characters are printed as
.\"O `.').
async HDLC 構成およびエスケープキャラクタを解釈し、
非同期の HDLC フレーミングとエスケープキャラクタを解釈し、
各パケットの FCS (frame check sequence) をチェックして、PPP パケットに
格納されて送受信されたバイトを収集する。パケットは、16 進数と文字の両形式
印字される。（印字できない文字は、`.'として印字される）
.TP
.B -d
.\"O With the \fB-p\fR option, this option causes
.\"O .B pppdump
.\"O to decompress packets which have been compressed with the BSD-Compress
.\"O or Deflate methods.
\fB-p\fR オプションと一緒に使用し、
.B pppdump
に BSD 方式で圧縮されたパケットの解凍を行うように指示する。
.TP
.B -r
.\"O Reverses the direction indicators, so that `sent' is printed for
.\"O bytes or packets received, and `rcvd' is printed for bytes or packets
.\"O sent.
方向の解釈を反転する。その結果、受信したバイトまたはパケットに対して
`sent' と表示され、送信したバイトまたはパケットに対して `rcvd' と
表示される。
.TP
.B -m \fImru
.\"O Use \fImru\fR as the MRU (maximum receive unit) for both directions of
.\"O the link when checking for over-length PPP packets (with the \fB-p\fR
.\"O option).
(\fB-p\fR オプションとともに使用し) 長さを超過した PPP パケットをチェックする場合、
リンクの両方向の MRU （最大受信単位）として \fImru\fR を使用する。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
pppd(8)
