.\" Copyright 2001 Andreas Dilger (adilger@turbolinux.com)
.\"
.\" This man page was created for libblkid.so.1.0 from e2fsprogs-1.24.
.\" 
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Created  Wed Sep 14 12:02:12 2001, Andreas Dilger
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Mar  7 02:13:15 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH LIBBLKID 3 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O libblkid \- block device identification library
libblkid \- ブロックデバイスの識別ライブラリ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <blkid/blkid.h>
.sp
.B cc
.I file.c
.B \-lblkid
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B libblkid
.\"O library is used to identify block devices (disks) as to their content (e.g.
.\"O filesystem type) as well as extracting additional information such as
.\"O filesystem labels/volume names, unique identifiers/serial numbers, etc.
.B libblkid
ライブラリは、ブロックデバイスのコンテンツ
(たとえばファイルシステムタイプ) や
ファイルシステムのラベル名・ボリューム名、
ユニークな識別番号・シリアル番号などの付加的な情報を使って、
ブロックデバイス (ディスク) を識別するのに使われる。
.\"O A common use is to allow use of LABEL= and UUID= tags instead of hard-coding
.\"O specific block device names into configuration files.
一般的な使い方として、
特定のブロックデバイス名を設定ファイルにハードコードする代わりに、
LABEL= と UUID= タグを使うことができる。
.P
.\"O Block device information is normally kept in a cache file
.\"O .I /etc/blkid.tab
.\"O and is verified to still be valid before being returned to the user
.\"O (if the user has read permission on the raw block device, otherwise not).
ブロックデバイスの情報は、通常キャッシュファイル
.I /etc/blkid.tab
に保存され、ユーザに返される前に現在も有効であるかが検証される
(ユーザが raw ブロックデバイスを読む権限がある場合は検証されるが、
権限がない場合は検証されない)。
.\"O The cache file also allows unprivileged users (normally anyone other
.\"O than root, or those not in the "disk" group) to locate devices by label/id.
非特権ユーザ (通常は root 以外の全ユーザ、
または "disk" グループに所属しないユーザ) も、
キャッシュファイルを使って、
ラベルと ID でデバイスを見つけることができる。
.P
.\"O In situations where one is getting information about a single known device,
.\"O it does not impact performance whether the cache is used or not (unless you
.\"O are not able to read the block device directly).  If you are dealing with
.\"O multiple devices use of the cache is highly recommended (even if empty) as
.\"O devices will be scanned at most one time, and the on-disk cache will be
.\"O updated if possible.  There is rarely a reason not to use the cache.
ユーザが既知の 1 つのデバイスの情報を取得しようとした場合、
(ユーザがブロックデバイスを直接読めない限り)
キャッシュを使うか使わないかはパフォーマンスには影響しない。
複数のデバイスを扱う場合、
(たとえ空であっても) キャッシュを使うことを特に推奨する。
これは、複数のデバイスが 1 回でスキャンされ、
可能であればディスク上のキャッシュが更新されるからである。
このキャッシュを使わない理由は稀である。
.P
.\"O In some cases (modular kernels), block devices are not even visible until
.\"O after they are accessed the first time, so it is critical that there is
.\"O some way to locate these devices without enumerating only visible devices,
.\"O so the use of the cache file is
.\"O .B required
.\"O in this situation.
(モジュラカーネルなど) いくつかのケースでは、
ブロックデバイスにアクセスした後でないと見えないことがあるので、
見えているデバイスのみを列挙するのではなく、
見えていないデバイスも探し出す
何らかの方法があることが重要になる。
このような状況ではキャッシュファイルを使用することが\fB必要\fRとされる。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B libblkid
.\"O was written by Andreas Dilger for the ext2 filesystem utilties, with input
.\"O from Ted Ts'o.  The library was subsequently heavily modified by Ted Ts'o.
.B libblkid
は、 Andreas Dilger が Ted Ts'o からの情報提供をうけ、
ext2 ファイルシステムユーティリティのために書いた。
このライブラリはその後 Ted Ts'o によってかなり修正された。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.I /etc/blkid.tab 
.\"O Caches data extracted from each recognized block device.
認識されたブロックデバイスから抽出したキャッシュデータ。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O .B libblkid
.\"O is part of the e2fsprogs package since version 1.33 and is available from
.\"O http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net.
.B libblkid
は、バージョン 1.33 から e2fsprogs パッケージの一部であり、
http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net から入手できる。
.\"O .SH COPYING
.SH 著作権
.B libblkid
is available under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License (LGPL),
version 2 (or at your discretion any later version).  A copy of the LGPL
should be included with this library in the file COPYING.  If not, write to
.RS
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.br
59 Temple Place
.br
Suite 330
.br
Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.RE
.PP
or visit
.UR http://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html#LGPL
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html#LGPL
.UE
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR blkid_get_cache (3),
.BR blkid_put_cache (3),
.BR blkid_get_dev (3),
.BR blkid_probe_all (3),
.BR blkid_get_devname (3),
.BR blkid_get_tag_value (3),
.BR blkid.tab (7)
