.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)banner.6	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/6/93
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997,1998 MAEHARA Kohichi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 21 00:00:00 JST 1998
.\"         by MAEHARA Kohichi <maeharak@kw.netlaputa.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH BANNER 6 "June 6, 1993"
.UC
.SH 名前
banner \- プリンタ用に大きな見出しを出力する
.SH 書式
.B /usr/games/banner
[
.BI \-w n
]
message ...
.SH 説明
.I banner
は大きくてクオリティの高い文字を標準出力に出力する。
message が省略された場合はプロンプトを出して標準入力から一行入力を読
みとる。
.B \-w
オプションが指示された場合は小さな端末用に文字の横幅を 132 桁ではなく
て
.I n 
まで押しつぶす。
.I n
を省略した場合 80 桁とする。
.PP
出力は印刷機器用に最大 132 桁の幅で無改行で出力される。この大きさはプ
リンタや高速のハードコピーデバイスで利用のに適当な大きさであるが、もし
あなたが辛抱強い人ならば decwriter などの 300 ボーの端末といったものへ
の出力にも利用できるだろう。
.SH バグ
 <、 >、 [、 ]、 \\、^、 _、{、 }、 |、 ~、といったいくつかの ASCII キャ
ラクターは利用できない。
また、"、'、& はおかしな風に見える(これでも役には立つはずだ)。
.PP
.B \-w
オプションは縦横を間引するように実装されている。このためあまり小さな数
値が指定されるとつぶれてしまう。また、文字がくっついてしまうこともある。
.SH 著者
Mark Horton
