.\" Copyright (c) 1989 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Landon Curt Noll.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)factor.6	5.3 (Berkeley) 6/23/90
.\"
.\"
.\" By: Landon Curt Noll   chongo@toad.com,   ...!{sun,tolsoft}!hoptoad!chongo
.\"
.\"   chongo <for a good prime call: 391581 * 2^216193 - 1> /\oo/\
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997,1998 MAEHARA Kohichi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 21 00:00:00 JST 1998
.\"         by MAEHARA Kohichi <maeharak@kw.netlaputa.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: 10 most wanted  FBI の出す凶悪犯リスト
.\"
.\"
.TH FACTOR 6 "June 23, 1990"
.UC 7
.SH 名前
factor, primes \- factor は素因数分解を行なう, primes は素数を求める
.SH 書式
.B factor
[ number ] ...
.PP
.B primes
[ start [ stop ]]
.SH 説明
.I factor
は -2147483648 以上 2147483647 以下の整数を素因数分解する。
求めた答は ``:'' の後に一行で表示される。
因数は空白で区切りながら昇順に表示する。もし同じ数字で何度か割ることが
できる場合は、その数字は回数分表示される。
.PP
.I factor
に複数の引数を与えて実行するとそれぞれについて素因数分解を行なう。
.PP
.I factor
を引数無しで実行すると、
.I factor
は標準入力からそのファイルのおしまいかあるいはエラーを生じるまで、一行
につき一つだけ数字を読みとる。先頭の空白ならびに空行は無視する。数字に
一つだけ - か + の記号がついているのはかまわない。数字は非数字キャラク
タ(たとえば改行)で区切られる。数字を一つ読む毎にそれを素因数分解する。
入力行はそれぞれ一行が255文字を越えてはならない。
.PP
.I primes
は
.B start
以上
.B stop
未満の素数を一行に一つ、昇順で表示する。
.B start 
は最低でも 0 以上で、
.B stop\&
未満であること。
.B stop
は 4294967295 よりも大きくてはいけない。
.B stop
を省略した場合のデフォルトは 4294967295 である。
.PP
引数なしで
.I primes
を起動した場合、
.B start
を標準入力から読み込む。この場合
.B stop
として 4294967295 を用いる。
.B start
の数字の頭に + 記号を付けるのはかまわない。
.B start
の数字は非数字のキャラクタ(例えば改行)で区切られる。
入力行は255文字を越えてはならない。
.SH 返り値
範囲外あるいは不正な入力を与えると答として `ouch' を標準エラー出力する。
.SH バグ
.I factor
は`十大凶悪'因子のリストを処理するのには使えない、また
.I primes
で素数の世界記録を求めることはできない。
