.\" Copyright (c) 1980 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)trek.6	6.3 (Berkeley) 6/23/90
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996,1997,1998 MAEHARA Kohichi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 10 00:00:00 JST 1998
.\"         by MAEHARA Kohichi <maeharak@kw.netlaputa.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH TREK 6 "June 23, 1990"
.UC 4
.SH 名前
trek \- トレッキーのためのゲーム
.SH 書式
.B /usr/games/trek
[ [
.B \-a
]
.I filename
]
.SH 説明
.IX  "trek command"  ""  "\fLtrek\fP \(em Star Trek game"
.B trek
は宇宙の繁栄と争いのゲームである。以下にコマンドの要旨を
掲げる。完全なドキュメントについては Eric Allman による
.IR trek
を参照すること。
.LP
起動時コマンドラインにファイル名を与えると、ゲームのログが
のファイルに記録される。 ファイル名に先行して
.B \-a
フラグを与えるとは既に存在するログファイルに上書きはせずに追加される。
.LP
ゲームは開始時にゲームの期間を入力するように求める。期間として
有効な入力は \*(lqshort\*(rq、\*(lqmedium\*(rq、\*(lqlong\*(rq である。
またここで \*(lqrestart\*(rq と入力することで以前中断保存したゲームを
再開することもできる。
次に難易度が尋ねられる。これは \*(lqnovice\*(rq、\*(lqfair\*(rq、
\*(lqgood\*(rq、\*(lqexpert\*(rq、\*(lqcommodore\*(rq、
\*(lqimpossible\*(rq のいずれかを選ばなければならない。
\*(lqnovice\*(rq から始めて徐々に段階を上げていくのがよいであろう。
.LP
ゲーム中コマンドを忘れたときは`?'クエスチョンマークを入力することで適
切なコマンドを知ることができるようになっている。
.SH 著者
Eric Allman
.SH 関連項目
.B /usr/doc/trek
.SH コマンド要覧
.ie t .ds f \fB
.el .ds f \fI
.ta 3i
.nf
\*fabandon\fR			総員退艦
\*fca\fRpture			捕獲
\*fcl\fRoak \*fu\fRp/\*fd\fRown		クローキングデバイスの作動/解除
\*fc\fRomputer request;...	コンピュータ 要求;...
\*fda\fRmages			ダメージレポート
\*fdestruct\fR			自爆手順作動
\*fdo\fRck			宇宙基地へ寄港
\*fhelp\fR			ヘルプ
\*fi\fRmpulse course distance	通常動力 方向 距離
\*fl\fRrscan			ロングレンジセンサー
\*fm\fRove course distance	移動 方向 距離
\*fp\fRhasers automatic amount	フェイザー 自動 使用エネルギー量
\*fp\fRhasers manual amt1 couse1 spread1...
				フェイザー 手動 使用エネルギー量 方位 拡散角度...
\*ft\fRorpedo course [\*fy\fRes] angle/\*fn\fRo
				フォトントーピードー 方位 展開角度
\*fram\fR course distance	強行 方位 距離
\*fr\fRest time			上陸休暇
\*fshell\fR			シェルエスケープ
\*fsh\fRields up/down		シールドアップ/ダウン
\*fs\fRrscan [\*fy\fRes/\*fn\fRo]		ショートレンジセンサー
\*fst\fRatus			ステータスレポート
\*fterminate\fR \*fy\fRes/\*fn\fRo		中断
\*fu\fRndock			発進
\*fv\fRisual course		メインビュワー 方向
\*fw\fRarp warp_factor		ワープ ワープファクター設定
.fi
.DT

