.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1997 Eric P. Allman
.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 Hisaaki Shibata all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mar  2 1998 by Hisaaki Shibata <shibata@opost1.netspace.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)aliases.5	8.3 (Berkeley) 2/1/97
.\"
.Dd February 1, 1997
.Dt ALIASES 5
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm aliases
.Nd sendmail用の別名定義ファイル
.Sh 書式
.Nm aliases
.Sh 説明
このファイルは
.Pa /usr/sbin/sendmail 
で使用するユーザ
.Tn ID
の別名を定義するものです。
このファイルは
.Pa /etc
に置かれ、以下のような形式の一連の行から構成されます。
.Bd -filled -offset indent
名前: 配送先名1, 配送先名2, 配送先名3, . . .,配送先名n 
.Ed
.Pp
上記の
.Em 名前
は実際のアドレスではなく別名であり、引き続く
.Em 配送先名n
はその名前の別名です。
行頭がスペース(空白)で始まる行は、その上の行の継続行です。
行頭が
.Ql #
で始まる行は、コメントです。
.Pp
別名付けはlocalのユーザ名としてのみ行われます。
配送ループは発生せず、配送先には1回以上の配送は行われません。
.Pp
別名付け処理を行った後に、localかつ有効な受信者が
.Dq Pa .forward
ファイルをhomeディレクトリに作成している場合は、
そのファイルに記載された転送先へ再転送されます。
.Pp
尚、このファイルは生データを置いており、実際の別名情報は
.Xr newaliases 1 .
コマンドで作成するバイナリ形式の
.Pa /etc/aliases.db
に格納されます。
.Xr newaliases
したがって aliases ファイルを編集するたびに newaliases コマンドを
実行しなければ変更内容が有効となりません。
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr newaliases 1 ,
.Xr dbopen 3 ,
.Xr dbm 3 ,
.Xr sendmail 8
.Rs
.%T "SENDMAIL Installation and Operation Guide"
.Re
.Rs
.%T "SENDMAIL An Internetwork Mail Router"
.Re
.Sh バグ
もし、
.Xr sendmail
をコンパイルした際にNEWDBの代わりにDBMサポートとした場合は、
.Xr dbm 3
プログラムの、1つの別名あたり約1000バイトの制限に抵触する事があります。
このような場合は別名化を``チェーン''することで解決できます。
すなわち、別名リストの最後の配送先名をダミーで定義し、その次にその配送先を
更に別名化すれば良いのです。
.Sh 来歴
.Nm
ファイルフォーマットは
.Bx 4.0
から登場しました。
