.\"	$NetBSD: colcrt.1,v 1.3 1995/03/26 05:30:59 glass Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)colcrt.1	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/30/93
.\"
.Dd June 30, 1993
.Dt COLCRT 1
.Os BSD 3
.Sh 名称
.Nm colcrt
.Nd nroff の出力を CRT で表示するためのフィルタ
.Sh 書式
.Nm colcrt
.Op Fl
.Op Fl \&2
.Op Ar
.Sh 解説
.Nm colcrt
は、半改行、逆改行、の機能を持たない端末に、仮想的にその機能を提供します。
重ね打ちは通常の出力となります。
半改行文字と下線 (ダッシュ`\-' に置換されます) は、通常の出力行の間に
新しい行をもうけて出力されます。
.Pp
利用可能なオプションは以下のとおりです:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl
下線を出力しません。このオプションは特に
.Xr tbl 1
の
.Em allbox
で描かれた表を表示する時に便利です。
.It Fl 2
すべての行に半改行があるように出力します。実質的には、1 行おきに出力される
ことになります。通常は半改行のない行では余分な改行を出力しません。
但し、2 連続の空行は決して省略されません。
.Fl 2
オプションは、上付き、あるいは下付き文字が含まれていて、それらを
印字できないラインプリンタに対して出力する時に便利です。
.El
.Sh 使用例
.Nm colcrt
の典型的な利用法は、以下のとおりです。
.Bd -literal
tbl exum2.n \&| nroff \-ms \&| colcrt \- \&| more
.Ed
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr nroff 1 ,
.Xr troff 1 ,
.Xr col 1 ,
.Xr more 1 ,
.Xr ul 1
.Sh バグ
空白に対して下線が引かれる場合には、たとえ
.Ql Fl
オプションが指定されていても、アンダーラインキャラクタで表示するようにすべき
です。
.Pp
102 行以上の行を遡ることが必要な処理を行えません。
.Pp
一般には、重ね打ちの効果は失われます。特殊なケースとして、
.Ql \&|
が
.Ql \-
で重ね打ちされる場合、または下線が引かれる場合には
.Ql \&+
になります。
.Pp
各行は 132 文字で切り捨てられます。
.Pp
すでに 1 行おきになっている行での上付き、下付き文字に対する対処が必要です。
.Sh 歴史
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 3.0
から登場しました。
