.\" Copyright (c) 1987, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)mesg.1	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/6/93
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" %FreeBSD: src/usr.bin/mesg/mesg.1,v 1.7 1999/08/28 01:03:59 peter Exp %
.\" $FreeBSD: doc/ja_JP.eucJP/man/man1/mesg.1,v 1.6 2001/05/14 01:07:26 horikawa Exp $
.\"
.\" Updated Wed May 11 JST 2005 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated & Modified (util-linux 2.36) Mon Jan 11 12:25:59 JST 2021
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@ybb.ne.jp>
.\"         and Yoichi Chonan <cyoichi@maple.ocn.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH MESG 1 "July 2014" util\-linux "User Commands"
.SH 名前
mesg \- 他のユーザから来たメッセージを表示する (表示しない)
.SH 書式
\fBmesg\fP [option] [\fBn\fP|\fBy\fP]
.SH 説明
ユーザは \fBmesg\fP ユーティリティを実行することで、
標準エラー出力と結びついている自分の端末デバイスに対して他のユーザが持つ書き込み権限を制御することができる。
端末への書き込みが許可されていると、他のユーザが実行する \fBtalk\fP(1) や
\fBwrite\fP(1) のようなプログラムが、その端末にメッセージを表示できるようになるのだ。
.PP
伝統的には、書き込みは許可するのがデフォルトである。
しかしながら、ユーザがセキュリティ上の様々なリスクをより意識するようになるにつれて、
少なくとも最初のログインシェルに対しては、デフォルトでは書き込みを許可しない傾向にある。
自分の tty の設定状態を確実に自分の望むようにするには、
\fBmesg\fP をログインスクリプトで実行するべきである。
.PP
\fBmesg\fP
ユーティリティは、端末で実行されない場合 (訳注: たとえば、\fBat\fP や \fBcron\fP
から実行される場合)、何のメッセージも出さずにエラーステータス
2 で終了する。この場合、\fBmesg\fP
の実行は意味がない。だが、この状況でも、コマンドラインオプション
\fB\-\-verbose\fP を付ければ、\fBmesg\fP
が警告メッセージを出力するようになる。こうした動作は、バージョン
2.33 で採用されたものである。
.SH 引き数
.TP 
\fBn\fP
メッセージを許可しない。
.TP 
\fBy\fP
メッセージの表示を許可する。
.PP
引き数を指定しない場合、\fBmesg\fP
は、現在のメッセージ受け入れ状態を標準エラー出力に表示する。
.SH オプション
.TP 
\fB\-v\fP,\fB \-\-verbose\fP
何をやっているかを説明する。
.TP 
\fB\-V\fP,\fB \-\-version\fP
バージョン情報を表示して終了する。
.TP 
\fB\-h\fP,\fB \-\-help\fP
ヘルプを表示して終了する。
.SH 終了ステータス
\fBmesg\fP ユーティリティは、次の値の一つで終了する。
.RS 4
.TP 
\fB\ 0\fP
メッセージは許可されている。
.TP 
\fB\ 1\fP
メッセージは許可されていない。
.TP 
\fB>1\fP
エラーが発生した。
.RE
.SH ファイル
\fI/dev/[pt]ty[pq]?\fP
.SH 歴史
\fBmesg\fP コマンドは、AT&T UNIX Version 6 で初登場した。

.SH 関連項目
\fBlogin\fP(1), \fBtalk\fP(1), \fBwrite\fP(1), \fBwall\fP(1), \fBxterm\fP(1)
.SH 入手方法
この mesg コマンドは、util\-linux パッケージの一部であり、
https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util\-linux/
から入手できる。
