.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)wall.1	6.5 (Berkeley) 4/23/91
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" %FreeBSD: src/usr.bin/wall/wall.1,v 1.3.2.3 2001/10/05 15:21:42 ru Exp %
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.\" Updated Wed May 11 JST 2005 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated & Modified (util-linux 2.36) Mon Dec 14 15:46:02 JST 2020
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@ybb.ne.jp>
.\"         and Yoichi Chonan <cyoichi@maple.ocn.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH WALL 1 "August 2013" util\-linux "User Commands"
.SH 名前
wall \- すべてのユーザに対してメッセージを書き込む
.SH 書式
\fBwall\fP [\fB\-n\fP] [\fB\-t\fP \fItimeout\fP] [\fB\-g\fP \fIgroup\fP] [\fImessage\fP | \fIfile\fP]
.SH 読者へのご注意
これは、util-linux 2.36 所収の \fBwall\fP
コマンドのマニュアルである。お使いの \fBwall\fP が util-linux
版以外の場合や、util-linux 版であっても、古いバージョンの場合は、この \fBwall\fP
とは動作やオプションが違うかもしれない。そうしたときは、お手元の \fBwall\fP
に付属する英語のマニュアルに当たってみていただきたい。
.SH 説明
\fBwall\fP コマンドは、現在ログインしているすべてのユーザの端末に、上記書式の
\fImessage\fP (訳注: 短文)、または \fIfile\fP
の内容を表示する。そうしたものの指定がない場合は、\fBwall\fP
対する標準入力を表示する。\fBwall\fP は、ASCII 文字で
79 字より長い行は折り返し、短い行は 79
字になるまでホワイトスペースで埋める。また、行の末尾に復帰文字と改行文字を必ず入れる。
.PP
メッセージの受信拒否を選択しているユーザや、
メッセージの受信を機械的に拒否するプログラムを使っているユーザの端末に書き込めるのは、
スパーユーザだけである。
.PP
\fBwall\fP を実行するのがスーパーユーザではない場合、\fBwall\fP
プログラムに set\-user\-ID や set\-group\-ID が設定されていると、\fIfile\fP
からの読み込みは拒否される。
.SH オプション
.TP 
\fB\-n\fP,\fB \-\-nobanner\fP
バナー (訳注: 発信者情報) を表示しない。
.TP 
\fB\-t\fP,\fB \-\-timeout \fP\fItimeout\fP
端末への書き込みを \fItimeout\fP 秒間試みてから、諦める。この \fItimeout\fP
は、正の整数でなければならない。デフォルトの値は 300
秒だが、これは、モデム回線で端末を動かしていた時代の名残りである。
.TP 
\fB\-g\fP,\fB \-\-group \fP\fIgroup\fP
メッセージの表示を、引き数 \fIgroup\fP で指定されるグループのメンバーに限定する。
引き数は、グループ名でも GID でもよい。
.TP 
\fB\-V\fP,\fB \-\-version\fP
バージョン情報を表示して終了する。
.TP 
\fB\-h\fP,\fB \-\-help\fP
ヘルプを表示して終了する。
.SH 注意
wdm がその一例だが、\fButmp\fP(5) の ut_type データの先頭に 1 個の ':'
文字を置く一部のセッションは、\fBwall\fP のメッセージを受け取ろうとしない。
これは、書き込みエラーを避けるためである。
.SH 歴史
\fBwall\fP コマンドが初登場したのは、AT&T UNIX バージョン 7 だった。
.SH 関連項目
\fBmesg\fP(1), \fBtalk\fP(1), \fBwrite\fP(1), \fBshutdown\fP(8)
.SH 入手方法
この wall コマンドは、util\-linux パッケージの一部であり、Linux Kernel Archive
<https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util\-linux/>
から入手できる。
