.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Jef Poskanzer and Craig Leres of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)write.1	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/6/93
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" %FreeBSD: src/usr.bin/write/write.1,v 1.7.2.1 2000/12/08 15:14:18 ru Exp %
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.\" Updated Wed May 11 JST 2005 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated & Modified (util-linux 2.36) Tue Jan 12 11:24:28 JST 2021
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@ybb.ne.jp>
.\"         and Yoichi Chonan <cyoichi@maple.ocn.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH WRITE 1 "March 1995" util\-linux "User Commands"
.SH 名前
write \- 他のユーザにメッセージを送る
.SH 書式
\fBwrite\fP \fIuser\fP [\fIttyname\fP]
.SH 説明
\fBwrite\fP は、あなたが端末に入力した行を他の人の端末にコピーすることによって、
他のユーザと会話ができるようにする。
.PP
\fBwrite\fP
コマンドを実行すると、宛先のユーザは次のような形のメッセージを受け取る。
.PP
.RS
Message from yourname@yourhost on yourtty at hh:mm ...
.RE
.PP
あなたが続けて入力する行は、1 行入力するたびに宛先の端末にコピーされる。
もし宛先の人が返事をしたいと思ったら、その人もやはり \fBwrite\fP
を実行しなければならない。
.PP
用件が済んだら、ファイル終端文字か割り込み文字を入力する
(訳注: 前者は Control\-d、後者は Control\-c)。宛先には、会話の終りを示す
\fBEOF\fP という文字が表示される。
.PP
他のユーザからのメッセージを拒否したいときは
(ただしスーパユーザからのメッセージは拒否できない)、\fBmesg\fP(1)
を使えばよい。コマンドの中には、たとえば \fBnroff\fP(1) や \fBpr\fP(1)
のように、書き込みを自動的に拒否するものもある。
それは、自分の生成する出力が上書きされてしまわないように、そうしているのである。
.PP
メッセージを送りたい相手が、2 つ以上の端末にログインしている場合は、
どの端末にメッセージを送るかを、\fBwrite\fP コマンドの
2 番目の引き数で指定することができる。あるいは、端末の選択を
\fBwrite\fP に任せてしまってもよい。その場合、\fBwrite\fP
は、アイドル時間が最も短い端末を選ぶことになる。そうすることで、
職場でログインしているユーザが、同時に自宅からもモデムでログインしているといった場合でも、
メッセージが適切な方に届くようにするのである。
.PP
\fBwrite\fP コマンドでやりとりするときの伝統的な約束では、行末の `\-o'
や `\-o' だけの行は、「あなたが話す番ですよ」という意味になる。`oo'
は、「会話を終りにしましょう」ということである。
.SH 歴史
\fBwrite\fP コマンドは AT&T UNIX Version 6 で初登場した。
.SH 関連項目
\fBmesg\fP(1), \fBtalk\fP(1), \fBwho\fP(1)
.SH 入手方法
この write コマンドは、util\-linux パッケージの一部であり、
https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util\-linux/ から入手できる。
