.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)lpc.8	8.5 (Berkeley) 4/28/95
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Hirohisa AMAN,
.\"     <aman@soft.comp.kyutech.ac.jp> all right reserved.
.\"
.\"O .Dd April 28, 1995
.\"O .Dt LPC 8
.\"O .Os BSD 4.2
.\"O
.Dd April 28, 1995
.Dt LPC 8
.Os BSD 4.2
.\"O
.\"O .Sh NAME
.\"O .Nm lpc
.\"O .Nd line printer control program
.\"O
.Sh 名前
.Nm lpc
.Nd ラインプリンタ制御プログラム
.\"O
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.\"O .Nm lpc
.\"O .Oo
.\"O .Ar command
.\"O .Op Ar argument ...
.\"O .Oc
.\"O
.Sh 書式
.Nm lpc
.Oo
.Ar command
.Op Ar argument ...
.Oc
.\"O
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.\"O .Nm Lpc
.\"O is used by the system administrator to control the
.\"O operation of the line printer system.  
.\"O For each line printer configured in
.\"O .Pa /etc/printcap ,
.\"O .Nm lpc
.\"O may be used to:
.\"O .Bl -bullet -offset indent
.\"O .It
.\"O disable or enable a printer,
.\"O .It
.\"O disable or enable a printer's spooling queue,
.\"O .It
.\"O rearrange the order of jobs in a spooling queue,
.\"O .It
.\"O find the status of printers, and their associated
.\"O spooling queues and printer daemons.
.\"O .El
.\"O
.Sh 説明
.Nm Lpc
はシステム管理者用のツールで、ラインプリンタシステムを制御するために用いられる。
.Pa /etc/printcap
で設定されている各ラインプリンタに対し、
.Nm lpc 
は以下のことに利用できる :
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
プリンタを使用不可もしくは使用可にする
.It
プリンタのスプーリングキューを使用不可もしくは使用可にする
.It
スプーリングキューの中にあるジョブの順序を変更する
.It
プリンタとそれに関連するスプーリングキュー、プリンタデーモンの状態を調べる
.El
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O Without any arguments,
.\"O .Nm lpc
.\"O will prompt for commands from the standard input.
.\"O If arguments are supplied,
.\"O .Nm lpc
.\"O interprets the first argument as a command and the remaining
.\"O arguments as parameters to the command.  The standard input
.\"O may be redirected causing
.\"O .Nm lpc
.\"O to read commands from file.
.\"O Commands may be abbreviated;
.\"O the following is the list of recognized commands.
.\"O
.Pp
引数を省略すると、
.Nm lpc
はプロンプトを出して、標準入力からコマンドを受け付ける。
引数が与えられると、
.Nm lpc
は最初の引数をコマンドとして解釈し、
残りの引数をコマンドに対するパラメーターとして解釈する。
標準入力はリダイレクトしてもよく、そうすると
.Nm lpc
はファイルからコマンドを読み込む。
コマンドは短縮してもよい。
以下は指定できるコマンドの一覧である。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.\"O .It Ic \&? No [ command ... ]
.\"O .It Ic help No [ command ... ]
.\"O Print a short description of each command specified in the argument list,
.\"O or, if no argument is given, a list of the recognized commands.
.\"O
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Ic \&? No [ command ... ]
.It Ic help No [ command ... ]
引数リストで指定された各コマンドの簡潔な説明を表示する。
引数が与えられていないときは、指定できるコマンドの一覧を表示する。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic abort  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
.\"O Terminate an active spooling daemon on the local host immediately and
.\"O then disable printing (preventing new daemons from being started by
.\"O .Xr lpr )
.\"O for the specified printers.
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic abort  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
ローカルホストのアクティブなスプーリングデーモンをただちに停止させる。
そして、指定されたプリンタでは印刷できないようにする(新しいデーモンが
.Xr lpr 
によって起動されないようにする)。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic clean  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
.\"O Remove any temporary files, data files, and control files that cannot
.\"O be printed (i.e., do not form a complete printer job)
.\"O from the specified printer queue(s) on the local machine.
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic clean  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
印刷されることのない(つまり、完全なプリンタジョブの形にはなっていない)すべての
一時ファイル・データファイル・制御ファイルを、
ローカルマシンの指定されたプリンタキューから削除する。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic disable  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
.\"O Turn the specified printer queues off.  This prevents new
.\"O printer jobs from being entered into the queue by
.\"O .Xr lpr .
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic disable  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
指定されたプリンタキューを止める。
.Xr lpr 
は、新しいプリンタジョブをキューへ投入できなくなる。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic down No {\ all\ |\ printer\ } message ...
.\"O Turn the specified printer queue off, disable printing and put
.\"O .Em message
.\"O in the printer status file. The message doesn't need to be quoted, the
.\"O remaining arguments are treated like
.\"O .Xr echo 1 .
.\"O This is normally used to take a printer down and let others know why
.\"O .Xr lpq 1
.\"O will indicate the printer is down and print the status message).
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic down No {\ all\ |\ printer\ } message ...
指定されたプリンタのキューを止め、印刷できないようにし、
.Em message
をプリンタのステータス(状態)ファイルに書き込む。
メッセージ(message)を引用符で囲む必要はないが、その場合残りの引数は
.Xr echo 1
と同様に扱われる。
これは通常、プリンタの運転を止め、その理由(
.Xr lpq 1
は、プリンタが停止していることを示し、ステータスメッセージを表示する)
を他の人たちに知らせるために使われる。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic enable  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
.\"O Enable spooling on the local queue for the listed printers. 
.\"O This will allow
.\"O .Xr lpr 1
.\"O to put new jobs in the spool queue.
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic enable  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
指定されたプリンタのローカルキューにおけるスプーリングを可能にする。
これにより
.Xr lpr 1
は、新しいジョブをスプールキューへ投入できるようになる。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic exit
.\"O .It Ic quit
.\"O Exit from lpc.
.\"O .ne 1i
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic exit
.It Ic quit
lpc の処理を終了する。
.ne 1i
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic restart  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
.\"O Attempt to start a new printer daemon. 
.\"O This is useful when some abnormal condition causes the daemon to
.\"O die unexpectedly, leaving jobs in the queue.
.\"O .Xr Lpq
.\"O will report that there is no daemon present when this condition occurs. 
.\"O If the user is the super-user,
.\"O try to abort the current daemon first (i.e., kill and restart a stuck daemon).
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic restart  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
新しいプリンタデーモンを起動しようと試みる。
これは、デーモンが何らかの異常状態に陥って、キューにジョブを残したまま
突如死んでしまった場合に有用である。
この状態に陥ると、
.Xr lpq
はデーモンが存在しないと報告する。
(lpqを動かした)ユーザーがスーパーユーザーならば、
まず現在のデーモンを停止させてみよ
(つまり、問題となっているデーモンを殺し、再起動させよ)。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic start  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
.\"O Enable printing and start a spooling daemon for the listed printers.
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic start  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
指定されたプリンタでの印刷を可能にし、スプーリングデーモンを起動させる。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic status  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
.\"O Display the status of daemons and queues on the local machine.
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic status  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
ローカルマシン上のデーモンとキューの状態を表示する。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic stop  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
.\"O Stop a spooling daemon after the current job completes and disable
.\"O printing.
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic stop  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
現在のジョブが完了した後、スプーリングデーモンを停止させ、
印刷できないようにする。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic topq No printer\ [\ jobnum\ ...\ ]\ [\ user\ ...\ ]
.\"O Place the jobs in the order listed at the top of the printer queue.
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic topq No printer\ [\ jobnum\ ...\ ]\ [\ user\ ...\ ]
指定されたジョブを、指定された順序で、プリンタキューの先頭に配置する。
.\"O
.\"O .Pp
.\"O .It Ic up  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
.\"O Enable everything and start a new printer daemon. Undoes the effects of
.\"O .Ic down .
.\"O
.Pp
.It Ic up  No {\ all\ |\ printer\ }
すべてを使用可能にして新しいプリンタデーモンを起動させる。
.Ic down
の効果を無効にする。
.\"O
.\"O .Sh FILES
.\"O .Bl -tag -width /var/spool/*/lockx -compact
.\"O .It Pa /etc/printcap
.\"O printer description file
.\"O .It Pa /var/spool/*
.\"O spool directories
.\"O .It Pa /var/spool/*/lock
.\"O lock file for queue control
.\"O .El
.\"O
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /var/spool/*/lockx -compact
.It Pa /etc/printcap
プリンタ記述ファイル
.It Pa /var/spool/*
スプールディレクトリ
.It Pa /var/spool/*/lock
キュー制御のためのロックファイル
.El
.\"O
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.\"O .Xr lpd 8 ,
.\"O .Xr lpr 1 ,
.\"O .Xr lpq 1 ,
.\"O .Xr lprm 1 ,
.\"O .Xr printcap 5
.\"O
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr lpd 8 ,
.Xr lpr 1 ,
.Xr lpq 1 ,
.Xr lprm 1 ,
.Xr printcap 5
.\"O
.\"O .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\"O .Bl -tag -width Ds
.\"O .It Sy "?Ambiguous command"
.\"O abbreviation matches more than one command
.\"O .It Sy "?Invalid command"
.\"O no match was found
.\"O .It Sy "?Privileged command"
.\"O you must be a member of group "operator" or root to execute this command
.\"O .El
.\"O
.Sh 返り値
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "?Ambiguous command"
コマンドの短縮形が 1 個以上のコマンドとマッチしている
.It Sy "?Invalid command"
コマンドが見つからなかった
.It Sy "?Privileged command"
このコマンドを実行するには "operator" グループのメンバーか root でなければならない
.El
.\"O
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.\"O
.Sh 履歴
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。





