.\"
.\" Original man-page is part of at-3.1.14.
.\"
.\" This is the Debian GNU/Linux prepackaged version of the deferred
.\" execution scheduler called at.
.\"
.\" This package was debianized by its author Thomas Koenig
.\" <ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de>, taken over and re-packaged first by Martin
.\" Schulze <joey@debian.org> and then by Siggy Brentrup <bsb@winnegan.de>,
.\" and then taken over by Ryan Murray <rmurray@debian.org>.
.\"
.\" In August 2009 the upstream development and Debian packaging were taken over
.\" by Ansgar Burchardt <ansgar@debian.org> and Cyril Brulebois <kibi@debian.org>.
.\"
.\" This may be considered the experimental upstream source, and since there
.\" doesn't seem to be any other upstream source, the only upstream source.
.\"
.\"    Copyright: 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 (c) Thomas Koenig
.\"               1993 (c) David Parsons
.\" 	      2002, 2005 (c) Ryan Murray
.\"
.\"    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"    (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"    GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2014 Takayuki Ogawa
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Fri 1 Aug 2014, by Takayuki Ogawa <takayuki@compusophia.com>
.\"
.TH AT.ALLOW 5 "Sep 1997" "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O at.allow, at.deny \- determine who can submit jobs via at or batch
at.allow, at.deny \- at や batch にジョブを登録できるユーザーを決める
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I /etc/at.allow
.\"O and
.\"O .I /etc/at.deny
.\"O files determine which user can submit commands for later execution via
.\"O .BR at (1)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR batch (1) .
.I /etc/at.allow
と
.I /etc/at.deny
ファイルは、
.BR at (1)
や
.BR batch (1)
経由で後刻実行するコマンドを、どのユーザが登録できるかを決定する。
.PP
.\"O The format of the files is a list of usernames, one on each line.  Whitespace
.\"O is not permitted.
ファイルの書式は、1 行に 1 ユーザ名を書いたリストである。空白 (whitespace) は許されない。
.PP
.\"O If the file
.\"O .I /etc/at.allow
.\"O exists, only usernames mentioned in it are allowed to use
.\"O .BR at .
.I /etc/at.allow
があれば、そこに書かれたユーザーのみが
.BR at
を使える。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I /etc/at.allow
.\"O does not exist,
.\"O .I /etc/at.deny
.\"O is checked, every username not mentioned in it is then allowed
.\"O to use
.\"O .BR at .
.I /etc/at.allow
がなければ
.I /etc/at.deny
をチェックし、そこに書かれて「いない」ユーザーすべてが
.BR at
を使える。
.PP
.\"O An empty
.\"O .I /etc/at.deny
.\"O means that every user may use
.\"O .BR at .
したがって、空の
.I /etc/at.deny
のみがあるときは、全てのユーザーが
.BR at
を使うことができる。
.PP
.\"O If neither exists, only the superuser is allowed to use at.
もしどちらのファイルもなければ、スーパーユーザーのみ
at を使うことができる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR at (1),
.BR cron (8),
.BR crontab (1),
.\"O .BR atd (8).
.BR atd (8)
