.\" Copyright 1995-1996 David Engel (david@ods.com)
.\" Copyright 1995 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Most of this was copied from the README file.  Do not restrict distribution.
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat May 23 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Wed Jan 6 1999 by NAKANO Takeo 
.\"
.TH LDD 1 "14 March 1998"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ldd \- print shared library dependencies
.SH 名前
ldd \- 共有ライブラリへの依存関係を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B ldd
.RB [ \-vVdr ]
program|library ...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O prints the shared libraries required by each program or shared library
.\"O specified on the command line.
.\"O If a shared library name does not contain a '/',
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O attempts to locate the library in the standard locations.
.\"O To run
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O on a shared library in the current directory, a "./" must be prepended
.\"O to it's name.
.B ldd
はコマンドラインで指定したプログラムや共有ライブラリについて、
それぞれで必要とされる共有ライブラリを表示する。
共有ライブラリの名前に '/' が含まれていないと、
.B ldd
は標準的な場所からライブラリを探そうと試みる。
.B ldd
をカレントディレクトリにある共有ライブラリに対して用いるには、
ライブラリの名前に "./" を前置する必要がある。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Print the version number of
.\"O .BR ldd .
.B ldd
のバージョン番号を表示する。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Print the version number of the dynamic linker,
.\"O .BR ld.so .
ダイナミックリンカ
.B ld.so
のバージョン番号を表示する。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Perform relocations and report any missing functions (ELF only).
リロケーションを実行し、足りない関数についてレポートする (ELF のみ)。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Perform relocations for both data objects and functions, and
.\"O report any missing objects (ELF only).
リロケーションをデータオブジェクトと関数の両者に対して実行し、
足りないオブジェクトについてレポートする (ELF のみ)。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O does not work very well on libc.so.5 itself.
.B ldd
は libc.so.5 そのものに対してはあまりうまく動作しない。
.PP
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O does not work on a.out shared libraries.
.B ldd
は a.out 共有ライブラリでは動作しない。
.PP
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O does not work with some extremely old a.out programs which were 
.\"O built before
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O support was added to the compiler releases.
.B ldd
は非常に古い a.out プログラム (
.B ldd
のサポートがコンパイラに追加される以前にビルドされたようなプログラム)
では動作しない。
.\"O If you use
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O on one of these programs, the program will attempt to run with argc = 0 and
.\"O the results will be unpredictable.
このようなプログラムに対して
.B ldd
を用いると、プログラムは argc = 0 で実行される。結果は予想不可能である。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O David Engel.
David Engel
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR ldconfig (8),
.\"O .BR ld.so (8).
.BR ld.so (8)
