.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Mar 13 02:58:01 JST 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji.
.\" Updated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Aug 17 10:17:07 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 3 Oct 2002 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 17 11:53:16 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 30 06:46:50 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" 
.\"WORD:	bad blocks	不良ブロック
.\" 
.TH BADBLOCKS 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O badblocks \- search a device for bad blocks
.SH 名前
badblocks \- デバイス上の不良ブロックを探す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B badblocks
[
.B \-svwnf
]
[
.B \-b
.I block-size
]
[
.B \-c
.I blocks_at_once
]
[
.B \-i
.I input_file
]
[
.B \-o
.I output_file
]
[
.B \-p
.I num_passes
]
[
.B \-t
.I test_pattern
]
.I device
[
.I last-block
] [
.I start-block 
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O is used to search for bad blocks on a device (usually a disk partition).
.B badblocks
はデバイス (通常はディスクパーティション) 上の
不良ブロックを探すために使用される。
.\"O .I device
.\"O is the special file corresponding to the device (e.g
.\"O .IR /dev/hdc1 ).
.I device
はデバイスに対応するスペシャルファイルである (例:
.IR /dev/hdc1 )。
.\"O .I last-block
.\"O is the last block to be checked; if it is not specified, the last block
.\"O on the device is used as a default.
.I last-block
はチェックされる最終ブロックである。
指定されない場合、デフォルトではデバイスの最終ブロックが使われる。
.\"O .I start-block
.\"O is an optional parameter specifying the starting block number
.\"O for the test, which allows the testing to start in the middle of the
.\"O disk.  If it is not specified the first block on the disk is used as a default.
.I start-block
は、テストを開始するブロックを指定するパラメータである (省略可能)。
これを用いると、ディスクの途中からテストを開始できる。
指定されない場合、デフォルトではディスクの開始ブロックが使われる。
.PP
.\"O .B Important note:
.\"O If the output of 
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O is going to be fed to the
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O or 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O programs, it is important that the block size is properly specified,
.\"O since the block numbers which are generated are very dependent on the 
.\"O block size in use by the filesystem.   
.B 重要な注意:
.B badblocks
の出力を
.B e2fsck
や
.B mke2fs
といったプログラムに与える場合には、
ブロックサイズを正しく指定することが大切である。
生成されたブロック番号は、ファイルシステムにおいて、
どのようなブロックサイズを用いるかに大きく依存するからである。
.\"O For this reason, it is strongly recommended that
.\"O users 
.\"O .B not
.\"O run 
.\"O .B badblocks 
.\"O directly, but rather use the 
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O option of the
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O and 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O programs.
このため、
.B badblocks
を直接ユーザが利用することはできるだけ避けるほうがよい。
代わりに
.B e2fsck
や
.B mke2fs
の
.B \-c
オプションを用いるようにすることを強く勧める。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI -b " block-size"
.\"O Specify the size of blocks in bytes.  The default is 1024.
ブロックサイズをバイト単位で指定する。
デフォルトは 1024 である。
.TP
.BI \-c " number of blocks"
.\"O is the number of blocks which are tested at a time.  The default is 64.
ブロックをまとめて何個ずつテストするかを指定する。
デフォルトは 64 である。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Normally, badblocks will refuse to do a read/write or a non-destructive
.\"O test on a device which is mounted, since either can cause the system to 
.\"O potentially crash and/or damage the filesystem even if it is mounted
.\"O read-only.  This can be overridden using the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O flag, but should almost never be used --- if you think you're smarter
.\"O than the 
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O program, you almost certainly aren't.  The only time when this option 
.\"O might be safe to use is if the /etc/mtab file is incorrect, and the device
.\"O really isn't mounted.
通常 badblocks は、マウントされているデバイスに対しては、
読み出し／書き込みテストや非破壊テストを行わない。
このいずれもシステムをクラッシュさせたり、
(たとえリードオンリーでマウントされていても)
ファイルシステムを壊す可能性があるからである。
.B \-f
フラグを使えばこの動作を強制できるが、
まず用いないようにする方がよい。
自分が
.B badblocks
プログラムよりも賢いと考えるなら別だが、
ほとんどそんなことは無いはずだ。
このオプションが唯一安全なのは、/etc/mtab が間違っていて、
デバイスが実際にはマウントされていない場合だけである。
.TP
.BI \-i " input_file"
.\"O Read a list of already existing known bad blocks.
.\"O .B Badblocks
.\"O will skip testing these blocks since they are known to be bad.  If
.\"O .I input_file
.\"O is specified as "-", the list will be read from the standard input.
.\"O Blocks listed in this list will be omitted from the list of
.\"O .I new
.\"O bad blocks produced on the standard output or in the output file.
既存の不良ブロックのリストを読み込む。
不良ブロックであることが分かっているため、
.B badblocks
はこれらのブロックのテストを飛ばす。
.I input_file
が "-" と指定された場合、リストを標準入力から読み込む。
ここで挙げられたリストにあるブロックは、
標準出力や出力ファイルに書き出される
\fI新たに見つかった\fP不良ブロックのリストからは除かれる。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-b
.\"O option of
.\"O .BR dumpe2fs (8)
.\"O can be used to retrieve the list of blocks currently marked bad on
.\"O an existing filesystem, in a format suitable for use with this option.
.BR dumpe2fs (8)
の
.B \-b
オプションを使うと、
既存のファイルシステム上で不良ブロックとして
マークされているブロックのリストを、
このオプションで使用するのに適した形式で取り出すことができる。
.TP
.BI -o " output_file"
.\"O Write the list of bad blocks to the specified file.  Without this option,
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O displays the list on its standard output.  The format of this file is suitable
.\"O for use by the
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O option in 
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR mke2fs (8).
指定されたファイルに不良ブロックのリストを書き出す。
このオプションを指定しない場合、
.B badblocks
は標準出力にリストを表示する。このファイルのフォーマットは、
.BR e2fsck (8)
や
.BR mke2fs (8)
の
.B \-l
オプションで使用するのに適している。
.TP
.BI \-p " num_passes"
.\"O Repeat scanning the disk until there are no new blocks discovered in
.\"O num_passes consecutive scans of the disk.
.\"O Default is 0, meaning
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O will exit after the first pass.
新たな不良ブロックが見つからなくなるまで、
num_passes 回連続でディスクのスキャンを繰り返す。
デフォルトは 0 で、
.B badblocks
は最初の 1 回で終了する。
.TP
.BI \-t " test_pattern"
.\"O Specify a test pattern to be read (and written) to disk blocks.   The
.\"O .I test_pattern
.\"O may either be a numeric value between 0 and ULONG_MAX-1 inclusive, or the word 
.\"O "random", which specifies that the block should be filled with a random
.\"O bit pattern.
ディスクブロックから読み出す (ディスクブロックに書き込む)
テストパターンを指定する。
.I test_pattern
は 0 以上 ULONG_MAX-1 以下の数値でも文字列 "random" でもよい。
"random" はブロックをランダムなビットパターンで埋めることを表す。
.\"O For read/write (\fB-w\fR) and non-destructive (\fB-n\fR) modes,
.\"O one or more test patterns may be specified by specifying the
.\"O .B -t
.\"O option for each test pattern desired.  For
.\"O read-only mode only a single pattern may be specified and it may not be
.\"O "random".  Read-only testing with a pattern assumes that the
.\"O specified pattern has previously been written to the disk - if not, large
.\"O numbers of blocks will fail verification.  
読み出し／書き込み (\fB-w\fR) モードと非破壊 (\fB-n\fR) モードでは、
使いたい各テストパターンについて
.B -t
を指定することで、複数のテストパターンを指定することができる。
読み出しだけのモードでは 1 つのパターンしか指定することができず、
"random" は指定できない。
1 つのパターンを指定した読み出しだけのテストでは、
指定されたパターンが前もってディスクに書き込まれていると仮定する。
指定されたパターンが書き込まれていない場合は、
たくさんのブロックが検証に失敗する。
.\"O If multiple patterns
.\"O are specified then all blocks will be tested with one pattern 
.\"O before proceeding to the next pattern.
複数のパターンが指定された場合、
(1 つのブロックに対して) 1 つのパターンをテストした後に
次のパターンをテストするようにして、
全てのブロックをテストする。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Use non-destructive read-write mode.  By default only a non-destructive 
.\"O read-only test is done.  This option must not be combined with the 
.\"O .B \-w
.\"O option, as they are mutually exclusive.
非破壊の読み出し／書き込みモードを使う。
デフォルトでは、非破壊読み出しテストだけが行われる。
このオプションと
.B \-w 
オプションは一方しか指定できないので、同時に指定してはならない。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Show the progress of the scan by writing out the block numbers as they
.\"O are checked.
スキャンの進行状況を表示する。ブロックがチェックされるごとに
そのブロックの番号を書き出す。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose mode.
詳細な表示を行う。
.TP
.B \-w
.\"O Use write-mode test. With this option,
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O scans for bad blocks by writing some patterns (0xaa, 0x55, 0xff, 0x00) on
.\"O every block of the device, reading every block and comparing the contents.  
.\"O This option may not be combined with the 
.\"O .B \-n 
.\"O option, as they are mutually exclusive.
書き込みモードでテストする。このオプションを指定すると、
.B badblocks 
はデバイスの各ブロックに、あるパターン (0xaa, 0x55, 0xff, 0x00) を書き込み、
またそれを読み出して比べることにより、不良ブロックを探索する。
このオプションを
.B \-n 
オプションと組み合わせて使うことはできない。
この 2 つのオプションはどちらか一方しか指定できない。
.\"O .SH WARNING
.SH 警告
.\"O Never use the
.\"O .B \-w
.\"O option on a device containing an existing file system.
.\"O This option erases data!  If you want to do write-mode testing on
.\"O an existing file system, use the
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option instead.  It is slower, but it will preserve your data.  
ファイルシステムが存在するデバイスに対して
.B \-w 
オプションを使用してはならない。
このオプションはデータを消去する。
既存のファイルシステムに書き込みモードテストをする場合は、
代わりに
.B \-n 
オプションを使うこと。
.B \-n 
オプションでのテストは遅いが、データは保存される。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O was written by Remy Card <Remy.Card@linux.org>.  Current maintainer is
.\"O Theodore Ts'o <tytso@alum.mit.edu>.  Non-destructive read/write test
.\"O implemented by David Beattie <dbeattie@softhome.net>.
.B badblocks
は Remy Card <Remy.Card@linux.org> によって作成された。
現在のメンテナは Theodore Ts'o <tytso@alum.mit.edu> である。
非破壊の読み出し／書き込みテストは
David Beattie <dbeattie@softhome.net> が実装した。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O is part of the e2fsprogs package and is available from 
.\"O http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net.
.B badblocks
は e2fsprogs パッケージの一部であり、
http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net で入手できる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR e2fsck (8),
.BR mke2fs (8)
