.\" Copyright 2000 Andreas Dilger (adilger@turbolinux.com)
.\"
.\" This man page was created for blkid from e2fsprogs-1.25.
.\" 
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Based on uuidgen, Mon Sep 17 10:42:12 2000, Andreas Dilger
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Mar  7 00:00:12 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 30 07:25:35 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Dec 20 05:57:54 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH BLKID 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O blkid \- command\-line utility to locate/print block device attributes
blkid \- ブロックデバイスの属性を見つけて表示するコマンドラインユーティリティ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B blkid 
[
.B \-hlv
]
[
[
.B \-c
.I cachefile
]
.B \-w
.I writecachefile
]
[
.B \-o
.I format
]
[
.B \-s
.I tag
]
[
.B \-t
.IR NAME = value
]
[
.I device ...
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B blkid
.\"O program is the command-line interface to working with
.\"O .BR libuuid (3)
.\"O library.  It can determine the type of content (e.g. filesystem, swap) 
.\"O a block device holds, and also attributes (tokens, NAME=value pairs)
.\"O from the content metadata (e.g. LABEL or UUID fields).
.B blkid
プログラムは
.BR libuuid (3)
とともに動作するコマンドラインインタフェースである。
このプログラムは、コンテンツメタデータ
(たとえば LABEL や UUID フィールド) から
ブロックデバイスが保持するコンテンツタイプ
(たとえばファイルシステムやスワップ) と
属性 (トークン、NAME=value ペア) を決定する。
.PP
.\"O .B blkid
.\"O has two main forms of operation: either searching for a device with a
.\"O specific NAME=value pair, or displaying NAME=value pairs for one or
.\"O more devices.
.B blkid
には主に 2 種類の操作形式がある。
特定の NAME=value ペアを持つデバイスを検索することと、
複数のデバイスの NAME=value ペアを表示することができる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Read from
.\"O .I cachefile
.\"O instead of reading from the default cache file
.\"O .IR /etc/blkid.tab .
デフォルトのキャッシュファイル
.I /etc/blkid.tab
ではなく
.I cachefile
を読み込む。
.\"O If you want to start with a clean cache (i.e. don't report devices previously
.\"O scanned but not necessarily available at this time), specify
.\"O .IR /dev/null.
何もキャッシュしていない状態で開始したい場合
(すなわち、以前はスキャンを行ったが
今回は利用する必要のないデバイスを表示しない場合) は、
.I /dev/null
を指定すること。
.\"Osatoh: 
.\"Osatoh: 上記の訳は自信なし。
.\"Osatoh: 
.TP
.B \-h
.\"O Display a usage message and exit.
使用法のメッセージを表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Look up the device that matches the search parameter specified using
.\"O the 
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O option, assuming that there is only one matching the search parameter.  
.B \-t
オプションを使って指定された検索パラメータにマッチする
デバイスをルックアップする。
このとき検索パラメータにマッチするデバイスは 1 つのみであると仮定する。
.\"O For a system with a large number of disks, this will be more 
.\"O efficient by avoiding the need to revalidate devices unless absolutely 
.\"O necessary.  If this option is not specified, 
.\"O .B blkid
.\"O will use a less efficient approach, which allows 
.\"O .B blkid
.\"O to print all of the devices that match the search parameter.
ディスクの数が多いシステムでは、絶対に必要でない限り
デバイスを再検証する必要がないため、より効率的である。
このオプションが指定されてない場合、
.B blkid
は検索パラメータにマッチする全てのデバイスの表示を許す効率の悪い手法を使う。
.IP
.\"O This option is best used for tag searches such as 
.\"O .I LABEL=data_vol
.\"O or
.\"O .IR UUID=e280469a-d06f-4c0b-b068-44f3b576029e .
このオプションは
.I LABEL=data_vol
または
.I UUID=e280469a-d06f-4c0b-b068-44f3b576029e
のようなタグ検索で使うのが最も良い。
.\"O If you want 
.\"O .B blkid
.\"O to print all of the ext3 filesystems using a search parameter 
.\"O such as
.\"O .IR TYPE=ext3 ,
.\"O then this option should 
.\"O .I not
.\"O be used.
.I TYPE=ext3
のような検索パラメータを使って、
.B blkid
に全ての ext3 ファイルシステムを表示させたい場合は、
このオプションを使う\fIべきではない\fR。
.TP
.B \-o 
.\"O Display 
.\"O .BR blkid 's
.\"O output using the specified format.  The
.\"O .I format
.\"O parameter may be 
.\"O .IR full ,
.\"O (the default), 
.\"O .IR  value ,
.\"O (only print the value of any tags printed by 
.\"O .BR blkid)
.\"O or 
.\"O .I device
.\"O (only print the device name).
指定された書式で
.B blkid
の出力を表示する。
.I format
引き数には、
.I full
(デフォルト)・
.I  value
.RB ( blkid
で表示される任意のタグの値のみを表示する)・
.I device
(デバイス名のみを表示する) が指定できる。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Show only the tags for each (specified) device that match
.\"O .IR tag .
.\"O It is possible to specify multiple
.\"O .B \-s 
.\"O .I tag
.\"O options.  If no tag is specified, then all tokens are shown for all
.\"O (specified) devices.
.I tag
にマッチするそれぞれの (指定された) デバイスについての
タグのみを表示する。
複数の
.I tag
を指定することもできる。
tag が指定されない場合、全ての (指定された) デバイスの
全てのトークンが表示される。
.\"O In order to just refresh the cache without showing any tokens use
.\"O .B "-s none"
.\"O with no other options.
トークンを表示せずキャッシュを更新したいだけの場合は、
その他のオプションを付けずに
.B "-s none"
を使用すること。
.TP
.B \-t
.\"O Search for block devices with tokens named
.\"O .I NAME
.\"O that have the value 
.\"O .IR value ,
.\"O and display any devices which are found.
値が
.I value
の
.I NAME
という名前のトークンを持つブロックデバイスを検索し、
見つかった全てのデバイスを表示する。
.\"O Common values for
.\"O .I NAME
.\"O include
.\"O .BR TYPE ,
.\"O .BR LABEL ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR UUID .
.I NAME
の一般的な値としては、
.BR TYPE ,
.BR LABEL ,
.B UUID
がある。
.\"O If there are no devices specified on the command line, all block devices 
.\"O will be searched; otherwise, only search the devices specified by the user.
コマンドラインでデバイスが何も指定されていない場合は、
全てのブロックデバイスを検索する。
それ以外の場合は、ユーザが指定したデバイスのみを検索する。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Display version number and exit.
バージョン番号を表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-w
.I <writecachefile>
.\"O Write the device cache to
.\"O .I writecachefile
.\"O instead of writing it to the default cache file
.\"O .IR /etc/blkid.tab .
デバイスキャッシュをデフォルトのキャッシュファイル
.I /etc/blkid.tab
ではなく
.I writecachefile
に書き込む。
.\"O If you don't want to save the cache to the default file, specify
.\"O .IR /dev/null.
キャッシュをデフォルトのファイルに保存したくない場合は、
.I /dev/null
を指定すること。
.\"O If not specified it will be the same file as that given by the
.\"O .B -c
.\"O option.
このオプションが指定されない場合は、
.B -c
オプションで指定されたファイルと同じファイルに書き出す。
.TP
.I <device>
.\"O Display tokens from only the specified device.  It is possible to
.\"O give multiple
.\"O .I <device>
.\"O options on the command line.  If none is given, all devices which
.\"O appear in
.\"O .I /proc/partitions
.\"O are shown, if they are recognized.
指定されたデバイスのみのトークンを表示する。
コマンドラインで複数の
.I <device>
を指定することもできる。
何も指定されていない場合、認識できるならば
.I /proc/partitions
にある全てのデバイスについて表示される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN CODE"
.SH リターンコード
.\"O If the specified token was found, or if any tags were shown from (specified)
.\"O devices 0 is returned.  If the specified token was not found, or no
.\"O (specified) devices could be identified, an exit code of 2 is returned.  
.\"O For usage or other errors, an exit code of 4 is returned.
指定されたトークンが見つかった場合、
または (指定された) デバイスでタグが表示された場合は、0 が返される。
指定されたトークンが見つからなかった場合、
または (指定された) デバイスが識別できなかった場合は、終了コード 2 が返される。
使用法のメッセージを表示した場合、
または他のエラーの場合は、終了コード 4 が返される。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B blkid
.\"O was written by Andreas Dilger for libblkid.
.B blkid
は libblkid のために Andreas Dilger によって書かれた。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O .B blkid
.\"O is part the e2fsprogs package since version 1.26 and is available from
.\"O http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net.
.B blkid
はバージョン 1.26 から e2fsprogs パッケージの一部であり、
http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net から入手できる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR libblkid (3)
