.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Mar 13 03:10:18 JST 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji.
.\" Updated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Aug 16 00:10:30 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Thu 3 Oct 2002 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 17 13:18:42 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue May  3 03:13:30 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Oct 28 04:28:52 JST 2006 by Yuichi SATO
.\" 
.\"WORD:	allocate	アロケート (する)
.\"WORD:	interactive	対話的
.\"WORD:	stdout		標準出力
.\"WORD:	dump		ダンプする
.\"WORD:	current working directory	カレントワーキングディレクトリ
.\"WORD:	open		オープンする
.\"WORD:	close		クローズする
.\"WORD:	owner		所有者(owner)
.\"WORD:	group		所有グループ(group)
.\"WORD:	permission	パーミッション(permission)
.\"WORD:	free block	空きブロック(free block)
.\"WORD:	directory entry	ディレクトリエントリ
.\"WORD:	link		リンク
.\"WORD:	reference counts	参照数(reference counts)
.\"WORD:	structure	構造体
.\"WORD:	pathname	パス名
.\"WORD:	SPECIFING FILES	ファイル指定
.\"
.TH DEBUGFS 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O debugfs \- ext2/ext3 file system debugger
debugfs \- ext2/ext3 ファイルシステムデバッガ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B debugfs
[
.B \-Vwci
]
[
.B \-b
blocksize
]
[
.B \-s
superblock
]
[
.B \-f 
cmd_file
]
[
.B \-R
request
]
[
.B \-d
data_source_device
]
[
device
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The 
.\"O .B debugfs 
.\"O program is an interactive file system debugger. It can be used to
.\"O examine and change the state of an ext2 file system.
.B debugfs
は対話的なファイルシステムのデバッガである。
ext2 ファイルシステムの状態の調査・変更に利用できる。
.\"O .br
.\"O .I device
.\"O is the special file corresponding to the device containing the ext2
.\"O file system (e.g /dev/hdXX).
.I device
は、ext2 ファイルシステムを含むデバイスに対応する
スペシャルファイルである。(例: /dev/hdXX)
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.I \-w
.\"O Specifies that the file system should be opened in read-write mode.
.\"O Without this option, the file system is opened in read-only mode.
ファイルシステムを read/write モードでオープンする。
このオプションを指定しない場合は、
ファイルシステムは read-only モードでオープンされる。
.TP
.I \-c
.\"O Specifies that the file system should be opened in catastrophic mode, in
.\"O which the inode and group bitmaps are not read initially.  This can be
.\"O useful for filesystems with significant corruption, but because of this,
.\"O catastrophic mode forces the filesystem to be opened read-only.
ファイルシステムを catastrophic
(甚大な破損が起こった場合の) モードでオープンする。
このモードでは inode とグループビットを最初に読み込まない。
これは重度に破損したファイルシステムに対しては有効なことがあるが、
一方このため catastrophic モードではファイルシステムを
read-only でしかオープンできない。
.TP
.I \-i
.\"O Specifies that 
.\"O .I device
.\"O represents an ext2 image file created by the
.\"O .B e2image
.\"O program.  Since the ext2 image file only contains the superblock, block
.\"O group descriptor, block and inode allocation bitmaps, and 
.\"O the inode table, many
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O commands will not function properly.  
.I device
が
.B e2image
プログラムによって作成された ext2 イメージファイルであることを指定する。
ext2 イメージファイルは、スーパーブロック・
ブロックグループディスクリプタ・ブロックアロケーションビットマップ・
inode アローケションビットマップ・inode テーブルしか持たないので、
.B debugfs
の多くのコマンドが正しく機能しない。
.\"O .B Warning:
.\"O no safety checks are in place, and 
.\"O .B debugfs 
.\"O may fail in interesting ways if commands such as
.\"O .IR ls ", " dump ", " 
.\"O etc. are tried without specifying the 
.\"O .I data_source_device
.\"O using the 
.\"O .I \-d
.\"O option.
.\"O .B debugfs 
.\"O is a debugging tool.  It has rough edges!
.B 警告:
安全性のチェックは行わない。
また、
.I \-d
オプションによって
.I data_source_device
を指定せずに、
.IR ls ", " dump
などのコマンドを実行した場合には
.B debugfs 
は変な風に失敗するかもしれない。
.B debugfs 
はデバッグ用のツールなので、洗練された部分のみであるとは限らない!
.TP
.I -d data_source_device
.\"O Used with the 
.\"O .I \-i
.\"O option, specifies that
.\"O .I data_source_device
.\"O should be used when reading blocks not found in the ext2 image file.
.I \-i
オプションと共に使用され、
読み込みブロックが ext2 イメージファイルに見つからない場合には、
指定された
.I data_source_device
が使用される。
.\"O This includes data, directory, and indirect blocks.
このデバイスにはデータ・ディレクトリ・間接 (indirect) ブロックが含まれる。
.TP
.I -b blocksize
.\"O Forces the use of the given block size for the file system, rather than
.\"O detecting the correct block size as normal.
通常のように正しいブロックサイズを検出する動作を行わず、
指定したブロックサイズをそのファイルシステムに用いる。
.TP
.I -s superblock
.\"O Causes the file system superblock to be read from the given block number,
.\"O rather than the default (1).  If you give a
.\"O .I -s
.\"O option, you must also give a
.\"O .I -b
.\"O option.
ファイルシステムのスーパーブロックを、デフォルトの 1 ではなく、
指定したブロック番号から読ませる。
.I -s
オプションを指定した場合、
.I -b
オプションも指定しなければならない。
.TP
.I -f cmd_file
.\"O Causes 
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O to read in commands from 
.\"O .IR cmd_file , 
.\"O and execute them.  When 
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O is finished executing those commands, it will exit.
.B debugfs
に、
.I cmd_file
からコマンドを読み込ませ、実行させる。
コマンドの実行を終了すると、
.B debugfs
は終了する。
.TP 
.I -R request
.\"O Causes 
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O to execute the single command 
.\"O .IR request ,
.\"O and then exit.
.I request
というひとつのコマンドを実行し、終了する。
.TP
.I -V
.\"O print the version number of 
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O and exit.
.B debugfs
のバージョンを表示して終了する。
.\"O .SH SPECIFYING FILES
.SH ファイル指定
.\"O Many
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O commands take a
.\"O .I filespec
.\"O as an argument to specify an inode (as opposed to a pathname) 
.\"O in the filesystem which is currently opened by 
.\"O .BR debugfs . 
.\"O The
.\"O .I filespec
.\"O argument may be specified in two forms.  The first form is an inode 
.\"O number surrounded by angle brackets, e.g., 
.\"O .IR <2> .
.\"O The second form is a pathname; if the pathname is prefixed by a forward slash
.\"O ('/'), then it is interpreted relative to the root of the filesystem 
.\"O which is currently opened by 
.\"O .BR debugfs .
.\"O If not, the pathname is 
.\"O interpreted relative to the current working directory as maintained by 
.\"O .BR debugfs .  
.\"O This may be modified by using the 
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O command
.\"O .IR cd .
.B debugfs
のコマンドの多くは、
debugfs が現在オープンしているファイルシステムにおける 
inode (パス名ではない) を示す
.I filespec
という引数を取る。
.I filespec
には 2 種類の表記法がある。ひとつは、inode 番号を <> で囲む方法である
(例:
.IR <2> )。
もうひとつはパス名で指定する方法である。
パス名が「/ (スラッシュ)」ではじまる場合、
.B debugfs
が現在オープンしているファイルシステムのルートからの相対パスを表す。
「/」で始まらない場合、カレントワーキングディレクトリからの相対パスを表す。
カレントワーキングディレクトリは
.B debugfs
の
.I cd
コマンドによって変更できる。
.\" 
.\"
.\"
.\"O .SH COMMANDS
.SH コマンド
.\"O This is a list of the commands which 
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O supports.
.B debugfs
がサポートするコマンドの一覧を以下に示す。
.TP
.I bmap filespec logical_block
.\"O Print the physical block number corresponding to the logical block number
.\"O .I logical_block
.\"O in the inode
.\"O .IR filespec .
.I filespec
で指定した inode における論理ブロック番号
.I logical_block
に対応する物理ブロック番号を表示する。
.TP
.I cat filespec
.\"O Dump the contents of the inode 
.\"O .I filespec
.\"O to stdout.
.I filespec
で指定した inode の内容を標準出力へダンプする。
.TP
.I cd filespec
.\"O Change the current working directory to 
.\"O .IR filespec .
カレントワーキングディレクトリを
.I filespec
で指定したディレクトリに変更する。
.TP
.I chroot filespec
.\"O Change the root directory to be the directory 
.\"O .IR filespec .
ルートディレクトリを
.I filespec
で指定したディレクトリに変更する。
.TP
.I close
.\"O Close the currently open file system.
現在オープンしているファイルシステムをクローズする。
.TP
.I clri file
.\"O Clear the contents of the inode 
.\"O .IR file .
.I file
で指定した inode の内容をクリアする。
.TP
.I dump [-p] filspec out_file
.\"O Dump the contents of the inode 
.\"O .I filespec
.\"O to the output file 
.\"O .IR out_file .  
.I filespec
で指定した inode の内容を
.I out_file
で指定したファイルにダンプする。
.\"O If the 
.\"O .I -p 
.\"O option is given set the owner, group and permissions information on 
.\"O .I out_file 
.\"O to match 
.\"O .IR filespec .
.I -p
オプションを与えると、
.I out_file
の所有者 (owner)、所有グループ (group)、パーミッション (permission) を
.I filespec
と同じにする。
.TP
.I expand_dir filespec
.\"O Expand the directory
.\"O .IR filespec .
.I filespec
で指定したディレクトリを展開する。
.TP
.I feature [fs_feature] [-fs_feature] ...
.\"O Set or clear various filesystem features in the superblock.  After setting
.\"O or clearing any filesystem features that were requested, print the current
.\"O state of the filesystem feature set.
スーパーブロックの様々なファイルシステム属性をセット/クリアする。
要求のあった属性をセット/クリアした後は、
ファイルシステム属性の現在状態の一覧を表示する。
.TP
.I find_free_block [count [goal]]
.\"O Find the first 
.\"O .I count
.\"O free blocks, starting from
.\"O .I goal
.\"O and allocate it.
.I goal
から始まる最初の
.I count
分の空きブロックを探し、その空きブロックをアロケート (allocate) する。
.TP
.I find_free_inode [dir [mode]]
.\"O Find a free inode and allocate it.  If present, 
.\"O .I dir
.\"O specifies the inode number of the directory 
.\"O which the inode is to be located.  The second 
.\"O optional argument
.\"O .I mode
.\"O specifies the permissions of the new inode.  (If the directory bit is set
.\"O on the mode, the allocation routine will function differently.)
空き inode を探し、その inode をアロケートする。
.I dir
を指定すると、
これはその inode を置くべきディレクトリの inode と解釈される。
さらに
.I mode
を指定すると、
これは新しい inode のパーミッションと解釈される。
.RI ( mode
にディレクトリであることを指定するビットが立っている場合、
アロケートルーチンの挙動は異なるものになる。)
.TP
.I freeb block [count]
.\"O Mark the block number
.\"O .I block
.\"O as not allocated.
.\"O If the optional argument 
.\"O .I count 
.\"O is present, then 
.\"O .I count
.\"O blocks starting at block number
.\"O .I block
.\"O will be marked as not allocated.
ブロック番号
.I block
をアロケートされていないものとしてマークする。
省略可能な引数
.I count
を指定すると、ブロック番号
.I block
から始まる
.I count
分のブロックをアロケートされていないものとしてマークする。
.TP
.I freei filespec
.\"O Free the inode specified by 
.\"O .IR filespec .
.I filespec
で指定した inode を解放する。
.TP
.I help
.\"O Print a list of commands understood by 
.\"O .BR debugfs (8).
.BR debugfs (8)
で利用できるコマンドのリストを表示する。
.TP
.I icheck block ...
.\"O Print a listing of the inodes which use the one or more blocks specified
.\"O on the command line.
コマンドラインに与えたブロック (複数指定可) 
を利用している inode のリストを表示する。
.TP
.I imap filespec
.\"O Print the location of the inode data structure (in the inode table) 
.\"O of the inode
.\"O .IR filespec .
.I filespec
で指定された inode の (inode テーブルにおける)
inode データ構造の場所を表示する。
.TP
.I init_filesys device blocksize
.\"O Create an ext2 file system on
.\"O .I device
.\"O with device size
.\"O .IR blocksize .
.\"O Note that this does not fully initialize all of the data structures; 
.\"O to do this, use the 
.\"O .BR mke2fs (8)
.\"O program.  This is just a call to the low-level library, which sets up
.\"O the superblock and block descriptors.
.I device 
上に、デバイスサイズ
.I blocksize 
の ext2 ファイルシステムを作成する。
このコマンドは、すべてのデータ構造を完全に初期化するわけではない。
これをしたい場合は
.BR mke2fs (8)
プログラムを用いること。
このコマンドは、単にスーパーブロックとブロックディスクリプタを設定する
低レベルライブラリを呼び出すだけである。
.TP
.I kill_file filespec
.\"O Deallocate the inode 
.\"O .I filespec
.\"O and its blocks.  Note that this does not remove any directory
.\"O entries (if any) to this inode.  See the 
.\"O .BR rm (1)
.\"O command if you wish to unlink a file.
.\"O nakano rm は debugfs の内部コマンドのことだと思うので (1) は抜いた。
.I filespec
で指定した inode と、
その inode が使用しているブロックをアロケートから外す (deallocate)。
なお、その inode に対応するディレクトリエントリは削除しないことに注意。
ファイルを unlink したい場合は
.I rm
コマンドを参照のこと。
.TP
.I lcd directory
.\"O Change the current working directory of the
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O process to
.\"O .I directory
.\"O on the native filesystem.
.B debugfs
プロセスのカレントワーキングディレクトリを
ネイティブファイルシステム (訳註: 作業対象のものではなく、
debugfs が呼び出され、稼働しているファイルシステム) 上の
.I directory
に変更する。
.TP
.I ln filespec dest_file
.\"O Create a link named 
.\"O .I dest_file
.\"O which is a link to 
.\"O .IR filespec .
.\"O Note this does not adjust the inode reference counts.
.I filespec
を指すリンク
.I dest_file
を作成する。
この際 inode の参照数 (reference counts) は変更しないことに注意。
.TP
.I logdump [-acs] [-b<block>] [-i<filespec>] [-f<journal_file>] [output_file]
.\"O Dump the contents of the ext3 journal.  By default, the journal inode as
.\"O specified in the superblock.  However, this can be overridden with the 
.\"O .I \-i
.\"O option, which uses an inode specifier to specify the journal to be
.\"O used.  A file containing journal data can be specified using the
.\"O .I \-f
.\"O option.   Finally, the 
.\"O .I \-s
.\"O option utilizes the backup information in the superblock to locate the
.\"O journal.
ext3 ジャーナルの内容をダンプする。
デフォルトではジャーナル inode はスーパーブロックで指定される。
しかし
.I \-i
オプションで上書きすることも可能である。
.I \-i
オプションは使用されるジャーナルを指定する inode 指定子を使う。
ジャーナルデータが書かれたファイルは、
.I \-f
オプションを使って指定することができる。
そして
.I \-s
オプションはスーパーブロックにあるバックアップ情報を使って、
ジャーナルをアロケートする。
.IP
.\"O The 
.\"O .I \-a
.\"O option causes the 
.\"O .I logdump
.\"O program to print the contents of all of the descriptor blocks.
.I \-a
オプションを指定すると、
.I logdump
プログラムは全てのディスクリプタブロックの内容を表示する。
.\"O The 
.\"O .I \-b
.\"O option causes 
.\"O .I logdump
.\"O to print all journal records that are refer to the specified block. 
.I \-b
オプションを指定すると、
.I logdump
プログラムは指定されたブロックを参照する全てのジャーナルレコードを表示する。
.\"O The 
.\"O .I \-c
.\"O option will print out the contents of all of the data blocks selected by
.\"O the 
.\"O .I \-a
.\"O and 
.\"O .I \-b
.\"O options.
.I \-c
オプションを指定すると、
.I \-a
と
.I \-b
オプションで選択された全てのデータブロックの内容を表示する。
.TP
.I ls [-l] [-d] filespec
.\"O Print a listing of the files in the directory
.\"O .IR filespec .
.\"O The 
.\"O .I \-l
.\"O flag will list files using a more verbose format.
.\"O The
.\"O .I \-d
.\"O flag will list deleted entries in the directory.
.I filespec
で指定したディレクトリ内にあるファイルをリスト表示する。
.I \-l
フラグを指定すると、より詳細な書式でファイルをリスト表示する。
.I \-d
フラグを指定すると、
このディレクトリにある削除エントリ (deleted entry)
をリスト表示する。
.TP
.I modify_inode filespec
.\"O Modify the contents of the inode structure in the inode
.\"O .IR filespec .
.I filespec
で指定した inode にある inode 構造体の内容を変更する。
.TP
.I mkdir filespec
.\"O Make a directory.
ディレクトリを作成する。
.TP
.I mknod filespec [p|[[c|b] major minor]]
.\"O Create a special device file (a named pipe, character or block device).
.\"O If a character or block device is to be made, the 
.\"O .I major
.\"O and
.\"O .I minor
.\"O device numbers must be specified.
スペシャルデバイスファイル
(名前付きパイプ、キャラクタデバイス、ブロックデバイス)
を作成する。
キャラクタデバイスおよびブロックデバイスを作成する場合は、
デバイス番号として
.I major
および
.I minor
を指定しなければならない。
.TP
.I ncheck inode_num ...
.\"O Take the requested list of inode numbers, and print a listing of pathnames
.\"O to those inodes.
指定した inode 番号それぞれに対応するパス名のリストを表示する。
.TP
.I open [-w] [-e] [-f] [-i] [-c] [-b blocksize] [-s superblock] device
.\"O Open a filesystem for editing.  The
.\"O .I -f
.\"O flag forces the filesystem to be opened even if there are some unknown
.\"O or incompatible filesystem features which would normally
.\"O prevent the filesystem from being opened.
編集の対象とするファイルシステムをオープンする。
.I \-f
フラグをつけると、通常ではオープンできないような、
不明なファイルシステムや非互換なファイルシステムでも
強制的にオープンする。
.\"O The
.\"O .I -e
.\"O flag causes the filesystem to be opened in exclusive mode.  The
.\"O .IR -b ", " -c ", " -i ", " -s ", and " -w
.\"O options behave the same as the command-line options to 
.\"O .BR debugfs .
.I \-e
フラグをつけるとファイルシステムを排他モードでオープンする。
.IR -b ", " -c ", " -i ", " -s ", " -w
オプションを指定した場合の動作は、
.B debugfs
にコマンドラインオプションを指定した場合と同じである。
.TP
.I pwd
.\"O Print the current working directory.
カレントワーキングディレクトリを表示する。
.TP
.I quit
.\"O Quit
.\"O .B debugfs
.B debugfs
を終了する。
.TP
.I rdump directory destination
.\"O Recursively dump
.\"O .I directory
.\"O and all its contents (including regular files, symbolic links, and other
.\"O directories) into the named
.\"O .I destination
.\"O which should be an existing directory on the native filesystem.
.I directory
と (通常のファイル・シンボリックリンク・
その他のディレクトリを含む) そのディレクトリの全ての内容を、
.I destination
という名前のディレクトリに再帰的にダンプする。
.I destination
はネイティブファイルシステム上に存在するディレクトリでなければならない。
.TP
.I rm pathname
.\"O Unlink 
.\"O .IR pathname .
.\"O If this causes the inode pointed to by 
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O to have no other references, deallocate the file.  This command functions
.\"O as the unlink() system call.
.\"O .I 
.I pathname
で指定したパス名を unlink する。
.I pathname
の示す inode が何も参照しなくなった場合には、
ファイルのアロケートを外す。
このコマンドは unlink() システムコールのように動作する。
.TP
.I rmdir filespec
.\"O Remove the directory
.\"O .IR filespec .
.I filespec
で指定したディレクトリを消去する。
.TP
.I setb block [count]
.\"O Mark the block number
.\"O .I block
.\"O as allocated.
ブロック番号
.I block
をアロケートされているものとしてマークする。
.\"O If the optional argument 
.\"O .I count 
.\"O is present, then 
.\"O .I count
.\"O blocks starting at block number
.\"O .I block
.\"O will be marked as allocated.
省略可能な引数
.I count
を指定すると、ブロック番号
.I block
から始まる
.I count
分のブロックをアロケートされているものとしてマークする。
.TP
.I seti filespec
.\"O Mark inode 
.\"O .I filespec
.\"O as in use in the inode bitmap.
inode ビットマップに、
.I filespec
で指定した inode が使用中であるとマークする。
.TP
.I set_inode_field filespec field value
.\"O Modify the inode specified by 
.\"O .I filespec
.\"O so that the inode field
.\"O .I field
.\"O has value 
.\"O .I value.
.I filespec
で指定された inode を変更し、inode フィールド
.I field
が値
.I value
を持つようにする。
.\"O The list of valid inode fields which can be set via this command 
.\"O can be displayed by using the command:
.\"O .B set_inode_field -l
このコマンドで設定が可能な、正しい inode フィールドのリストは、
.B set_inode_field -l
コマンドによって表示できる。
.TP
.I set_super_value field value
.\"O Set the superblock field
.\"O .I field
.\"O to 
.\"O .I value.
.\"O The list of valid superblock fields which can be set via this command 
.\"O can be displayed by using the command:
.\"O .B set_super_value -l
スーパーブロックフィールド
.I field
を
.I value
にする。このコマンドで設定が可能な、
正しいスーパーブロックフィールドのリストは、
.B set_super_value -l
コマンドによって表示できる。
.TP
.I show_super_stats [-h]
.\"O List the contents of the super block and the block group descriptors.  If the
.\"O .I -h
.\"O flag is given, only print out the superblock contents.
スーパーブロックとブロックグループディスクリプタの内容を表示する。
.I \-h
フラグが与えられると、
スーパーブロックの内容だけを表示する。
.TP
.I stat filespec
.\"O Display the contents of the inode structure of the inode
.\"O .IR filespec .
.I filespec
で指定した inode の inode 構造体の内容を表示する。
.TP
.I testb block [count]
.\"O Test if the block number
.\"O .I block
.\"O is marked as allocated in the block bitmap.
.\"O If the optional argument 
.\"O .I count 
.\"O is present, then 
.\"O .I count
.\"O blocks starting at block number
.\"O .I block
.\"O will be tested.
ブロック番号
.I block
がブロックビットマップにおいてアロケートになっているかどうか調べる。
省略可能な引数
.I count
を指定すると、ブロック番号
.I block
から始まる
.I count
分のブロックを検査する。
.TP
.I testi filespec
.\"O Test if the inode 
.\"O .I filespec
.\"O is marked as allocated in the inode bitmap.
.I filespec
で指定した inode が
inode ビットマップにおいてアロケートになっているかどうか調べる。
.TP
.I unlink pathname
.\"O Remove the link specified by 
.\"O .I pathname 
.\"O to an inode.  Note this does not adjust the inode reference counts.
.I pathname
で指定した、ある inode を指すリンクを削除する。
なおこの際、inode 参照数は変更しないことに注意。
.TP
.I write source_file out_file
.\"O Create a file in the filesystem named
.\"O .IR out_file ,
.\"O and copy the contents of
.\"O .I source_file
.\"O into the destination file.
ファイルシステム内に
.I out_file
で指定したファイルを作成し、
.I source_file
の内容をそのファイルにコピーする。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.SH 環境変数
.TP
.B DEBUGFS_PAGER, PAGER
.\"O The
.\"O .BR debugfs (8)
.\"O program always pipes the output of the some commands through a
.\"O pager program.  These commands include: 
.\"O .IR show_super_stats ,
.\"O .IR list_directory ,
.\"O .IR show_inode_info ,
.\"O .IR list_deleted_inodes ,
.\"O and
.\"O .IR htree_dump .
.BR debugfs (8)
はいくつかのコマンドの出力を常にページャプログラムにパイプする。
そのようなコマンドとしては、
.IR show_super_stats ,
.IR list_directory ,
.IR show_inode_info ,
.IR list_deleted_inodes ,
.I htree_dump
がある。
.\"O The specific pager can explicitly specified by the
.\"O .B DEBUGFS_PAGER
.\"O environment variable, and if it is not set, by the
.\"O .B PAGER
.\"O environment variable.  
特定のページャを環境変数
.B DEBUGFS_PAGER
で明示的に指定することができる。
この環境変数が設定されていない場合は、環境変数
.B PAGER
で指定される。
.IP
.\"O Note that since a pager is always used, the 
.\"O .BR less (1)
.\"O pager is not particularly appropriate, since it clears the screen before
.\"O displaying the output of the command and clears the output the screen
.\"O when the pager is exited.  Many users prefer to use the 
.\"O .BR less (1)
.\"O pager for most purposes, which is why the 
.\"O .B DEBUGFS_PAGER 
.\"O environment variable is available to override the more general
.\"O .B PAGER
.\"O environment variable.
1 つのページャが常に使われるので、
.BR less (1)
ページャは特に適さない点に注意すること。
.BR less (1)
はコマンドの表示を表示する前にスクリーンをクリアしたり、
ページャが終了するときにスクリーンへの出力をクリアしてしまうからである。
多くのユーザは
.BR less (1)
ページャをいろいろな目的に使うのを好んでいる。
これが環境変数
.B DEBUGFS_PAGER 
で、より一般的な環境変数
.B PAGER
を上書きできる理由である。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O was written by Theodore Ts'o <tytso@mit.edu>.
.B debugfs
は Theodore Ts'o <tytso@mit.edu> によって作成された。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR dumpe2fs (8),
.BR e2fsck (8),
.BR mke2fs (8)
