.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Mar 13 02:58:01 JST 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji.
.\" Updated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Aug  5 15:50:06 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 17 01:45:12 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" 
.\"WORD:	dump			ダンプ(dump)
.\"WORD:        filesystem feature      ファイルシステム属性
.\"WORD:	AVAILABILITY		入手方法
.\"
.TH DUMPE2FS 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O dumpe2fs \- dump ext2/ext3 filesystem information
dumpe2fs \- ext2/ext3 ファイルシステムの情報をダンプ (dump) する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B dumpe2fs
[
.B \-bfhixV
]
[
.B \-ob
.I superblock
]
[
.B \-oB
.I blocksize
]
.I device
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B dumpe2fs
.\"O prints the super block and blocks group information for the filesystem
.\"O present on
.\"O .I device.
.B dumpe2fs
は、
.I device 
によって指定されるデバイス上にあるファイルシステムの
スーパーブロックに関する情報と
ブロックグループに関する情報を表示する。
.PP
.\"O .B dumpe2fs
.\"O is similar to Berkeley's
.\"O .B dumpfs
.\"O program for the BSD Fast File System.
.B dumpe2fs
は、Berkeley の BSD Fast File System 用の
.B dumpfs
と同様のものである。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b
.\"O print the blocks which are reserved as bad in the filesystem.
ファイルシステム上で不良ブロックとして扱われているブロックを表示する。
.TP
.BI -ob " superblock"
.\"O use the block
.\"O .I superblock
.\"O when examining the filesystem.
.\"O This option is not usually needed except by a filesystem wizard who 
.\"O is examining the remains of a very badly corrupted filesystem.
ファイルシステムを調べるときに、
.I superblock
ブロックを用いる。このオプションは通常は必要ない。
ファイルシステムを熟知したユーザが、ひどい状態に壊れてしまった
ファイルシステムから、残りを調べるときに用いられる。
.TP
.BI -oB blocksize
.\"O use the blocksize specified on the command line when examining the filesystem.
.\"O This option is not usually needed except by a filesystem wizard who 
.\"O is examining the remains of a very badly corrupted filesystem.
ファイルシステムを調べるときに、コマンドラインから指定した
ブロックサイズを用いる。このオプションは通常は必要ない。
ファイルシステムを熟知したユーザが、ひどい状態に壊れてしまった
ファイルシステムから、残りを調べるときに用いられる。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O force dumpe2fs to display a filesystem even though it may have some
.\"O filesystem feature flags which dumpe2fs may not understand (and which
.\"O can cause some of dumpe2fs's display to be suspect).
dumpe2fs の理解しないファイルシステム属性フラグを持つような
ファイルシステムでも、強制的に表示する
(そして dumpe2fs の表示がおかしくなるかもしれない)。
.TP
.B \-h
.\"O only display the superblock information and not any of the block
.\"O group descriptor detail information.
スーパーブロックの情報だけを表示し、
ブロックグループデスクリプターの詳細情報は表示しない。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O display the filesystem data from an image file created by 
.\"O .BR e2image ,
.\"O using 
.\"O .I device
.\"O as the pathname to the image file.
.I device
をイメージファイルへのパス名として、
.B e2image
で作成されたイメージファイルのファイルシステムデータを表示する。
.TP
.B \-x
.\"O print the detailed group information block numbers in hexadecimal format
詳細なグループ情報のブロック数を 16 進数で表示する。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O print the version number of 
.\"O .B dumpe2fs
.\"O and exit.
.B dumpe2fs
のバージョンを表示して終了する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O You need to know the physical filesystem structure to understand the
.\"O output.
出力を理解するためには、
ファイルシステムの物理的な構造を知っていなければならない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B dumpe2fs 
.\"O was written by Remy Card <Remy.Card@linux.org>.  It is currently being
.\"O maintained by Theodore Ts'o <tytso@alum.mit.edu>.
.B dumpe2fs
は Remy Card <Remy.Card@linux.org> によって作成された。
現在は Theodore Ts'o <tytso@alum.mit.edu> によってメンテナンスされている。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O .B dumpe2fs
.\"O is part of the e2fsprogs package and is available from 
.\"O http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net.
.B dump2fs
は e2fsprogs パッケージの一部であり、
http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net から入手できる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR e2fsck (8),
.BR mke2fs (8),
.BR tune2fs (8)
