.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Mar 12 12:06:45 JST 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji.
.\" Updated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Aug  7 08:35:46 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Sep  9 22:13:00 JST 2001 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated Fri 4 Oct 2002 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 17 02:08:36 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Dec 20 06:30:28 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Oct 29 02:07:11 JST 2006 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.\"WORD:	fatal error	致命的なエラー(fatal error)
.\"WORD:	bad block	不良ブロック
.\"WORD:	non-interactively	非対話的に
.\"WORD:	byte-swap	バイトスワップ(エンディアン)
.\"WORD:	byte-order	バイトオーダー
.\"WORD:	statistics	統計(statistisc)
.\"WORD:	verbose		詳細な
.\"WORD:	REPORTING BUGS	バグ報告
.\"WORD:	crush		クラッシュ
.\"WORD:	reboot		リブート
.\"WORD:	transcript	実行記録
.\" 
.TH E2FSCK 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O e2fsck \- check a Linux ext2/ext3 file system
.SH 名前
e2fsck \- Linux ext2/ext3 ファイルシステムをチェックする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B e2fsck
[
.B \-pacnyrdfkvstDFSV
]
[
.B \-b
.I superblock
]
[
.B \-B
.I blocksize
]
[
.B \-l|\-L
.I bad_blocks_file
]
[
.B \-C
.I fd
]
[
.B \-j
.I external-journal
]
[
.B \-E
.I extended_options
]
.I device
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O is used to check a Linux second extended file system (ext2fs).
.\"O .B E2fsck
.\"O also 
.\"O supports ext2 filesystems containing a journal, which are
.\"O also sometimes known as ext3 filesystems, by first applying the journal
.\"O to the filesystem before continuing with normal
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O processing.  After the journal has been applied, a filesystem will
.\"O normally be marked as clean.  Hence, for ext3 filesystems,
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O will normally run the journal and exit, unless its superblock
.\"O indicates that further checking is required.
.B e2fsck
は Linux 第 2 拡張ファイルシステム (ext2fs) をチェックする。
e2fsck はジャーナル付きの ext2 ファイルシステムもサポートする。
このファイルシステムは ext3 ファイルシステムとも呼ばれ、
この場合は通常の
.B e2fsck
処理を行う前に、まずジャーナルをファイルシステムに適用する。
ジャーナルを適用した後、ファイルシステムは通常
clean であるとマークされる。
よって、ext3 ファイルシステムに対しては、
.B e2fsck
は通常ジャーナルを実行して終了するだけになる
(ただしスーパーブロックに、
より詳細なチェックを要求する内容が記述されている場合は別)。
.PP
.\"O .I device
.\"O is the device file where the filesystem is stored (e.g.
.\"O .IR /dev/hdc1 ).
.I device
はファイルシステムが保存されているデバイスファイルである (例:
.IR dev/hdc1 )。
.PP
.\"O Note that in general it is not safe to run
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O on mounted filesystems.  The only exception is if the
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option is specified, and 
.\"O .BR \-c , 
.\"O .BR \-l ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B -L
.\"O options are 
.\"O .I not
.\"O specified.   However, even if it is safe to do so, the results printed by
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O are not valid if the filesystem is mounted.   If 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O asks whether or not you should check a filesystem which is mounted, 
.\"O the only correct answer is ``no''.  Only experts who really know what
.\"O they are doing should consider answering this question in any other way.
マウントされているファイルシステムに対して
.B e2fsck
を実行するのは、一般的に言って、安全でないという点に注意すること。
唯一の例外は、
.B \-n
が指定されていて、かつ
.BR \-c , 
.BR \-l ,
.B -L
オプションが指定されて\fIいない\fR場合である。
しかし安全に実行できたとしても、
ファイルシステムがマウントされているときに
.B e2fsck
で表示される結果は有効ではない。
マウントされているファイルシステムをチェックすべきか否かを
.B e2fsck
が質問してきた場合、唯一の正しい答えは ``no'' である。
何をしているかを本当に分かっているエキスパートのみが、
この質問に対して別の答えを出すかを考えるべきである。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-a 
.\"O This option does the same thing as the 
.\"O .B -p
.\"O option.  It is provided for backwards compatibility only; it is
.\"O suggested that people use 
.\"O .B -p 
.\"O option whenever possible.
このオプションは
.B \-p
オプションと同様のものとみなされる。
下位互換性のためにのみ準備されているオプションであるため、
できる限り
.B -p
オプションを使うことが推奨される。
.TP
.BI \-b " superblock"
.\"O Instead of using the normal superblock, use an alternative superblock
.\"O specified by 
.\"O .IR superblock .
通常のスーパーブロックのかわりに、
.IR superblock 
をスーパーブロックとして利用する。
.\"O This option is normally used when the primary superblock has been
.\"O corrupted.  
このオプションが用いられるのは、
プライマリなスーパーブロックが壊れた場合である。
.\"O The location of the backup superblock is dependent on the
.\"O filesystem's blocksize.  For filesystems with 1k blocksizes, a backup
.\"O superblock can be found at block 8193; for filesystems with 2k
.\"O blocksizes, at block 16384; and for 4k blocksizes, at block 32768.  
バックアップスーパーブロックの場所は、
ファイルシステムのブロックサイズによって異なる。
ファイルシステムのブロックサイズが 1k の場合、
バックアップスーパーブロックは 8193 にある。
また、ブロックサイズが 2k の場合は 16384 に、
4k の場合は 32768 にある。
.IP
.\"O Additional backup superblocks can be determined by using the 
.\"O .B mke2fs 
.\"O program using the 
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option to print out where the superblocks were created.   
バックアップ用の追加スーパーブロックの位置を決めるには、
.B mke2fs 
プログラムを
.B \-n
オプション付きで実行して、
スーパーブロックが生成された場所を表示させればよい。
.\"O The 
.\"O .B \-b 
.\"O option to 
.\"O .BR mke2fs ,
.\"O which specifies blocksize of the filesystem must be specified in order
.\"O for the superblock locations that are printed out to be accurate.
スーパーブロックの正確な場所を表示させたければ、
.B \-b 
オプションでファイルシステムのブロックサイズを指定して
.B mke2fs
を実行しなければならない。
.IP
.\"O If an alternative superblock is specified and  
.\"O the filesystem is not opened read-only, e2fsck will make sure that the
.\"O primary superblock is updated appropriately upon completion of the 
.\"O filesystem check.
代替スーパーブロックが指定され、
ファイルシステムが read-only 以外で open されている場合、
e2fsck はファイルシステムのチェックが終わったときに
プライマリのスーパーブロックを適切な値に更新するかどうかの
確認を求める。
.TP
.BI \-B " blocksize"
.\"O Normally, 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O will search for the superblock at various different
.\"O block sizes in an attempt to find the appropriate block size.
.\"O This search can be fooled in some cases.  This option forces 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O to only try locating the superblock at a particular blocksize.
.\"O If the superblock is not found, 
.\"O .B e2fsck 
.\"O will terminate with a fatal error.
通常
.B e2fsck 
は、
適切なブロックサイズを探すために
スーパーブロックを様々なブロックサイズでサーチする。
この作業は無駄な場合がある。このオプションは、
ブロックサイズを指定してスーパーブロックをサーチするよう指定する。
スーパーブロックが見つからない場合、
.B e2fsck
は致命的なエラー (fatal error) で終了する。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O This option causes 
.\"O .B e2fsck 
.\"O to use 
.\"O .BR badblocks (8)
.\"O program to do a read-only scan of the device in order to find any bad
.\"O blocks.  If any bad blocks are found, they are added to the bad block
.\"O inode to prevent them from being allocated to a file or directory.  If
.\"O this option is specified twice, then the bad block scan will be done
.\"O using a non-destructive read-write test.
このオプションを指定すると、
.B e2fsck
は
.BR badblocks (8)
を使ってデバイスの read-only スキャンを行い、不良ブロックを探す。
不良ブロックが見つかると、それを不良ブロック inode に加え、
ファイルやディレクトリとして確保 (allocate) されないようにする。
このオプションが 2 つ指定されると、
不良ブロックのスキャンは非破壊的 read-write テストを用いて行われる。
.TP
.BI \-C " fd"
.\"O This option causes
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O to write completion information to the specified file descriptor 
.\"O so that the progress of the filesystem 
.\"O check can be monitored.  This option is typically used by programs 
.\"O which are running
.\"O .BR e2fsck .
.\"O If the file descriptor specified is 0, 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O will print a completion bar as it goes about its business.  This requires
.\"O that e2fsck is running on a video console or terminal.
このオプションを指定すると
.B e2fsck
は作業状況を指定したファイルディスクリプタに書き出し、
ファイルシステムのチェックの進行状況をモニターできるようにする。
このオプションは、
.BR e2fsck
を動作させるプログラムから良く用いられる。
指定されたファイルディスクリプタが 0 の場合、
.B e2fsck
は作業を進めるごとに棒グラフを出力する。
この動作をさせるには、
.B e2fsck
をビデオコンソールか端末から実行する必要がある。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Print debugging output (useless unless you are debugging
.\"O .BR e2fsck ).
デバッグ情報を出力する
.RB ( e2fsck 
をデバッグするときにしか役に立たない)。
.TP
.B \-D
.\"O Optimize directories in filesystem.  This option causes e2fsck to
.\"O try to optimize all directories, either by reindexing them if the
.\"O filesystem supports directory indexing,  or by sorting and compressing
.\"O directories for smaller directories, or for filesystems using
.\"O traditional linear directories.
.\"O nakano たぶん最後の ,"or" が入れ間違い
ファイルシステム中のディレクトリを最適化する。
このオプションを指定すると、
e2fsck はすべてのディレクトリを最適化しようとする。
ファイルシステムがディレクトリインデクシングをサポートしていれば、
インデックスを再生成する。
また従来の線形的なディレクトリ構造を使うファイルシステムでは、
小さなディレクトリから順にソートして圧縮する。
.TP
.BI \-E " extended_options"
.\"O Set e2fsck extended options.  Extended options are comma
.\"O separated, and may take an argument using the equals ('=') sign.  The
.\"O following options are supported:
e2fsck に拡張オプションを設定する。
拡張オプション間はコンマで区切り、
等号 ('=') に続ける形で引数を取ることもできる。
次のオプションがサポートされている。
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.BI ea_ver= extended_attribute_version
.\"O Assume the format of the extended attribute blocks in the filesystem is
.\"O the specified version number.  The version number may be 1 or 2.  The
.\"O default extended attribute version format is 2.
.\"O nakano 最後の文は version と format が逆だと思うが...
対象ファイルシステムの拡張属性ブロックのフォーマットを、
指定したバージョン番号のものであると仮定する。
バージョン番号には 1 または 2 が指定できる。
デフォルトの拡張属性フォーマットのバージョンは 2 である。
.RE
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Force checking even if the file system seems clean.
ファイルシステムが clean な場合でも、強制的にチェックする。
.TP
.B \-F
.\"O Flush the filesystem device's buffer caches before beginning.  Only
.\"O really useful for doing 
.\"O .B e2fsck 
.\"O time trials.
チェックを始める前に、ファイルシステムデバイスのキャッシュバッファを
フラッシュする。
.B e2fsck
を用いたタイムトライアルにのみ有用。
.TP
.BI \-j " external-journal"
.\"O Set the pathname where the external-journal for this filesystem can be
.\"O found.
このファイルシステムの外部ジャーナルがあるパス名を設定する。
.TP
.BI \-k
.\"O When combined with the 
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O option, any existing bad blocks in the bad blocks list are preserved,
.\"O and any new bad blocks found by running
.\"O .BR badblocks (8) 
.\"O will be added to the existing bad blocks list.
.B \-c
オプションと組み合わせると、
不良ブロックリストにある既存の不良ブロックは保存され、
.BR badblocks (8) 
を実行して見つかった新たな不良ブロックが
既存の不良ブロックリストに追加される。
.TP
.BI \-l " filename"
.\"O Add the block numbers listed in the file specified by
.\"O .I filename
.\"O to the list of bad blocks.  The format of this file is the same as the
.\"O one generated by the 
.\"O .BR badblocks (8)
.\"O program.  Note that the block numbers are based on the blocksize
.\"O of the filesystem.  Hence,
.\"O .BR badblocks (8)
.\"O must be given the blocksize of the filesystem in order to obtain correct
.\"O results.  As a result, it is much simpler and safer to use the
.\"O .B -c
.\"O option to
.\"O .BR e2fsck ,
.\"O since it will assure that the correct parameters are passed to the
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O program.
.\"O nakano いまいちピンと来ないけど...
.I filename
で指定したファイルにリストされているブロック番号を
不良ブロックのリストに追加する。このファイルのフォーマットは
.BR badblocks (8)
プログラムが出力するものと同じである。
ブロック番号はファイルシステムのブロックサイズに基づいていることに注意。
したがって正しい結果を得るためには
.BR badblocks (8)
にファイルシステムのブロックサイズを与えなければならない。
よって、
.BR e2fsck
に
.B \-c
オプションを与える方が、ずっと単純かつ安全である。
このオプションを指定すれば、正しいパラメータが
.B badblocks
プログラムに渡ることになっている。
.TP
.BI \-L " filename"
.\"O Set the bad blocks list to be the list of blocks specified by 
.\"O .IR filename .
.\"O (This option is the same as the 
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O option, except the bad blocks list is cleared before the blocks listed
.\"O in the file are added to the bad blocks list.)
.IR filename
で指定したファイルに書かれているブロックリストを、
不良ブロックのリストに指定する。
(このオプションは
.B \-l
オプションとは異なり、ファイルにリストされているブロックを
不良ブロックリストに加える前に、
不良ブロックリストをいったんクリアする。)
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Open the filesystem read-only, and assume an answer of `no' to all
.\"O questions.  Allows
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O to be used non-interactively.  (Note: if the 
.\"O .BR \-c ,
.\"O .BR \-l ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-L
.\"O options are specified in addition to the 
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option, then the filesystem will be opened read-write, to permit the
.\"O bad-blocks list to be updated.  However, no other changes will be made
.\"O to the filesystem.)  This option
.\"O may not be specified at the same time as the 
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-y
.\"O options.
ファイルシステムを read-only で open し、全ての問いに対して「no」と答える。
.B e2fsck
を非対話的に動作させることができる。(注意:
.B \-n
オプションに加えて
.BR \-c ,
.BR \-l ,
.B \-L
のいずれかのオプションを付加した場合は、
不良ブロックリストを更新するためにファイルシステムは
read/write でオープンされる。
ただしファイルシステム自体は変更されない。)
このオプションは
.B \-p
または
.B \-y
オプションと同時に指定してはならない。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Automatically repair ("preen") the file system.  This option will case
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O to automatically
.\"O fix any filesystem problems that can be safely fixed without human
.\"O intervention.  If 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O discovers a problem which may require the system administrator
.\"O to take additional corrective action, 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O will print a description of the problem and then exit with the value 4
.\"O logically or'ed into the exit code.  (See the \fBEXIT CODE\fR section.)
.\"O This option is normally used by the system's boot scripts.  It may not 
.\"O be specified at the same time as the
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-y
.\"O options.
ファイルシステムを質問なしで自動的に修復 (preen) する。
このオプションを指定すると、
.B e2fsck
は安全に修正できるファイルシステムの問題を、
使用者と対話せずに自動的に修正する。
.B e2fsck
は、システム管理者が別に正しい行動をとる必要のある問題を見つけると、
問題の説明を表示し、値 4 と返り値の論理 OR をとった値で終了する。
(「\fB返り値\fR」のセクションを参照すること。)
通常、このオプションはシステムのブートスクリプトで使われる。
このオプションは
.B \-n
または
.B \-y
オプションと同時に指定してはならない。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O This option does nothing at all; it is provided only for backwards
.\"O compatibility.
このオプションは何もしない。
過去との互換性のために準備されているだけである。
.TP 
.B \-s
.\"O This option will byte-swap the filesystem so that it is using the normalized, 
.\"O standard byte-order (which is i386 or little endian).  If the filesystem is
.\"O already in the standard byte-order, 
.\"O .B e2fsck 
.\"O will take no action.
このオプションはファイルシステムのバイトスワップ (エンディアンの変更) を行う。
すなわち、i386 やリトルエンディアンで標準的なバイトオーダーにする。
ファイルシステムがすでに標準的なバイトオーダーになっているならば、
.B e2fsck
は何もしない。
.TP
.B \-S
.\"O This option will byte-swap the filesystem, regardless of its current 
.\"O byte-order.
ファイルシステムがバイトスワップされている場合でも、
現在のバイトオーダーを保つ。
.TP
.B \-t
.\"O Print timing statistics for
.\"O .BR e2fsck .
.\"O If this option is used twice, additional timing statistics are printed
.\"O on a pass by pass basis.
.\"O nakano pass by pass basis とは?
.B e2fsck
のタイミング統計 (statistics) を表示する。
このオプションを 2 つ指定すると、より詳細なタイミング統計が
次々と得られる。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose mode.
詳細な表示をする。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Print version information and exit.
バージョン情報を表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-y
.\"O Assume an answer of `yes' to all questions; allows 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O to be used non-interactively.  This option
.\"O may not be specified at the same time as the 
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O options.
全ての問いに対して「yes」と答える。これによって
.B e2fsck
を非対話的に動作させることができる。
このオプションは
.B \-n
または
.B \-p
オプションと同時に指定してはならない。
.\"O .SH EXIT CODE
.SH 返り値
.\"O The exit code returned by
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O is the sum of the following conditions:
.B e2fsck
の返り値は、以下の状態を表す数の和になる。
.br
.\"O \	0\	\-\ No errors
\	0\	\-\ エラーなし
.br
.\"O \	1\	\-\ File system errors corrected
\	1\	\-\ ファイルシステムのエラーが修正された
.br
.\"O \	2\	\-\ File system errors corrected, system should
.\"O .br
.\"O \	\	\ \ be rebooted
.\"O .br
\	2\	\-\ ファイルシステムのエラーが修正された。
.br
\	\	\ \ システムをリブートしなければならない
.br
.\"O \	4\	\-\ File system errors left uncorrected
\	4\	\-\ ファイルシステムのエラーが修正されないまま
.br
\	\	\ \ 残っている
.br
.\"O \	8\	\-\ Operational error
\	8\	\-\ 操作エラー
.br
.\"O \	16\	\-\ Usage or syntax error
\	16\	\-\ 利用法・文法のエラー
.br
.\"O \	32\	\-\ E2fsck canceled by user request
\	32\	\-\ e2fsck がユーザ要求によってキャンセルされた
.br
.\"O \	128\	\-\ Shared library error
\	128\	\-\ 共有ライブラリエラー
.\"O .br
.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O The following signals have the following effect when sent to 
.\"O .BR e2fsck .
以下のシグナルが
.B e2fsck
に送られると、記述されているような効果を及ぼす。
.TP
.B SIGUSR1
.\"O This signal causes
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O to start displaying a completion bar.  (See discussion of the 
.\"O .I \-C
.\"O option.)
このシグナルを送ると
.B e2fsck
は作業状況の棒グラフの表示を始める
.RI ( \-C
オプションの記述を見よ)。
.TP
.B SIGUSR2
.\"O This signal causes
.\"O .B e2fsck 
.\"O to stop displaying a completion bar.
このシグナルを送ると
.B e2fsck
は作業状況の棒グラフの表示をやめる。
.\"O .SH REPORTING BUGS
.SH バグ報告
.\"O Almost any piece of software will have bugs.  If you manage to find a
.\"O filesystem which causes 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O to crash, or which 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O is unable to repair, please report it to the author.
どんなソフトウェアにもバグはつきものである。
もしも
.B e2fsck 
がクラッシュしたり、
.B e2fsck
によって修復できない事態が発生したりした場合は、
作者に連絡してほしい。
.PP
.\"O Please include as much information as possible in your bug report.
.\"O Ideally, include a complete transcript of the
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O run, so I can see exactly what error messages are displayed.  (Make sure
.\"O the messages printed by 
.\"O .B e2fsck 
.\"O are in English; if your system has been
.\"O configured so that 
.\"O .BR e2fsck 's
.\"O messages have been translated into another language, please set the the
.\"O .B LC_ALL
.\"O environment variable to
.\"O .B C
.\"O so that the transcript of e2fsck's output will be useful to me.)
バグ報告にはできるだけ多くの情報を入れてほしい。
.B e2fsck 
の完全な実行記録があれば、
私はどのようなエラーが発生しているかを確認することができる。
.RB ( e2fsck
で表示されるメッセージが英語であることを確認してほしい。
.B e2fsck
のメッセージが他の言語に翻訳されるようにシステムが設定されている場合は、
環境変数
.B LC_ALL
を
.B C
に設定して、e2fsck の出力の実行記録が私にとって役立つようにしてほしい。)
.\"O If you
.\"O have a writable filesystem where the transcript can be stored, the 
.\"O .BR script (1)
.\"O program is a handy way to save the output of
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O to a file.
実行記録を書き込むことのできるファイルシステムがあるなら、
.BR script (1)
プログラムを用いれば、簡単に
.B e2fsck
の出力を保存できる。
.PP
.\"O It is also useful to send the output of 
.\"O .BR dumpe2fs (8).
.\"O If a specific inode or inodes seems to be giving 
.\"O .B e2fsck 
.\"O trouble, try running the
.\"O .BR debugfs (8)
.\"O command and send the output of the 
.\"O .BR stat (1u)
.\"O command run on the relevant inode(s).  If the inode is a directory, the 
.\"O .B debugfs
.\"O .I dump
.\"O command will allow you to extract the contents of the directory inode,
.\"O which can sent to me after being first run through
.\"O .BR uuencode (1).  
.BR dumpe2fs (8)
の出力も役に立つ。
特定の inode の不良が
.B e2fsck 
の動作をおかしくしているようなら、
.BR debugfs (8)
コマンドを起動し、該当する inode に対して
.I stat
コマンドを実行して、その出力を送ってほしい。
その inode がディレクトリである場合は、debugfs の
.I dump
コマンドを利用すれば、ディレクトリ inode の内容を取り出すことができる。
その内容を
.BR uuencode (1)
にかければ、そのまま私に報告することができる。
.\"O The most useful data you can send to help reproduce
.\"O the bug is a compressed raw image dump of the filesystem, generated using
.\"O .BR e2image (8).
バグを再現するためにユーザが送ることのできる最も有用なデータは、
.BR e2image (8)
を使って生成されるファイルシステムの圧縮された raw イメージダンプである。
.\"O See the 
.\"O .BR e2image (8)
.\"O man page for more details.
より詳細な情報は
.BR e2image (8)
を参照すること。
.PP
.\"O Always include the full version string which 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O displays when it is run, so I know which version you are running.
私に報告する際には、どのバージョンなのか私にわかるよう、
.B e2fsck
の実行時に表示されるバージョン文字列を必ず入れてほしい。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This version of 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O was written by Theodore Ts'o <tytso@mit.edu>.
このバージョンの
.B e2fsck
は、Theodore Ts'o <tytso@mit.edu> によって作成された。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR badblocks (8),
.BR dumpe2fs (8),
.BR debugfs (8),
.BR e2image (8),
.BR mke2fs (8),
.BR tune2fs (8)
