.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.\"WORD		filesystem label	ファイルシステムラベル
.\"
.TH E2LABEL 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O e2label \- Change the label on an ext2/ext3 filesystem
.SH 名前
e2label \- ext2/ext3 ファイルシステムのラベルを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B e2label
.I device
[
.I new-label
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B e2label
.\"O will display or change the filesystem label on the ext2 filesystem located on
.\"O .I device.  
.B e2label
は
.I device
に置かれた ext2 ファイルシステムのファイルシステムラベル
(filesystem label) を表示したり変更したりする。
.PP
.\"O If the optional argument 
.\"O .I new-label
.\"O is not present, 
.\"O .B e2label
.\"O will simply display the current filesystem label.
引数
.I new-label
が指定されていないと、
.B e2label
は単に現在のファイルシステムラベルを表示する。
.PP
.\"O If the optional argument
.\"O .I new-label
.\"O is present, then 
.\"O .B e2label
.\"O will set the filesystem label to be
.\"O .IR new-label .
.\"O Ext2 filesystem labels can be at most 16 characters long; if
.\"O .I new-label 
.\"O is longer than 16 characters, 
.\"O .B e2label
.\"O will truncate it and print a warning message.  
引数
.I new-label
が指定されていると、
.B e2label
はファイルシステムラベルを
.I new-label
に変更する。
ext2 ファイルシステムラベルは最大 16 文字まで指定できる。
.I new-label
が 16 文字より長い場合、
.B tune2fs
は切捨てを行い、警告メッセージを出力する。
.PP
.\"O It is also possible to set the filesystem label using the
.\"O .B \-L
.\"O option of 
.\"O .BR tune2fs (8).
ファイルシステムラベルは
.BR tune2fs (8)
の
.B \-L
オプションを用いても指定できる。
.PP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B e2label 
.\"O was written by Theodore Ts'o (tytso@mit.edu).
.B e2label
は Theodore Ts'o (tytso@mit.edu) によって書かれた。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O .B e2label
.\"O is part of the e2fsprogs package and is available from 
.\"O http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net.
.B e2label
は e2fsprogs パッケージの一部であり、
http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net から入手できる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR mke2fs (8),
.BR tune2fs (8)
