.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Mar Wed Mar 11 05:54:50 JST 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji.
.\" Updated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Sep  2 23:23:05 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Sat 5 Oct 2002 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 17 03:04:33 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue May  3 05:59:27 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" 
.\"WORD:	exit code	返り値
.\"WORD:	bit-wise OR	ビットごとの OR
.\"WORD:	front-end	フロントエンド
.\"WORD:	manual pages	マニュアル
.\"WORD:	interactive mode インタラクティブ(対話)モード
.\"WORD:	verbose		詳細な
.\"WORD:	serially	逐次的に
.\" 
.TH FSCK 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O fsck \- check and repair a Linux file system
fsck \- Linux ファイルシステムのチェックと修復を行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B fsck
[
.B \-sAVRTNP
]
[
.B \-C
[
.I fd
]
]
[
.B \-t
.I fstype
] 
.I [filesys ... ]
[\-\-] [
.B fs-specific-options
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O is used to check and optionally repair one or more Linux file systems.  
.\"O .I filesys
.\"O can be a device name (e.g.
.\"O .IR /dev/hda1 ", " /dev/sdb2 ),
.\"O a mount point (e.g.
.\"O .IR / ", " /usr ", " /home ),
.\"O or an ext2 label or UUID specifier (e.g.
.\"O UUID=8868abf6-88c5-4a83-98b8-bfc24057f7bd or LABEL=root).  
.\"O Normally, the
.\"O .B fsck 
.\"O program will try to handle filesystems on different physical disk drives 
.\"O in parallel to reduce the total amount of time needed to check all of the
.\"O filesystems.
.B fsck
は (ひとつまたは複数の) Linux ファイルシステムをチェックし、
また指定すれば修復も行う。
.I filesys
に指定できるのは、デバイス名 (例:
.IR /dev/hda1 ", " /dev/sdb2 )、
ファイルシステムのマウントポイント (例:
.IR / ", " /usr ", " /home )、
ext2 ラベルまたは UUID 指定
(例: UUID=8868abf6-88c5-4a83-98b8-bfc24057f7bd, LABEL=root)
である。
通常
.B fsck
は、
物理的に異なるディスク上にある複数のファイルシステムを並列的にチェックし、
全ファイルシステムのチェックに要する時間を短縮しようとする。
.PP
.\"O If no filesystems are specified on the command line, and the
.\"O .B \-A
.\"O option is not specified,
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O will default to checking filesystems in
.\"O .B /etc/fstab
.\"O serially.  This is equivalent to the 
.\"O .B \-As
.\"O options.
コマンドラインからファイルシステムがひとつも指定されず、かつ
.B \-A
オプションも指定されなかった場合は、
.B fsck
はデフォルトの動作として
.B /etc/fstab
に書かれているファイルシステムを逐次的にチェックする。
これは
.B \-As
オプションを指定した場合の動作と同じである。
.PP
.\"O The exit code returned by
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O is the sum of the following conditions:
.B fsck
の返り値は、以下の状態を表す数の和となる。
.br
.\"O \	0\	\-\ No errors
\	0\	\-\ エラーなし
.br
.\"O \	1\	\-\ File system errors corrected
\	1\	\-\ ファイルシステムのエラーが修正された
.br
.\"O \	2\	\-\ System should be rebooted
\	2\	\-\ システムをリブートする必要がある
.br
.\"O \	4\	\-\ File system errors left uncorrected
\	4\	\-\ ファイルシステムのエラーが修正されないまま
.br
\	\	\ \ 残っている
.br
.\"O \	8\	\-\ Operational error
\	8\	\-\ 操作エラー
.br
.\"O \	16\	\-\ Usage or syntax error
\	16\	\-\ 利用法・文法のエラー
.br
.\"O \	32\	\-\ Fsck canceled by user request
\	32\	\-\ fsck がユーザ要求によってキャンセルされた
.br
.\"O \	128\	\-\ Shared library error
\	128\	\-\ 共有ライブラリのエラー
.br
.\"O The exit code returned when multiple file systems are checked
.\"O is the bit-wise OR of the exit codes for each
.\"O file system that is checked.
複数のファイルシステムをチェックした場合の返り値は、
チェックした各ファイルシステムの返り値に対して、
ビットごとの OR をとったものになる。
.PP
.\"O In actuality,
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O is simply a front-end for the various file system checkers
.\"O (\fBfsck\fR.\fIfstype\fR) available under Linux.  The file
.\"O system-specific checker is searched for in
.\"O .I /sbin
.\"O first, then in
.\"O .I /etc/fs
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /etc ,
.\"O and finally in the directories listed in the PATH environment
.\"O variable.  Please see the file system-specific checker manual pages for
.\"O further details.
.\"O nakano 末尾の記述と異なる。/sbin/fs.d, /sbin/fs が抜けている。
.B fsck
は、実際には Linux で利用できるさまざまなファイルシステムチェッカー
(\fBfsck\fR.\fIfstype\fR) への単なるフロントエンドにすぎない。
ファイルシステム固有のチェッカーは、
.IR /sbin ", " /sbin/fs.d ", " /sbin/fs ", " /etc/fs ", " /etc ,
環境変数 PATH 内のディレクトリの順にサーチされる。
詳細はファイルシステム固有のチェッカーのマニュアルを参照すること。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Serialize 
.\"O .B fsck 
.\"O operations.  This is a good idea if you are checking multiple
.\"O filesystems and the checkers are in an interactive mode.  (Note:
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8)
.\"O runs in an interactive mode by default.  To make 
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8)
.\"O run in a non-interactive mode, you must either specify the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option, if you wish for errors to be corrected automatically, or the
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option if you do not.)
.B fsck
の動作を逐次的にする。
複数のファイルシステムを
インタラクティブ (対話) モードでチェックする際に有用。
(注意: デフォルトでは
.BR e2fsck (8)
の動作は対話モードである。
.BR e2fsck (8)
を非対話モードで動作させるには、
.B \-p
オプションか
.B \-a
オプションを使用する。また非対話的にエラーを自動修復させたい場合は
.B \-n
オプションを利用する。)
.TP
.BI \-t " fslist"
.\"O Specifies the type(s) of file system to be checked.  When the
.\"O .B \-A 
.\"O flag is specified, only filesystems that match 
.\"O .I fslist
.\"O are checked.  
チェックするファイルシステムのタイプを指定する。
.B \-A 
オプションが指定されている場合は、
.I fslist
にマッチするファイルシステムのみをチェックする。
.\"O The
.\"O .I fslist
.\"O parameter is a comma-separated list of filesystems and options
.\"O specifiers.  All of the filesystems in this comma-separated list may be
.\"O prefixed by a negation operator 
.\"O .RB ' no '
.\"O or 
.\"O .RB ' ! ',
.\"O which requests that only those filesystems not listed in
.\"O .I fslist
.\"O will be checked.  
.I fslist
パラメータは、コンマで区切られた
ファイルシステムとオプション指定のリストである。
このコンマ区切りのリストに含まれるファイルシステムのすべてに、
否定演算子
.RB ' no '
または
.RB ' ! '
を前置することもできる。
これにより、
.I fslist
にリストされていないファイルシステムだけがチェックされる。
.\"O If all of the filesystems in 
.\"O .I fslist
.\"O are not prefixed by a negation operator, then only those filesystems
.\"O listed
.\"O in
.\"O .I fslist
.\"O will be checked.
.I fslist
のファイルシステムすべてに否定演算子が付けられていない場合は、
.I fslist
にリストされているファイルシステムのみがチェックされる。
(訳註: リストの一部だけに否定演算子を付けることはできない)
.sp
.\"O Options specifiers may be included in the comma-separated
.\"O .IR fslist .
.\"O They must have the format
.\"O .BI opts= fs-option\fR.
.\"O If an options specifier is present, then only filesystems which contain
.\"O .I fs-option
.\"O in their mount options field of
.\"O .B /etc/fstab
.\"O will be checked.  If the options specifier is prefixed by a negation
.\"O operator, then only
.\"O those filesystems that do not have
.\"O .I fs-option
.\"O in their mount options field of
.\"O .B /etc/fstab
.\"O will be checked.
オプション指定をコンマで区切った形で
.I fslist
に含めても良い。
これらは
.BI opts= fs-option\fR
という書式でなければならない。
オプション指定が存在すると、
.B /etc/fstab
のマウントオプションのフィールドに
.I fs-option
があるファイルシステムのみがチェックされる。
オプション指定の前に否定演算子がある場合は、
.B /etc/fstab
のマウントオプションのフィールドに
.I fs-option
がないファイルシステムのみがチェックされる。
.sp
.\"O For example, if
.\"O .B opts=ro
.\"O appears in
.\"O .IR fslist ,
.\"O then only filesystems listed in
.\"O .B /etc/fstab
.\"O with the
.\"O .B ro
.\"O option will be checked.
例えば、
.B opts=ro
を
.I fslist
に指定すると、
.B /etc/fstab
にリストされているファイルシステムのうち、
.B ro
オプションを持つものだけがチェックされる。
.sp
.\"O For compatibility with Mandrake distributions whose boot scripts
.\"O depend upon an unauthorized UI change to the
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O program, if a filesystem type of
.\"O .B loop
.\"O is found in
.\"O .IR fslist ,
.\"O it is treated as if
.\"O .B opts=loop
.\"O were specified as an argument to the
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O option.
.B fsck
プログラムへの非公式なユーザインターフェース変更に
依存したブートスクリプトを使っている
Mandrake ディストリビューションとの互換性のため、
.I fslist
にファイルシステムタイプ
.B loop
があった場合、
.B \-t
オプションの引き数として
.B opts=loop
が指定されていると仮定する。
.sp
.\"O Normally, the filesystem type is deduced by searching for
.\"O .I filesys
.\"O in the 
.\"O .I /etc/fstab 
.\"O file and using the corresponding entry.
.\"O If the type can not be deduced, and there is only a single filesystem 
.\"O given as an argument to the 
.\"O .B \-t 
.\"O option, 
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O will use the specified filesystem type.  If this type is not
.\"O available, then the default file system type (currently ext2) is used. 
通常ファイルシステムのタイプは、
.I filesys
を
.I /etc/fstab
ファイルから検索して見つかったエントリから取得する。
ファイルシステムのタイプが取得できず、
かつ 1 つのファイルシステムだけが
.B \-t
オプションの引き数になっている場合、
.B fsck
はそれを利用する。
指定してあるファイルシステムタイプを利用できない場合は、
デフォルトのファイルシステムタイプ (現時点では ext2) を利用する。
.TP
.B \-A
.\"O Walk through the
.\"O .I /etc/fstab
.\"O file and try to check all file systems in one run.  This option is
.\"O typically used from the
.\"O .I /etc/rc
.\"O system initialization file, instead of multiple commands for checking
.\"O a single file system.
.I /etc/fstab
に列記されているファイルシステムをすべてチェックする。
このオプションを用いれば、複数のファイルシステムに対して
fsck をひとつひとつ単独で実行しなくてもよいため、
システムの初期設定ファイルである 
.I /etc/rc
中でよく利用される。
.sp
.\"O The root filesystem will be checked first unless the
.\"O .B \-P
.\"O option is specified (see below).  After that, 
.\"O filesystems will be checked in the order specified by the 
.\"O .I fs_passno 
.\"O (the sixth) field in the 
.\"O .I /etc/fstab
.\"O file.  
.B \-P
オプション (後述) が指定されていなければ、
ルートファイルシステムが最初にチェックされる。その後、
.I /etc/fstab
ファイルの第 6 フィールドである
.I fs_passno
の順序にしたがって他のファイルシステムがチェックされる。
.\"O Filesystems with a 
.\"O .I fs_passno
.\"O value of 0 are skipped and are not checked at all.  Filesystems with a
.\"O .I fs_passno
.\"O value of greater than zero will be checked in order,
.\"O with filesystems with the lowest
.\"O .I fs_passno 
.\"O number being checked first.
.I fs_passno
の値が 0 であるファイルシステムは、スキップされて一切チェックされない。
.I fs_passno
の値が 0 より大きいファイルシステムは、小さい
.I fs_passno 
値を持ったものを優先し、順番にチェックされる。
.\"O If there are multiple filesystems with the same pass number, 
.\"O fsck will attempt to check them in parallel, although it will avoid running 
.\"O multiple filesystem checks on the same physical disk.  
同じ番号が指定されているファイルシステムが複数ある場合には、
fsck はそれらを並列してチェックしようとする。
しかし同じ物理ディスクにあるファイルシステムの同時チェックは避ける。
.sp
.\"O Hence, a very common configuration in 
.\"O .I /etc/fstab
.\"O files is to set the root filesystem to have a 
.\"O .I fs_passno
.\"O value of 1
.\"O and to set all other filesystems to have a
.\"O .I fs_passno
.\"O value of 2.  This will allow
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O to automatically run filesystem checkers in parallel if it is advantageous
.\"O to do so.  System administrators might choose
.\"O not to use this configuration if they need to avoid multiple filesystem
.\"O checks running in parallel for some reason --- for example, if the
.\"O machine in question is short on memory so that
.\"O excessive paging is a concern.
したがって、
.I /etc/fstab
に対する最も普通の設定は、ルートファイルシステムの
.I fs_passno
を 1 とし、他のすべてのファイルシステムの
.I fs_passno
を 2 とするものである。こうすると
.B fsck
は、(効果が期待できる場合には) 自動的にファイルシステムチェッカーを
同時に並列して動作させる。
何らかの理由で複数ファイルシステムの
並列チェックをしたくない場合には、システム管理者はこの設定をしてはいけない。
たとえばマシンのメモリが少なく、余分なページングが
問題になる場合などがこれにあたる。
.TP
.B \-C\fR [ \fI "fd" \fR ]
.\"O Display completion/progress bars for those filesystem checkers (currently 
.\"O only for ext2 and ext3) which support them.   Fsck will manage the
.\"O filesystem checkers so that only one of them will display  
.\"O a progress bar at a time.  GUI front-ends may specify a file descriptor
.\"O .IR fd ,
.\"O in which case the progress bar information will be sent to that file descriptor.
作業完了分・残り分の棒グラフをサポートしている
ファイルシステムチェッカー (現在 ext2 と ext3 用のものだけ) に、
表示を行わせる。
fsck は一度にひとつのチェッカーだけが表示を行うように、
複数のチェッカーを管理する。
GUI フロントエンドにはファイルディスクリプタ
.I fd
を指定することができる。
この場合、棒グラフの情報はファイルディスクリプタに送られる。
.TP
.B \-N
.\"O Don't execute, just show what would be done.
実際には実行せず、何が行われるかだけを表示する。
.TP
.B \-P
.\"O When the 
.\"O .B \-A
.\"O flag is set, check the root filesystem in parallel with the other filesystems.
.\"O This is not the safest thing in the world to do,
.\"O since if the root filesystem is in doubt things like the 
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8) 
.\"O executable might be corrupted!  This option is mainly provided
.\"O for those sysadmins who don't want to repartition the root
.\"O filesystem to be small and compact (which is really the right solution).
.B \-A
オプションが指定されている場合、
ルートファイルシステムを他のファイルシステムと並列にチェックする。
ルートファイルシステムが壊れている場合には
.BR e2fsck (8)
自体が壊れている可能性もあるため、
このオプションを用いるのは安全性を損なうことになる。
このオプションは、
ルートファイルシステムを小さくコンパクトなパーティションに切りなおしたくない
システム管理者向けのオプションである
(ルートファイルシステムを小さくコンパクトにまとめるのが正しい解なのだが)。
.TP
.B \-R
.\"O When checking all file systems with the
.\"O .B \-A
.\"O flag, skip the root file system (in case it's already mounted read-write).
.B \-A
オプションを用いて全てのファイルシステムをチェックする際に、
ルートファイルシステムをチェックしないようにする
(ルートファイルシステムがすでに read/write でマウントされている場合)。
.TP
.B \-T
.\"O Don't show the title on startup.
起動時にタイトルを表示しない。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Produce verbose output, including all file system-specific commands
.\"O that are executed.
.B fsck
から起動されるシステム固有のコマンドを含め、詳細な表示をする。
.TP
.B fs-specific-options
.\"O Options which are not understood by 
.\"O .B fsck 
.\"O are passed to the filesystem-specific checker.  
.B fsck
が理解しないオプションは、ファイルシステム固有のチェッカーに渡される。
.\"O These arguments
.\"O .B must
.\"O not take arguments, as there is no
.\"O way for 
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O to be able to properly guess which arguments take options and which
.\"O don't.
これらのオプションは引き数をとっては\fBならない\fR。
なぜなら、どのオプションが引き数をとるか (とらないか) を
.B fsck
が正しく判断できる方法がないためである。
.IP
.\"O Options and arguments which follow the
.\"O .B \-\-
.\"O are treated as file system-specific options to be passed to the
.\"O file system-specific checker.
.B \-\-
以降に指定したオプションと引き数は、ファイルシステム固有のオプションとして
ファイルシステム固有のチェッカーに渡される。
.IP
.\"O Please note that fsck is not
.\"O designed to pass arbitrarily complicated options to filesystem-specific
.\"O checkers.  If you're doing something complicated, please just
.\"O execute the filesystem-specific checker directly.  
fsck は任意の複雑なオプションをファイルシステム固有のチェッカーに渡すようには
設計されていない点に注意すること。
複雑なことをやろうとするときは、
ファイルシステム固有のチェッカーを直接実行してほしい。
.\"O If you pass 
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O some horribly complicated option and arguments, and it doesn't do
.\"O what you expect, 
.\"O .B don't bother reporting it as a bug.
.\"O You're almost certainly doing something that you shouldn't be doing
.\"O with 
.\"O .BR fsck.
非常に複雑なオプションと引き数を
.B fsck
に渡した場合に、期待した動作をしなかったとしても、
\fBバグとして報告するには及ばない\fR。
.B fsck
にやらせるべきではないことを、あなたがやったのだから。
.PP
.\"O Options to different filesystem-specific fsck's are not standardized.
.\"O If in doubt, please consult the man pages of the filesystem-specific
.\"O checker.  Although not guaranteed, the following options are supported
.\"O by most file system checkers:
ファイルシステム固有の fsck のオプションは、標準化されていない。
確かでない場合は、ファイルシステム固有のチェッカーの
man ページを調べること。
保証されたものではないが、以下のオプションは
ほとんどのファイルシステムチェッカーでサポートされている。
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Automatically repair the file system without any questions (use
.\"O this option with caution).  Note that 
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8)
.\"O supports 
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O for backwards compatibility only.  This option is mapped to 
.\"O .BR e2fsck 's
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option which is safe to use, unlike the 
.\"O .B \-a 
.\"O option that some file system checkers support.
.\"O nakano unlike 以下は冗長な気がする。
質問なしで自動的にファイルシステムを修復する
(このオプションの使用には注意を要する)。
ほとんどのファイルシステムチェッカーは
.B \-a
オプションに対応しているが、
.BR e2fsck (8)
においては
.B \-a 
オプションは過去互換性のために準備されているだけである。
したがって
.B e2fsck
では、このオプションは (安全に利用できる)
.B \-p
オプションにマップされ、
いくつかのフィルシステムチェッカーがサポートしている
.B \-a
にはマップされない。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O For some filesystem-specific checkers, the 
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option will cause the fs-specific fsck to avoid attempting to repair any 
.\"O problems, but simply report such problems to stdout.  This is however
.\"O not true for all filesystem-specific checkers.  In particular, 
.\"O .BR fsck.reiserfs (8)
.\"O will not report any corruption if given this option.
ファイルシステム固有のチェッカーの中には、
.B \-n
オプションが指定されると、
問題点を修復するのではなく、その問題点を単に標準出力に書き出すものもある。
しかし全てのファイルシステム固有のチェッカーが、
このような動作をするわけではない。
特に
.BR fsck.reiserfs (8)
は、このオプションが指定されても破損箇所を報告しない。
.\"O .BR fsck.minix (8)
.\"O does not support the 
.\"O .B \-n 
.\"O option at all.
また
.BR fsck.minix (8)
は、
.B \-n 
オプションを全くサポートしていない。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Interactively repair the filesystem (ask for confirmations).  Note: It
.\"O is generally a bad idea to use this option if multiple fsck's are being
.\"O run in parallel.  Also note that this is 
.\"O .BR e2fsck 's
.\"O default behavior; it supports this option for backwards compatibility
.\"O reasons only.
対話的にファイルシステムを修復する (確認を求める)。
注意: fsck が並列に動作している場合にこのオプションを利用するのは
あまり賢いとはいえない。
.B e2fsck
においては並列動作がデフォルトであり、
このオプションは過去互換性のためにのみ準備されている。
.TP
.B \-y
.\"O For some filesystem-specific checkers, the 
.\"O .B \-y 
.\"O option will cause the fs-specific fsck to always attempt to fix any
.\"O detected filesystem corruption automatically.  Sometimes an expert may
.\"O be able to do better driving the fsck manually.  Note that 
.\"O .B not
.\"O all filesystem-specific checkers implement this option.  In particular 
.\"O .BR fsck.minix (8)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR fsck.cramfs (8)
.\"O does not support the
.\"O .B -y
.\"O option as of this writing.
ファイルシステム固有のチェッカーの中には、
.B \-y 
オプションが指定されると、検出されたファイルシステムの破損箇所を
常に自動的に修復しようとするものもある。
エキスパートは、より上手に fsck を手動で実行させることができる場合もある。
全てのファイルシステム固有のチェッカーが、
このオプションを実装しているわけではない点に注意すること。
この man ページを書いている時点では、特に
.BR fsck.minix (8)
と
.BR fsck.cramfs (8)
は
.B -y
オプションをサポートしていない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Theodore Ts'o (tytso@mit.edu)
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .IR /etc/fstab .
.I /etc/fstab
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.SH 環境変数
.\"O The
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O program's behavior is affected by the following environment variables:
.B fsck
プログラムの振舞いは、以下の環境変数による影響を受ける。
.TP
.B FSCK_FORCE_ALL_PARALLEL
.\"O If this environment variable is set,
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O will attempt to run all of the specified filesystems in parallel,
.\"O regardless of whether the filesystems appear to be on the same
.\"O device.  (This is useful for RAID systems or high-end storage systems
.\"O such as those sold by companies such as IBM or EMC.)
この環境変数が設定されていると、
.B fsck
は指定されたファイルシステムすべてを、
それらのファイルシステムが同じデバイス上にあるように見えるかどうかを問わず、
並列にチェックしようとする。
(これは IBM や EMC などの会社から販売されているような、
RAID システムやハイエンドのストレージシステムで有用である。)
.TP
.B FSCK_MAX_INST
.\"O This environment variable will limit the maximum number of file system
.\"O checkers that can be running at one time.  This allows configurations
.\"O which have a large number of disks to avoid
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O starting too many file system checkers at once, which might overload
.\"O CPU and memory resources available on the system.  If this value is
.\"O zero, then an unlimited number of processes can be spawned.  This is
.\"O currently the default, but future versions of
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O may attempt to automatically determine how many file system checks can
.\"O be run based on gathering accounting data from the operating system.
この環境変数は、同時に動作するファイルシステムチェッカーの最大数を制限する。
この指定を行えば、多数のディスクを備えたシステムにおいて
.B fsck
がたくさんのファイルシステムチェッカーを同時に起動し、
システムで利用できる CPU やメモリなどの資源に
過度の負荷を与えてしまうことを避けることができる。
この値を 0 にすると、spawn するプロセス数の制限がなくなる。
現在はこれがデフォルトだが、
.B fsck
の将来の版では、OS からアカウンティングデータを取得することにより、
同時に行うファイルシステムチェックの数を自動的に決めるようになるかもしれない。
.TP
.B PATH
.\"O The
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O environment variable is used to find file system checkers.  A set of
.\"O system directories are searched first:
.\"O .BR /sbin ,
.\"O .BR /sbin/fs.d ,
.\"O .BR  /sbin/fs ,
.\"O .BR /etc/fs ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR /etc .
.\"O Then the set of directories found in the
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O environment are searched.
.B PATH
環境変数はファイルシステムチェッカーを探索する際に用いられる。
まず最初に、一連のシステムディレクトリが検索される。これらは
.BR /sbin ,
.BR /sbin/fs.d ,
.BR  /sbin/fs ,
.BR /etc/fs ,
.B /etc
である。これに続いて
.B PATH
環境変数に指定されたディレクトリ群が検索される。
.TP
.B FSTAB_FILE
.\"O This environment variable allows the system administrator
.\"O to override the standard location of the
.\"O .B /etc/fstab
.\"O file.  It is also useful for developers who are testing
.\"O .BR fsck .
この環境変数を用いると、システム管理者は
.B /etc/fstab
ファイルの標準的な置場所を変更できる。
これは
.B fsck
のテストを行う開発者にとっても便利である。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR fstab (5),
.BR mkfs (8),
.BR fsck.ext2 (8)
.\"O or
または
.BR fsck.ext3 (8)
.\"O or
または
.BR e2fsck (8),
.BR cramfsck (8),
.BR fsck.minix (8),
.BR fsck.msdos (8),
.BR fsck.jfs (8),
.BR fsck.nfs (8),
.BR fsck.vfat (8),
.BR fsck.xfs (8),
.BR fsck.xiafs (8),
.BR reiserfsck (8).
