.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 2003 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar  6 14:22:05 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH LOGSAVE 8 "December 2010" "E2fsprogs version 1.41.14"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O logsave \- save the output of a command in a logfile
logsave \- コマンドの出力をログファイルに保存する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B logsave
[
.B \-asv
]
.I logfile cmd_prog [ ... ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B logsave
.\"O program will execute
.\"O .I cmd_prog 
.\"O with the specified argument(s), and save a copy of its output to
.\"O .IR logfile .
.B logsave
プログラムは、指定された引き数をつけて
.I cmd_prog 
を実行し、出力のコピーを
.I logfile
に保存する。
.\"O If the containing directory for
.\"O .I logfile
.\"O does not exist, 
.\"O .B logsave
.\"O will accumulate the output in memory until it can be written out.
.I logfile
を置くディレクトリが存在しない場合、
書き出せるようになるまで
.B logsave
は出力をメモリ内に蓄えておく。
.\"O A copy of the output will also be written to standard output.
出力のコピーは標準出力にも書き出される。
.PP
.\"O If 
.\"O .I cmd_prog
.\"O is a single hyphen ('-'), then instead of executing a program,
.\"O .B logsave
.\"O will take its input from standard input and save it in
.\"O .I logfile
.I cmd_prog
が 1 個のハイフン ('-') の場合、
.B logsave
は、プログラムを実行する代わりに標準入力から入力を取得し、
.I logfile
に書き出す。
.PP
.\"O .B logsave
.\"O is useful for saving the output of initial boot scripts 
.\"O until the /var partition is mounted, so the output can be written to 
.\"O /var/log.
.B logsave
は /var パーティションがマウントされるまで
初期ブートスクリプトの出力を保存しておくのに役立つ。
そして (/var パーティションがマウントされたときに)、
出力を /var/log に書き出すことができる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O This option will cause the output to be appended to 
.\"O .IR logfile ,
.\"O instead of replacing its current contents.
このオプションを指定すると、出力で
.I logfile
の現在の内容を置き換えるのではなく、出力を追加する。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O This option will cause 
.\"O .B logsave
.\"O to skip writing to the log file text which is bracketed with a control-A 
.\"O (ASCII 001 or Start of Header) and control-B (ASCII 002 or Start of
.\"O Text).  This allows progress bar information to be visible to the user
.\"O on the console, while not being written to the log file.
このオプションを指定すると、
.B logsave
は control-A (ASCII 001 または Start of Header) と
control-B (ASCII 002 または Start of Text) で囲まれた
文字列をログファイルに書かないで飛ばす。
これにより、ユーザに対してはプログレスバーの情報をコンソールで見せて、
ログファイルには書き込まないことが可能になる。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O This option will make
.\"O .B logsave
.\"O to be more verbose in its output to the user.
このオプションを指定すると、
.B logsave
のユーザへの出力をより詳細にできる。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Theodore Ts'o (tytso@mit.edu)
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR fsck (8)
