.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Mar 11 03:38:49 JST 1998 by MATSUMOTO Shoji.
.\" Updated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Sep  2 23:23:05 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Sun 6 Oct 2002 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 17 14:16:33 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>, v1.35
.\" Updated & Modified Tue May  3 06:43:13 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO, v1.37
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Feb 17 02:05:53 JST 2007 by Yuichi SATO, v1.39
.\" 
.\"WORD:	special file	スペシャルファイル
.\"WORD:        filesystem feature      ファイルシステム属性
.\"WORD:	bad blocks	不良ブロック
.\"WORD:	reserved blocks	予約ブロック
.\"WORD:	super-user	スーパーユーザ
.\"WORD:	native OS	ネイティブな OS
.\"WORD:	volume label	ボリュームラベル
.\"WORD:	revision	リビジョン
.\"WORD:	argument	引き数
.\"WORD:	RAID stripe	RAID ストライプ
.\"WORD:	AVAILABILITY	入手方法
.\" 
.TH MKE2FS 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mke2fs \- create an ext2/ext3 filesystem
mke2fs \- ext2/ext3 ファイルシステムを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mke2fs
[
.B \-c
| 
.B \-l
.I filename
]
[
.B \-b
.I block-size
]
[
.B \-f
.I fragment-size
]
[
.B \-g
.I blocks-per-group
]
[
.B \-i
.I bytes-per-inode
]
[
.B \-j
]
[
.B \-J
.I journal-options
]
[
.B \-N
.I number-of-inodes
]
[
.B -n
]
[
.B \-m
.I reserved-blocks-percentage
]
[
.B \-o
.I creator-os
]
[
.B \-O 
.IR feature [,...]
]
[
.B \-q
]
[
.B \-r
.I fs-revision-level
]
[
.B \-E
.I extended-options
]
[
.B \-v
]
[
.B \-F
]
[
.B \-L
.I volume-label
]
[
.B \-M
.I last-mounted-directory
]
[
.B \-S
]
[
.B \-T
.I filesystem-type
]
[
.B \-V
]
.I device
[
.I blocks-count
]
.sp
.B "mke2fs \-O journal_dev"
[
.B \-b
.I block-size
]
.\"O .\" No external-journal specific journal options yet (size is ignored)
.\" 外部ジャーナルに固有のオプションはまだない (サイズは無視される)
.\" [
.\" .B \-J
.\" .I journal-options
.\" ]
[
.B \-L
.I volume-label
]
[
.B \-n
]
[
.B \-q
]
[
.B \-v
]
.I external-journal
[
.I blocks-count
]


.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O is used to create an ext2/ext3 filesystem (usually in a disk partition).
.B mke2fs
は ext2/ext3 ファイルシステムを (通常はディスクのパーティションに) 作成する。
.\"O .I device
.\"O is the special file corresponding to the device (e.g
.\"O .IR /dev/hdXX ).
.I device
はデバイスに対応するスペシャルファイルである (例:
.IR /dev/hdXX )。
.\"O .I blocks-count
.\"O is the number of blocks on the device.  If omitted,
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O automagically figures the file system size.  If called as
.\"O .B mkfs.ext3
.\"O a journal is created as if the
.\"O .B \-j
.\"O option was specified.
.I blocks-count
はデバイスのブロック数である。省略すると
.B mke2fs
が自動的にファイルシステムサイズを計算する。
.B mkfs.ext3
として起動されると、
.B \-j
オプションが指定された場合のようにジャーナルを作る。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-b " block-size"
.\"O Specify the size of blocks in bytes.  Valid block size vales are 1024,
.\"O 2048 and 4096 bytes per block.  If omitted,
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O block-size is heuristically determined by the file system size and
.\"O the expected usage of the filesystem (see the
.\"O .B \-T
.\"O option).
ブロックサイズをバイト単位で指定する。指定できるブロックサイズは
ブロックあたり 1024, 2048, 4096 バイトである。省略すると、
.B mke2fs
はファイルシステムのサイズと予想されるファイルシステムの利用法
.RB ( \-T
オプションを見よ) とからブロックサイズを
ヒューリスティック (heuristic) に基づいて決定する。
.\"O If 
.\"O .I block-size
.\"O is negative, then 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O will use heuristics to determine the
.\"O appropriate block size, with the constraint that the block size will be
.\"O at least 
.\"O .I block-size
.\"O bytes.  This is useful for certain hardware devices which require that
.\"O the blocksize be a multiple of 2k.
.I block-size
が負の数である場合、
.B mke2fs
はヒューリスティックを使って
適切なブロックサイズを決定する。
この場合、ブロックサイズを少なくとも
.I block-size
バイトにするという制限を付ける。
これは、ブロックサイズが 2k の倍数でなければいけない
特定のハードウェアなどで役に立つ。
.\"O sato: 
.\"O sato: block-size < 0 ならば、
.\"O sato: 制限は少なくとも -(block-size) のような気がするが。
.\"O sato: 
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Check the device for bad blocks before creating the file system.  If
.\"O this option is specified twice, then a slower, read-write
.\"O test is used instead of a fast read-only test.
デバイスにファイルシステムを作成する前に不良ブロックを検査する。
このオプションを 2 つ指定すると、
より遅い read-write テストを用いる。
1 つの場合は高速な read-only テストを用いる。
.TP
.BI \-E " extended-options"
.\"O Set extended options for the filesystem.  Extended options are comma
.\"O separated, and may take an argument using the equals ('=') sign.  The
.\"O .B -E
.\"O option used to be 
.\"O .B -R
.\"O in earlier versions of 
.\"O .BR mke2fs .
ファイルシステムの拡張オプションを設定する。
拡張オプションはコンマで区切られ、
引き数がある場合は「= (イコール)」記号を使って指定する。
.B -E
オプションは、以前のバージョンの
.B mke2fs
では
.B -R
であった。
.\"O The 
.\"O .B -R
.\"O option is still accepted for backwards compatibility.   The 
.\"O following extended options are supported:
後方互換として
.B -R
オプションはまだ受け付けられる。
以下のオプションがサポートされている:
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.BI stride= stripe-size
.\"O Configure the filesystem for a RAID array with
.\"O .I stripe-size
.\"O filesystem blocks per stripe.
RAID アレイのファイルシステムに対して、
1 ストライプあたりのファイルシステムブロックを
.I stripe-size
に設定する。
.TP
.BI resize= max-online-resize
.\"O Reserve enough space so that the block group descriptor table can grow
.\"O to support a filesystem that has max-online-resize blocks.
ブロック数が max-online-resize のファイルシステムをサポートするために、
ブロックグループディスクリプタテーブルを拡大できる
十分な領域を予約する。
.RE
.TP
.BI \-f " fragment-size"
.\"O Specify the size of fragments in bytes.
フラグメントサイズをバイト単位で指定する。
.TP
.B \-F
.\"O Force 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O to run, even if the specified device is not a 
.\"O block special device, or appears to be mounted.
指定したデバイスがブロックスペシャルデバイスでない場合や、
マウントされている場合であっても、
.B mke2fs
を実行させる。
.TP
.BI \-g " blocks-per-group"
.\"O Specify the number of blocks in a block group.  There is generally no
.\"O reason the user to ever set this parameter, as the default is optimal
.\"O for the filesystem.  (For administrators who are creating
.\"O filesystems on RAID arrays, it is preferable to use the
.\"O .I stride
.\"O RAID parameter as part of the
.\"O .B \-R
.\"O option rather than manipulating the number of blocks per group.)  
.\"O This option is generally used by developers who
.\"O are developing test cases.  
ブロックグループに含まれるブロック数を指定する。
デフォルトでファイルシステムに最適な値であるため、
ユーザがこのパラメータを設定する一般的な理由はない。
(RAID アレイ上にファイルシステムを作成しようとする管理者にとっては、
グループ毎のブロック数を操作するよりも、
.B \-R
オプションの一部として
.I stride
RAID パラメータを使う方がよい。)
一般にこのオプションは、テストケースを開発する開発者が使う。
.TP
.BI \-i " bytes-per-inode"
.\"O Specify the bytes/inode ratio. 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O creates an inode for every
.\"O .I bytes-per-inode
.\"O bytes of space on the disk.  The larger the 
.\"O .I bytes-per-inode
.\"O ratio, the fewer inodes will be created.  This value generally shouldn't
.\"O be smaller than the blocksize of the filesystem, since then too many
.\"O inodes will be made.  Be warned that is not possible to expand the number 
.\"O of inodes on a filesystem after it is created, so be careful deciding the
.\"O correct value for this parameter. 
バイト数/inode 数の比率を指定する。
.B mke2fs
は、ディスク上の各
.I bytes-per-inode
バイトの領域に対してひとつの inode を生成する。
.I bytes-per-inode
比を大きくすると、作成される inode の数は少なくなる。
この値は、一般にはファイルシステムのブロックサイズより小さくすべきではない。
さもないと不必要に多くの inode が作られてしまう。
注意してほしいが、一度ファイルシステムを作成したら、
あとから inode の数を増やすことはできない。
したがって、このパラメータには正しい値を与えるよう、慎重になってほしい。
.TP
.B \-j
.\"O Create the filesystem with an ext3 journal.  If the
.\"O .B \-J
.\"O option is not specified, the default journal parameters will be used to
.\"O create an appropriately sized journal (given the size of the filesystem) 
.\"O stored within the filesystem.  Note that you must be using a kernel
.\"O which has ext3 support in order to actually make use of the journal.
ext3 ジャーナルを持ったファイルシステムを作成する。
.B \-J 
オプションが指定されていない場合は、
デフォルトのジャーナルパラメータが用いられ、
(ファイルシステムのサイズに対して) 適切な大きさのジャーナルを作成して
ファイルシステムに格納する。
実際にジャーナルを利用するためには、
ext3 をサポートしたカーネルが必要である。
.TP
.BI \-J " journal-options"
.\"O Create the ext3 journal using options specified on the command-line.
.\"O Journal options are comma
.\"O separated, and may take an argument using the equals ('=')  sign.
.\"O The following journal options are supported:
コマンドラインで指定されたオプションを使って
ext3 ジャーナルを作成する。
ジャーナルオプションはコンマで区切り、
引き数がある場合は「= (イコール)」記号を使って指定する。
以下のオプションがサポートされている:
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.BI size= journal-size
.\"O Create an internal journal (i.e., stored inside the filesystem) of size
.\"O .I journal-size 
.\"O megabytes.
.\"O The size of the journal must be at least 1024 filesystem blocks 
.\"O (i.e., 1MB if using 1k blocks, 4MB if using 4k blocks, etc.) 
.\"O and may be no more than 102,400 filesystem blocks.  
.\"O The journal must fit within the newly created filesystem.  
内部ジャーナル (ファイルシステム内部に置かれるジャーナル) をサイズ
.I journal-size 
メガバイトで作成する。
ジャーナルのサイズは少なくともファイルシステムブロック 1024 個分より
大きくなくてはならない
(すなわち 1k のブロックなら 1MB、4k のブロックなら 4MB、など)。
またおそらく 102400 個分より大きくすべきではない。
.TP
.BI device= external-journal
.\"O Attach the filesystem to the journal block device located on
.\"O .IR external-journal .
.\"O The external
.\"O journal must already have been created using the command
.\"O .IP
.\"O .B mke2fs -O journal_dev 
.\"O .IR external-journal
.\"O .IP
ファイルシステムを
.I external-journal 
にあるジャーナルブロックデバイスにアタッチする。
外部ジャーナルは、前もって
.IP
.B mke2fs -O journal_dev 
.IR external-journal
.IP
コマンドで作成しておかなければならない。
.\"O Note that
.\"O .I external-journal
.\"O must have been created with the
.\"O same block size as the new filesystem.
また
.I external-journal
は、新しいファイルシステムと同じブロックサイズで
作成しなければならない。
.\"O In addition, while there is support for attaching
.\"O multiple filesystems to a single external journal,
.\"O the Linux kernel and 
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8)
.\"O do not currently support shared external journals yet.
さらに、1 つの外部ジャーナルに対して
複数ファイルシステムをアタッチすることはサポートされているが、現時点では、
Linux カーネルと
.BR e2fsck (8)
は外部ジャーナルの共有をサポートしていない。
.IP
.\"O Instead of specifying a device name directly,
.\"O .I external-journal
.\"O can also be specified by either
.\"O .BI LABEL= label
.\"O or
.\"O .BI UUID= UUID
.\"O to locate the external journal by either the volume label or UUID
.\"O stored in the ext2 superblock at the start of the journal.  
デバイス名を直接指定する代わりに、
.BI LABEL= label
や
.BI UUID= UUID
という形式でも
.I external-journal
を指定できる。
この形式では、外部ジャーナルの場所を、
ジャーナルの先頭の ext2 スーパーブロックに格納されている
UUID やボリュームラベルで指定する。
.\"O Use
.\"O .BR dumpe2fs (8)
.\"O to display a journal device's volume label and UUID.  See also the
.\"O .B -L
.\"O option of
.\"O .BR tune2fs (8).
ジャーナルデバイスのボリュームラベルと UUID を表示するには、
.BR dumpe2fs (8)
を使うこと。
.BR tune2fs (8)
の
.B -L
オプションも参照のこと。
.RE
.IP
.\"O Only one of the
.\"O .BR size " or " device
.\"O options can be given for a filesystem.
ひとつのファイルシステムに対しては、
.BR size " オプションまたは " device
オプションのどちらか一方しか指定できない。
.TP
.BI \-l " filename"
.\"O Read the bad blocks list from
.\"O .IR filename .  
.\"O Note that the block numbers in the bad block list must be generated
.\"O using the same block size as used by mke2fs.  As a result, the
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O option to 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O is a much simpler and less error-prone method of checking a disk for bad
.\"O blocks before formatting it, as 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O will automatically pass the correct parameters to the
.\"O .B badblocks
.\"O program.
不良ブロックのリストを
.I filename
から読み込む。このリストのブロック番号は、
mke2fs の用いるブロックサイズと同じもので作る必要がある。
よって、フォーマットの前にディスクの不良ブロックをチェックするには、
.B mke2fs
の
.B \-c
オプションを用いるほうが、ずっと単純かつ間違いの起こりにくい方法である。
このオプションを指定すれば、
.B mke2fs
は自動的に正しいパラメータを
.B badblocks
に渡すからである。
.TP
.BI \-L " new-volume-label"
.\"O Set the volume label for the filesystem to
.\"O .IR new-volume-label .
.\"O The maximum length of the
.\"O volume label is 16 bytes.
ファイルシステムのボリュームラベルを
.I new-volume-label
に設定する。
ボリュームラベルの最大長は 16 バイトである。
.TP
.BI \-m " reserved-blocks-percentage"
.\"O Specify the percentage of the filesystem blocks reserved for 
.\"O the super-user.  This avoids fragmentation, and allows root-owned
.\"O daemons, such as 
.\"O .BR syslogd (8),
.\"O to continue to function correctly after non-privileged processes are 
.\"O prevented from writing to the filesystem.  The default percentage 
.\"O is 5%.
スーパーユーザのみが利用できる予約ブロックのパーセンテージを指定する。
このオプションは断片化を防ぐとともに、
非特権プロセスによるファイルシステムへの書き込みが防止された後でも、
root が所有する
.BR syslogd (8)
といったデーモンが正しく機能し続けるようにする。
デフォルトのパーセンテージは 5% である。
.TP
.B \-M
.\"O Set the last mounted directory for the filesystem.  This might be useful 
.\"O for the sake of utilities that key off of the last mounted directory to 
.\"O determine where the filesystem should be mounted.
ファイルシステムに、「最後にマウントされたディレクトリ」を設定する。
ファイルシステムがマウントされたディレクトリを検知して、
どこにファイルシステムをマウントすべきかを決定するような
ユーティリティに対して有用。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O causes mke2fs to not actually create a filesystem, but display what it
.\"O would do if it were to create a filesystem.  This can be used to
.\"O determine the location of the backup superblocks for a particular
.\"O filesystem, so long as the mke2fs parameters that were passed when the
.\"O filesystem was originally created are used again.  (With the
.\"O .B \-n 
.\"O option added, of course!)
実際にはファイルシステムを作らないが、
あたかもファイルシステムを作成しているかのように表示を出す。
このオプションは、ある特定のファイルシステムのバックアップスーパーブロックの
位置を知るのに利用できる。
ただしこの際 mke2fs にはそのファイルシステムを作ったときと
同じパラメータを渡す必要がある
(もちろん
.B \-n
は加えてよい!)。
.TP
.BI \-N " number-of-inodes"
.\"O overrides the default calculation of the number of inodes that should be 
.\"O reserved for the filesystem (which is based on the number of blocks and 
.\"O the
.\"O .I bytes-per-inode
.\"O ratio).  This allows the user to specify the number 
.\"O of desired inodes directly.
このファイルシステムに作成すべき
inode の個数に関するデフォルトの計算値を変更する
(計算値はブロックの個数と
.I bytes-per-inode
比をもとにしている)。
これによりユーザが必要な inode の個数を直接指定できる。
.TP
.BI \-o " creator-os"
.\"O Manually override the default value of the "creator os" field of the 
.\"O filesystem.  Normally the creator field is set by default to the native OS
.\"O of the
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O executable.
ファイルシステムの「creator os」フィールドの値を手動で変更する。
通常「creator os」フィールドは
.B mke2fs
によってネイティブな OS に設定される。
.TP
.B "\-O \fIfeature\fR[,...]"
.\"O Create filesystem with given features (filesystem options), overriding 
.\"O the default filesystem options.  The default features which are 
.\"O enabled by default are specified by the
.\"O .I base_features
.\"O relation, either in the
.\"O .I [libdefaults]
.\"O section in the
.\"O .B /etc/mke2fs.conf
.\"O configuration file, or in the subsection of the 
.\"O .I [fs_types]
.\"O section for the filesystem type as specified by the
.\"O .B -T
.\"O option.  The filesystem type-specific configuration setting found in
.\"O the 
.\"O .I [fs_types]
.\"O section will override the global default found in
.\"O .IR [libdefaults] .
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: relation の訳語が思いつかない。
.\"Osato: 
デフォルトのファイルシステムオプションを上書きし、
指定された属性 (ファイルシステムオプション) でファイルシステムを作成する。
デフォルトで有効にされる属性は、
.I base_features
リレーションで指定される。
このリレーションは、設定ファイル
.B /etc/mke2fs.conf
の
.I [libdefaults]
セクション、または
.B -T
オプションで指定されたファイルシステムタイプに対応する
.I [fs_types]
セクションのサブセクションにある。
.I [fs_types]
セクションにあるファイルシステムタイプに固有の設定は、
.I [libdefaults]
にある大域的なデフォルト値を上書きする。
.sp
.\"O The filesystem feature set will be further edited 
.\"O using either the feature set specification specified by this option, 
.\"O or if this option is not specified, by the
.\"O .I default_features
.\"O relation for the filesystem type being created, or in the 
.\"O .I [libdefaults]
.\"O section of the configuration file.
ファイルシステム属性のセットは、以下の方法で更に変更できる。
このオプションで指定される属性セット指定で変更する。
このオプションが指定されない場合は、
作成されるファイルシステムタイプに対応する
.I default_features
リレーションで変更する。
設定ファイルの
.I [libdefaults]
セクションで変更する。
.sp
.\"O The filesystem feature set is comprised of a list of features, separated
.\"O by commas, that are to be enabled.  To disable a feature, simply
.\"O prefix the feature name with a  caret ('^') character.  The 
.\"O pseudo-filesystem feature "none" will clear all filesystem features.
ファイルシステム属性セットは、
コンマで区切った属性のリストとして構成されており、
これに含まれる属性が有効にされる。
属性を無効にする場合は、単に属性名の前にキャレット ('^') 文字を置けばよい。
仮想的なファイルシステム属性 "none" は、
全てのファイルシステム属性をクリアする。
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.B dir_index
.\"O Use hashed b-trees to speed up lookups in large directories.
ハッシュ B ツリーを使い、
ファイルが多いディレクトリ内での検索を高速化する。
.TP
.B filetype
.\"O Store file type information in directory entries.
ディレクトリエントリにファイルタイプ情報を保存する。
.TP
.B has_journal
.\"O Create an ext3 journal (as if using the
.\"O .B \-j
.\"O option).
.RB ( \-j
オプションを使った場合のように) ext3 ジャーナルを作成する。
.TP
.B journal_dev
.\"O Create an external ext3 journal on the given device
.\"O instead of a regular ext2 filesystem.
.\"O Note that
.\"O .I external-journal
.\"O must be created with the same
.\"O block size as the filesystems that will be using it.
ext3 ジャーナルを、通常の ext2 ファイルシステム上にではなく、
指定されたデバイス上に作成する。
.I external-journal
は、それが使われるファイルシステムと
同じブロックサイズで作成されなければならない。
.TP
.B resize_inode
.\"O Reserve space so the block group descriptor table may grow in the future.
.\"O Useful for online resizing using 
.\"O .BR resize2fs .
ブロックグループディスクリプタテーブルを
将来大きくできるように、領域を予約しておく。
.B resize2fs
を使ってオンラインでサイズ変更をするときに役立つ。
.\"O By default 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O will attempt to reserve enough space so that the
.\"O filesystem may grow to 1024 times its initial size.  This can be changed
.\"O using
.\"O .B resize
.\"O extended option.
.B mke2fs
はデフォルトで十分な領域を予約するので、
ファイルシステムは初期サイズの 1024 倍まで大きくできる。
これは
.B resize
拡張オプションを使って変更できる。
.TP
.B sparse_super
.\"O Create a filesystem with fewer superblock backup copies
.\"O (saves space on large filesystems).
スーパーブロックのバックアップコピーを少なくした
ファイルシステムを作成する
(大きなファイルシステムでは使用量を少なくできる)。
.RE
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Quiet execution.  Useful if 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O is run in a script.
表示を抑制する。
.B mke2fs
をスクリプト内で実行する場合に有用。
.TP
.BI \-r " revision"
.\"O Set the filesystem revision for the new filesystem.  Note that 1.2
.\"O kernels only support revision 0 filesystems.  The default is to 
.\"O create revision 1 filesystems.
新しいファイルシステムに対してファイルシステムリビジョンを設定する。
1.2 系のカーネルはリビジョン 0 のファイルシステムにしか対応していない。
デフォルトではリビジョン 1 のファイルシステムを作成する。
.TP
.B \-S
.\"O Write superblock and group descriptors only.  This is useful if all of
.\"O the superblock and backup superblocks are corrupted, and a last-ditch
.\"O recovery method is desired.  It causes 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O to reinitialize the 
.\"O superblock and group descriptors, while not touching the inode table
.\"O and the block and inode bitmaps.  The
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O program should be run immediately after this option is used, and there
.\"O is no guarantee that any data will be salvageable.  It is critical to
.\"O specify the correct filesystem blocksize when using this option,
.\"O or there is no chance of recovery.
スーパーブロックとグループディスクリプタのみを書き出す。
スーパーブロックもそのバックアップも壊れてしまい、
復旧の最終手段が必要な場合に有用。
このオプションを使用すると
mke2fs はスーパーブロックとグループディスクリプタを再初期化する。
inode テーブルとブロックそのものと inode ビットマップには手をつけない。
このオプションを使用した場合、ただちに
.B e2fsck
プログラムを使用しなければならない。
また、データが救済されるかどうかは保証の限りではない。
このオプションを使う際には、現在のファイルシステムの
ブロックサイズを指定することが重要である。
さもなければ、復帰できる見込みはない。
.\" .TP
.\" .BI \-t " test"
.\"O .\" Check the device for bad blocks before creating the file system
.\"O .\" using the specified test.
.\" ファイルシステムを作成する前に、
.\" 指定されたテストを使ってデバイスの不良ブロックを検査する。
.TP
.BI \-T " fs-type"
.\"O Specify how the filesystem is going to be used, so that 
.\"O .B mke2fs 
.\"O can choose optimal filesystem parameters for that use.  The filesystem
.\"O types that are can be supported are defined in the configuration file 
.\"O .BR /etc/mke2fs.conf (5).
.\"O The default configuration file contains definitions for the filesystem
.\"O types: small, floppy, news, largefile, and largefile4.  
ファイルシステムの利用目的を指定し、 
.B mke2fs 
が最適なファイルシステムパラメータを選択できるようにする。
サポートできるファイルシステムタイプは、設定ファイル
.BR /etc/mke2fs.conf (5)
に定義されている。
デフォルトの設定ファイルには、ファイルシステムタイプ
small, floppy, news, largefile, largefile4 の定義が書かれている。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose execution.
詳細な表示をする。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Print the version number of 
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O and exit.
.B mke2fs
のバージョンを表示して終了する。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This version of
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O has been written by Theodore Ts'o <tytso@mit.edu>.
このバージョンの
.B mke2fs
は Theodore Ts'o <tytso@mit.edu> によって作成された。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O accepts the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option but currently ignores it because the second
.\"O extended file system does not support fragments yet.
.B mke2fs
には
.B \-f
オプションを付けることができるが、現時点では無視される。
現時点の ext2 ファイルシステムはフラグメントに対応していないからである。
.br
.\"O There may be other ones.  Please, report them to the author.
たぶん他にもあるだろう。見つけたら作者に連絡してほしい。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O .B mke2fs
.\"O is part of the e2fsprogs package and is available from 
.\"O http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net.
.B mke2fs
は e2fsprogs パッケージの一部であり、
http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net
から入手できる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR mke2fs.conf (5),
.BR badblocks (8),
.BR dumpe2fs (8),
.BR e2fsck (8),
.BR tune2fs (8)
