.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat 23 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue 16 Nov 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Apr 17 03:17:45 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH MKLOST+FOUND 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O mklost+found \- create a lost+found directory on a mounted Linux
.\"O second extended file system
.SH 名前
mklost+found \- マウントされている Linux 第 2 拡張ファイルシステムに
lost+found ディレクトリを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mklost+found
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B mklost+found
.\"O is used to create a
.\"O .I lost+found
.\"O directory in the current working directory
.\"O on a Linux second extended file system.  There is normally a
.\"O .I lost+found
.\"O directory in the root directory of each filesystem.
.B mklost+found
は、Linux 第 2 拡張ファイルシステム上にある現在のディレクトリに
.I lost+found
ディレクトリを作成するために用いられる。
通常それぞれのファイルシステムのルートディレクトリには
.I lost+found
ディレクトリがおかれる。
.PP
.\"O .B mklost+found
.\"O pre-allocates disk blocks to the
.\"O .I lost+found
.\"O so that when
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8)
.\"O is being run to recover a filesystem, it does not need to allocate blocks in
.\"O the filesystem to store a large number of unlinked files.  This ensures that
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O will not have to allocate data blocks in the filesystem during recovery.
.B mklost+found
はディスクブロックをディレクトリに前もって割り当てる。
これによって、
.BR e2sfsck (8)
がファイルシステム回復のために起動されたとき、
unlink された多数のファイルを保存するためのブロックを
ファイルシステムに割り当てる必要がなくなる。
したがって
.B e2fsck
がファイルシステムの回復の最中にデータブロックを割り当てなくても良くなる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.\"O There are none.
.SH オプション
ない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B mklost+found
.\"O has been written by Remy Card <Remy.Card@linux.org>.  It is currently being
.\"O maintained by Theodore Ts'o <tytso@alum.mit.edu>.
.B mklost+found
は Remy Card <Remy.Card@linux.org> によって作成された。
現在は Theodore Ts'o <tytso@alum.mit.edu> によってメンテナンスされている。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.\"O There are none :-)
.SH バグ
ない :-)
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O .B mklost+found
.\"O is part of the e2fsprogs package and is available from 
.\"O http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net.
.B mklost+found
は e2fsprogs パッケージの一部であり、
http://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net から入手できる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR e2fsck (8),
.BR mke2fs (8)
