.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1997 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2007 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Sep  2 23:47:38 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>, v1.24
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Mar  6 14:01:56 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>, v1.34
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Feb 19 03:21:10 JST 2007 by Yuichi SATO, v1.39
.\" 
.\" .TH RESIZE2FS 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.TH RESIZE2FS 8 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O resize2fs \- ext2/ext3 file system resizer
resize2fs \- ext2/ext3 ファイルシステムのサイズを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B resize2fs
[
.B \-d 
.I debug-flags
]
[
.B \-S
.I RAID-stride
]
[
.B \-f
]
[
.B \-F
]
[
.B \-p
]
.I device
[
.I size
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The 
.\"O .B resize2fs 
.\"O program will resize ext2 or ext3 file systems.  It can be used to enlarge or
.\"O shrink an unmounted file system located on 
.\"O .IR device .
.B resize2fs 
は ext2 または ext3 ファイルシステムのサイズを変更する。
このプログラムは
.I device 
上のアンマウントされたファイルシステムを拡大または縮小する。
.\"O If the filesystem is mounted, it can be used to expand the size of the
.\"O mounted filesystem, assuming the kernel supports on-line resizing.  (As
.\"O of this writing, the Linux 2.6 kernel supports on-line resize for
.\"O filesystems mounted using ext3 only.).
ファイルシステムがマウントされている場合、
カーネルがオンラインでのサイズ変更をサポートしていると仮定して、
マウントされているファイルシステムのサイズを拡大する
(この man ページを書いている時点では、Linux 2.6 カーネルにおいて、
マウントされているファイルシステムのオンラインでのサイズ変更が
サポートされているのは、ext3 のみである)。
.PP
.\"O The 
.\"O .I size
.\"O parameter specifies the requested new size of the filesystem.
.I size
パラメータには希望するファイルシステムの新しいサイズを指定する。
.\"O If no units are specified, the units of the
.\"O .I size
.\"O parameter shall be the filesystem blocksize of the filesystem.
単位が指定されない場合、
.I size
パラメータの単位はファイルシステムのブロックサイズとなる。
.\"O Optionally, the 
.\"O .I size
.\"O parameter may be suffixed by one of the following the units 
.\"O designators: 's', 'K', 'M', or 'G',
.\"O for 512 byte sectors, kilobytes, megabytes, or gigabytes, respectively.
.I size
パラメータにはオプションとして
以下の単位指定文字を後ろに付けることができる。
\&'s', 'K', 'M', 'G' は、それぞれ 512 バイトセクタ、
キロバイト、メガバイト、ギガバイトを表す。
.\"O The 
.\"O .I size
.\"O of the filesystem may never be larger than the size of the partition.
ファイルシステムの
.I size
は、パーティションのサイズより大きくすることはできない。
.\"O If 
.\"O .I size
.\"O parameter is not specified, it will default to the size of the partition.
.I size
パラメータが指定されない場合、
パーティションのサイズをデフォルトとする。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B resize2fs
.\"O program does not manipulate the size of partitions.  If you wish to enlarge
.\"O a filesystem, you must first make sure you can expand the size of the
.\"O underlying partition first.  
.B resize2fs
プログラムは、パーティションのサイズは操作しない。
ファイルシステムを大きくしようとする場合は、
そのファイルシステムがあるパーティションのサイズを大きくできるかを
最初に確認しなければならない。
.\"O This can be done using 
.\"O .BR fdisk (8)
.\"O by deleting the partition and recreating it with a larger size or using
.\"O .BR lvextend (8),
.\"O if you're using the logical volume manager
.\"O .BR lvm (8).
これは、
.BR fdisk (8)
を使ってパーティションを削除した後に
より大きなパーティションを再作成することで確認できるし、
論理ボリュームマネージャ
.BR lvm (8)
を使っている場合は、
.BR lvextend (8)
を使って確認できる。
.\"O When 
.\"O recreating the partition, make sure you create it with the same starting
.\"O disk cylinder as before!  Otherwise, the resize operation will 
.\"O certainly not work, and you may lose your entire filesystem.  
パーティションを再作成する場合、
必ず以前と同じ開始ディスクシリンダで作成すること!
そうしないと、サイズ変更の操作は絶対にうまく行かず、
ファイルシステム全体を失ってしまう。
.\"O After running
.\"O .BR fdisk (8),
.\"O run resize2fs to resize the ext2 filesystem 
.\"O to use all of the space in the newly enlarged partition.
.BR fdisk (8)
を実行した後、resize2fs を実行すること。
これにより、ext2 ファイルシステムのサイズを変更し、
拡大した新しいパーティションの全ての領域を使うことができる。
.PP
.\"O If you wish to shrink an ext2 partition, first use 
.\"O .B resize2fs
.\"O to shrink the size of filesystem.  Then you may use 
.\"O .BR fdisk (8)
.\"O to shrink the size of the partition.  When shrinking the size of 
.\"O the partition, make sure you do not make it smaller than the new size 
.\"O of the ext2 filesystem!
ext2 パーティションを小さくしようとする場合には、
最初に
.B resize2fs
を使ってファイルシステムのサイズを小さくする。
続いて
.BR fdisk (8)
を使えばパーティションのサイズを小さくできる。
パーティションのサイズを小さくするときは、
新しい ext2 ファイルシステムのサイズより小さくしないこと!
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-d \fIdebug-flags
.\"O Turns on various resize2fs debugging features, if they have been compiled 
.\"O into the binary.
resize2fs のいろいろなデバッグ属性がプログラムに組み込まれている場合、
それらの属性を設定する。
.\"O .I debug-flags
.\"O should be computed by adding the numbers of the desired features 
.\"O from the following list:
.I debug-flags
は以下のリストのうち希望する属性値を足して計算する。
.br
.\"O \	1\	\-\ Print out all disk I/O 
\	1\	\-\ 全てのディスク I/O を表示する。
.br
.\"O \	2\	\-\ Debug block relocations
\	2\	\-\ ブロックの再割り当てをデバッグする。
.br
.\"O \	8\	\-\ Debug inode relocations
\	8\	\-\ inode の再割り当てをデバッグする。
.br
.\"O \	16\	\-\ Debug moving the inode table
\	16\	\-\ inode テーブルの移動をデバッグする。
.TP
.B \-S \fIRAID-stride
.\"O The 
.\"O .B resize2fs
.\"O program will heuristically determine the RAID stride that was specified 
.\"O when the filesystem was created.  This option allows the user to 
.\"O explicitly specify a RAID stride setting to be used by resize2fs instead.
.B resize2fs
プログラムは、ファイルシステムが作成されたときに指定された
RAID stride をヒューリスティック (heuristic) に基づいて決定する。
一方、このオプションにより、ユーザは resize2fs で使用される
RAID stride 設定を明示的に指定することができる。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Prints out a percentage completion bars for each 
.\"O .B resize2fs
.\"O operation, so that the user can keep track of what
.\"O the program is doing.
.B resize2fs
の各操作について、作業完了分のパーセントを表すバーを表示する。
これによりユーザーはプログラムの動作を追うことができる。
.TP 
.B \-f
.\"O Forces resize2fs to proceed with the filesystem resize operation, overriding 
.\"O some safety checks which resize2fs normally enforces.
resize2fs が通常行う安全性チェックを無視させて、
ファイルシステムのサイズ変更操作を強制的に進める。
.TP
.B \-F
.\"O Flush the filesystem device's buffer caches before beginning.  Only
.\"O really useful for doing 
.\"O .B resize2fs
.\"O time trials.
サイズ変更を始める前に、
ファイルシステムデバイスのバッファキャッシュを消去する。
.B resize2fs
のタイムトライアルをする場合にのみ役立つ。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B resize2fs
.\"O was written by Theodore Ts'o <tytso@mit.edu>.
.B resize2fs
は Theodore Ts'o <tytso@mit.edu> が作成した。
.\"O .SH COPYRIGHT
.SH 著作権
Resize2fs is Copyright 1998 by Theodore Ts'o and PowerQuest, Inc.  All
rights reserved.  
.\"O As of April, 2000
.\"O .B Resize2fs
.\"O may be redistributed under the terms of the GPL.
2000 年 4 月の時点では、
.B resize2fs
は GPL の下で再配布可能である。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR fdisk (8),
.BR e2fsck (8),
.BR mke2fs (8),
.BR lvm (8), 
.BR lvextend (8)
