.\" Paul ``Rusty'' Russell, Nov-1997.  `ipchains@rustcorp.com.au'.
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 OOGAMI Atsushi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov  7 18:08:42 JST 2000
.\"         by OOGAMI Atsushi <ati@ff.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	firewall	ファイアウォール
.\"WORD:	chains		チェイン
.\"WORD:	stdout		標準出力
.\"
.TH IPCHAINS-SAVE 8 "February 8, 1998" "" ""
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ipchains\-save \- save IP firewall chains to stdout
ipchains\-save \- IP ファイアウォールチェインを標準出力へ保存する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .BR "ipchains\-save " "[chain] [ -v ]
.BR "ipchains\-save " "[チェイン名] [ -v ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O ipchains\-save prints the firewall chains to stdout.
ipchains\-save は、ファイアウォールチェインを標準出力へ書き出す。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O The options that are recognized by
.\"O .B ipchains-save
.\"O are:
.B ipchains-save
が認識するオプションは、以下の通り:
.TP
.BR -v
.\"O print out every rule
全てのルールを出力する
.P
.\"O An optional chain name means only that chain will be saved.
チェイン名を指定すれば、そのチェインだけが保存される。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
ipchains(8), the IPCHAINS HOWTO.
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Paul ``Rusty'' Russell <ipchains@rustcorp.com>



