.\" Paul ``Rusty'' Russell, Nov-1997.  `ipchains@rustcorp.com.au'.
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 OOGAMI Atsushi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov  7 18:27:35 JST 2000
.\"         by OOGAMI Atsushi <ati@ff.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	firewall	ファイアウォール
.\"WORD:	chains		チェイン
.\"WORD:	stdin		標準入力
.\"
.TH IPCHAINS-RESTORE 8 "February 8, 1998" "" ""
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ipchains\-restore \- restore IP firewall chains from stdin
ipchains\-restore \- IP ファイアウォールチェインを標準入力から復元する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR "ipchains\-restore " "[ -f ] [ -v ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O ipchains\-restore restores firewall chains from stdin.
ipchains\-restore は、ファイアウォールチェインを標準入力から復元する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O The options that are recognized by
.\"O .B ipchains-restore
.\"O are:
.B ipchains-restore
が認識するオプションは、以下の通り:
.TP
.BR -f
.\"O clear chains without asking
確認無しでチェインを消去する
.TP
.BR -v
.\"O print out every rule
全てのルールを出力する
.TP
.BR -p
.\"O create every referred-to chain which doesn't exist (useful if you've
.\"O used ipchains\-save to save a single chain).
被参照チェイン (referred-to chain) のうち、存在しないものを全て生成する
(ipchains\-save で単一のチェインを保存した場合に便利)。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
ipchains(8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Paul ``Rusty'' Russell <ipchains@rustcorp.com>



