.\" Paul ``Rusty'' Russell, Nov-1997.  `ipchains@rustcorp.com.au'.
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 OOGAMI Atsushi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov  7 17:58:52 JST 2000
.\"         by OOGAMI Atsushi <ati@ff.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	firewall	ファイアウォール
.\"WORD:	dual-booting	デュアルブート環境
.\"WORD:	accounting	アカウント制御
.\"
.TH IPFWADM-WRAPPER 8 "February 8, 1998" "" ""
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ipfwadm\-wrapper \- IP firewall administration
ipfwadm\-wrapper \- IP ファイアウォール管理
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -A " "command parameters [options]
.BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -A " "コマンド パラメータ [オプション]
.br
.\"O .BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -I " "command parameters [options]
.BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -I " "コマンド パラメータ [オプション]
.br
.\"O .BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -O " "command parameters [options]
.BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -O " "コマンド パラメータ [オプション]
.br
.\"O .BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -F " "command parameters [options]
.BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -F " "コマンド パラメータ [オプション]
.br
.\"O .BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -M " "[ -l | -s ] [options]
.BR "ipfwadm\-wrapper -M " "[ -l | -s ] [オプション]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Ipfwadm\-wrapper emulates the behaviour of ipfwadm. You
.\"O can use this wrapper to use your old ipfwadm firewall
.\"O rules with ipchains. See ipfwadm(8) for more details.
ipfwadm\-wrapper は、ipfwadm の動作をエミュレートする。
このラッパーを利用すれば、ipfwadm 形式の古いファイアウォール
ルールを ipchains で使うことができる。
詳細については ipfwadm(8) を参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O If the kernel does not support ipchains (eg. a 2.0 kernel), and the
.\"O file /sbin/ipfwadm.real exists and is executable, then it will be
.\"O executed with the arguments given to ipfwadm-wrapper.  This allows
.\"O simple dual-booting of 2.2 and 2.0 kernels with the same firewalling
.\"O scripts: simply move ipfwadm to ipfwadm.real, and ipfwadm-wrapper to
.\"O ipfwadm.
カーネルが ipchains をサポートしない場合 (例えば 2.0 カーネル) に、
実行可能ファイル /sbin/ipfwadm.real が存在すると、ipfwadm.real は
ipfwadm-wrapper への引数とともに実行される。これにより、同じファイア
ウォールスクリプトを用いた 2.2 カーネルと 2.0 カーネルのデュアルブー
ト環境を簡単に実現できる。単に ipfwadm を ipfwadm.real に、そして
ipfwadm-wrapper を ipfwadm にリネームするだけでよい。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
ipfwadm(8), ipchains(8)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The script isn't clever at parsing command line arguments.  You must
.\"O use separate arguments, rather than run them together.  For example,
.\"O `ipfwadm \-Mle' becomes `ipfwadm-wrapper \-M \-l \-e'.
ipfwadm\-wrapper のコマンド行引数解析は、あまり賢くない。引数は
ひとまとめにせず、分割して与えなければならない。例えば、
`ipfwadm \-Mle' は `ipfwadm-wrapper \-M \-l \-e' とする。
.PP
."O Fragment accounting rules are not translated correctly; they will
."O account packets with source port 65535.
フラグメントアカウント制御ルール (fragment accounting rules) は、正しく
解釈されない。パケットのソースポートを 65535 とみなすだろう。
.PP
.\"O Due to new kernel restrictions, you must be root even to list rules
.\"O for 2.2 kernels.
新しいカーネルの制限により、2.2 カーネルではたとえルールを一覧するだけ
であっても root になる必要がある。
.PP
.\"O If /usr is mounted from NFS, you will not be able to use
.\"O ipfwadm-wrapper before /usr is mounted.
/usr が NFS 経由でマウントされる場合、/usr をマウントしてから
でないと ipfwadm-wrapper を利用することはできない。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Paul ``Rusty'' Russell <ipchains@rustcorp.com>



