.\"O .TH "LIBBLKID" "3" "2021-06-02" "util\-linux 2.37.2" "Programmer\(aqs Manual"
.\"O .ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.\"O .el       .ds Aq '
.\"O .ss \n[.ss] 0
.\"O .nh
.\"O .ad l
.\"O .de URL
.\"O \fI\\$2\fP <\\$1>\\$3
.\"O ..
.\"O .als MTO URL
.\"O .if \n[.g] \{\
.\"O .  mso www.tmac
.\"O .  am URL
.\"O .    ad l
.\"O .  .
.\"O .  am MTO
.\"O .    ad l
.\"O .  .
.\"O .  LINKSTYLE blue R < >
.\"O .\}
.TH LIBBLKID 3 2021\-06\-02 "util\-linux 2.37.2" プログラマーマニュアル
.ie  \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el       .ds Aq '
.ss \n[.ss] 0
.nh
.ad l
.de  URL
\fI\\$2\fP <\\$1>\\$3
..
.als MTO URL
.if  \n[.g] \{\
.  mso www.tmac
.  am URL
.    ad l
.  .
.  am MTO
.    ad l
.  .
.  LINKSTYLE blue R < >
.\}
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "NAME"
.\"O libblkid \- block device identification library
.SH 名前
libblkid \- ブロックデバイスの識別ライブラリ
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "SYNOPSIS"
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fB#include <blkid.h>\fP
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fBcc\fP \fIfile.c\fP \fB\-lblkid\fP
.SH 書式
.sp
\fB#include <blkid.h>\fP
.sp
\fBcc\fP \fIfile.c\fP \fB\-lblkid\fP
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.\"O .sp
.\"O The \fBlibblkid\fP library is used to identify block devices (disks) as to their content (e.g., filesystem type) as well as extracting additional information such as filesystem labels/volume names, unique identifiers/serial numbers. A common use is to allow use of \fBLABEL=\fP and \fBUUID=\fP tags instead of hard\-coding specific block device names into configuration files.
.\"O .sp
.\"O The low\-level part of the library also allows the extraction of information about partitions and block device topology.
.\"O .sp
.\"O The high\-level part of the library keeps information about block devices in a cache file and is verified to still be valid before being returned to the user (if the user has read permission on the raw block device, otherwise not). The cache file also allows unprivileged users (normally anyone other than root, or those not in the "disk" group) to locate devices by label/id. The standard location of the cache file can be overridden by the environment variable \fBBLKID_FILE\fP.
.\"O .sp
.\"O In situations where one is getting information about a single known device, it does not impact performance whether the cache is used or not (unless you are not able to read the block device directly).
.\"O .sp
.\"O The high\-level part of the library supports two methods to evaluate \fBLABEL/UUID\fP. It reads information directly from a block device or read information from /dev/disk/by\-* udev symlinks. The udev is preferred method by default.
.\"O .sp
.\"O If you are dealing with multiple devices, use of the cache is highly recommended (even if empty) as devices will be scanned at most one time and the on\-disk cache will be updated if possible.
.\"O .sp
.\"O In some cases (modular kernels), block devices are not even visible until after they are accessed the first time, so it is critical that there is some way to locate these devices without enumerating only visible devices, so the use of the cache file is \fBrequired\fP in this situation.
.SH 説明
.sp
\fBlibblkid\fP ライブラリは、 ブロックデバイス (ディスク) の内容 (ファイルシステムタイプなど) を識別して、
ファイルシステムのラベル/ボリューム名、 一意の識別番号/シリアル番号を抽出する。 一般的な利用方法としては、 \fBLABEL=\fP や \fBUUID=\fP
タグを用いることができる。  設定ファイル内に特定のブロックデバイス名を指定する必要はない。
.sp
本ライブラリの低レベル機能部分では、 パーティションやブロックデバイストポロジーに関する情報も抽出する。
.sp
本ライブラリの高レベル機能部分では、 ブロックデバイスに関する情報をキャッシュファイルに保持しておき、 ユーザーへ情報を返す前に、
その情報がまだ有効であるかどうかが検証される (これはユーザーが raw
ブロックデバイスの読み込み権限を持っている場合であり、権限がない場合には検証は行われない)。 キャッシュファイルは、 非特権ユーザーであっても (通常
root ユーザー以外であったり、 "disk" グループに属していなかったりする場合でも)、 デバイスのラベルや ID
を使ってデバイスにアクセスできる。 キャッシュファイルの標準的な配置ディレクトリは、 環境変数 \fBBLKID_FILE\fP によって上書きされる。
.sp
どれか 1 つのデバイスについての情報を取得する場面においては、 キャッシュを使っても使わなくても、 性能に影響することはない
(ただしブロックデバイスを直接読み込むことができない場合は除く)。
.sp
本ライブラリの高レベル機能部分では、 \fBLABEL/UUID\fP を評価する方法を 2 つ提供している。 1
つはブロックデバイスから直接情報を読み取ることであり、 もう 1 つは udev シンボリックリンク /dev/disk/by\-*
から情報を読み取ることである。 デフォルトでは、 udev から取得する方法が採用される。
.sp
複数デバイスを扱う場合は、キャッシュファイルを (たとえ空であっても) 利用することが強く推奨される。 複数デバイスは 1 度にすべてスキャンされ、
ディスク内のキャッシュが、 その際に可能であれば更新されるためである。
.sp
(モジュラーカーネルなどの) 特定の状況において、 ブロックデバイスがアクセスされていない状態では、 そのデバイスが見えない場合がある。 したがって、
そういったデバイスを特定するためには、 単に見えているデバイスだけを取り上げるのではなく、 適切な方法が必要になる。 こういった状況においては、
キャッシュファイルの利用が \fB必要\fP となる。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "CONFIGURATION FILE"
.\"O .sp
.\"O The standard location of the \fI/etc/blkid.conf\fP config file can be overridden by the environment variable \fBBLKID_CONF\fP. For more details about the config file see \fBblkid\fP(8) man page.
.SH 設定ファイル
.sp
設定ファイル \fI/etc/blkid.conf\fP の標準的な配置ディレクトリは、 環境変数 \fBBLKID_CONF\fP によって上書きされる。
この設定ファイルに関する詳細は、 man ページ \fBblkid\fP(8) を参照のこと。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "AUTHORS"
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fBlibblkid\fP was written by Andreas Dilger for the ext2 filesystem utilities, with input from Ted Ts\(cqo. The library was subsequently heavily modified by Ted Ts\(cqo.
.\"O .sp
.\"O The low\-level probing code was rewritten by Karel Zak.
.SH 著者
.sp
\fBlibblkid\fP は、 Ted Ts\(cqo からの情報を受けて、 Andreas Dilger が ext2
ファイルシステムユーティリティー向けに書いた。 その後、 このライブラリは Ted Ts\(cqo により引き続き、 かなりの修正が行われている。
.sp
低レベルの probe コードは Karel Zak が書き直した。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "COPYING"
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fBlibblkid\fP is available under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License (LGPL), version 2 (or at your discretion any later version).
.SH 著作権
.sp
\fBlibblkid\fP is available under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
License (LGPL), version 2 (or at your discretion any later version).
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fBblkid\fP(8),
.\"O \fBfindfs\fP(8)
.SH 関連項目
.sp
\fBblkid\fP(8), \fBfindfs\fP(8)
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.\"O .sp
.\"O For bug reports, use the issue tracker at \c
.\"O .URL "https://github.com/karelzak/util\-linux/issues" "" "."
.SH バグ報告
.sp
バグ報告は、 以下にある issue トラッカーを利用すること。
.URL https://github.com/karelzak/util\-linux/issues "" .
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "AVAILABILITY"
.\"O .sp
.\"O The \fBlibblkid\fP library is part of the util\-linux package since version 2.15. It can be downloaded from \c
.\"O .URL "https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util\-linux/" "Linux Kernel Archive" "."
.SH 入手方法
.sp
\fBlibblkid\fP ライブラリは、 バージョン 2.15 以降、 util\-linux パッケージの一部であり、 以下からダウンロードできる。
.URL https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util\-linux/ "Linux Kernel Archive" .
.\"O ----------------------------------------
