.\"O .TH "UUID_PARSE" "3" "2021-06-02" "util\-linux 2.37.2" "Programmer\(aqs Manual"
.\"O .ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.\"O .el       .ds Aq '
.\"O .ss \n[.ss] 0
.\"O .nh
.\"O .ad l
.\"O .de URL
.\"O \fI\\$2\fP <\\$1>\\$3
.\"O ..
.\"O .als MTO URL
.\"O .if \n[.g] \{\
.\"O .  mso www.tmac
.\"O .  am URL
.\"O .    ad l
.\"O .  .
.\"O .  am MTO
.\"O .    ad l
.\"O .  .
.\"O .  LINKSTYLE blue R < >
.\"O .\}
.TH UUID_PARSE 3 2021\-06\-02 "util\-linux 2.37.2" プログラマーマニュアル
.ie  \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el       .ds Aq '
.ss \n[.ss] 0
.nh
.ad l
.de  URL
\fI\\$2\fP <\\$1>\\$3
..
.als MTO URL
.if  \n[.g] \{\
.  mso www.tmac
.  am URL
.    ad l
.  .
.  am MTO
.    ad l
.  .
.  LINKSTYLE blue R < >
.\}
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "NAME"
.\"O uuid_parse \- convert an input UUID string into binary representation
.SH 名前
uuid_parse \- 入力された UUID 文字列をバイナリー表現に変換する
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "SYNOPSIS"
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fB#include <uuid.h>\fP
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fBint uuid_parse(char *\fIin\fP, uuid_t \fIuu\fP);\fP
.\"O .br
.\"O \fBint uuid_parse_range(char *\fIin_start\fP, char *\fIin_end\fP, uuid_t \fIuu\fP);\fP
.SH 書式
.sp
\fB#include <uuid.h>\fP
.sp
\fBint uuid_parse(char *\fP\fIin\fP\fB, uuid_t \fP\fIuu\fP\fB);\fP
.br
\fBint uuid_parse_range(char *\fP\fIin_start\fP\fB, char *\fP\fIin_end\fP\fB, uuid_t
\fP\fIuu\fP\fB);\fP
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.\"O .sp
.\"O The \fBuuid_parse\fP() function converts the UUID string given by \fIin\fP into the binary representation. The input UUID is a string of the form 1b4e28ba\-2fa1\-11d2\-883f\-b9a761bde3fb (in \fBprintf\fP(3) format "%08x\-%04x\-%04x\-%04x\-%012x", 36 bytes plus the trailing \(aq\(rs0\(aq).
.\"O .sp
.\"O The \fBuuid_parse_range\fP() function works like \fBuuid_parse\fP() but parses only range in string specified by \fIin_start\fP and \fIin_end\fP pointers.
.SH 説明
.sp
\fBuuid_parse\fP() 関数は、 \fIin\fP として指定された UUID 文字列を、 バイナリー表現に変換する。 入力とする UUID は、
1b4e28ba\-2fa1\-11d2\-883f\-b9a761bde3fb といった形式の文字列である (\fBprintf\fP(3)
のフォーマットで表現すると、 "%08x\-%04x\-%04x\-%04x\-%012x" という 36 バイトであり、 後ろに \(aq\(rs0\(aq)
が続く)。
.sp
\fBuuid_parse_range\fP() 関数は、 \fBuuid_parse\fP() と同様であるが、 \fIin_start\fP と \fIin_end\fP
のポインターによって指定された文字列の範囲のみを解析する。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.\"O .sp
.\"O Upon successfully parsing the input string, 0 is returned, and the UUID is stored in the location pointed to by \fIuu\fP, otherwise \-1 is returned.
.SH 返り値
.sp
入力文字列の解析が正常に行われた場合は 0 を返し、 UUID は \fIuu\fP で示される場所に保存される。 これ以外は \-1 を返す。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.\"O .sp
.\"O This library parses UUIDs compatible with OSF DCE 1.1, and hash based UUIDs V3 and V5 compatible with \c
.\"O .URL "https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4122" "RFC\-4122" "."
.SH 準拠
.sp
本ライブラリは OSF DCE 1.1 と互換の UUID を解析する。 またハッシュベース UUID V3 と V5 は、 以下と互換である。
.URL https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4122 RFC\-4122 .
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "AUTHORS"
.\"O .sp
.\"O Theodore Y. Ts\(cqo
.SH 著者
.sp
Theodore Y. Ts\(cqo
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fBuuid\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_clear\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_compare\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_copy\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_generate\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_is_null\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_time\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_unparse\fP(3)
.SH 関連項目
.sp
\fBuuid\fP(3), \fBuuid_clear\fP(3), \fBuuid_compare\fP(3), \fBuuid_copy\fP(3),
\fBuuid_generate\fP(3), \fBuuid_is_null\fP(3), \fBuuid_time\fP(3), \fBuuid_unparse\fP(3)
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.\"O .sp
.\"O For bug reports, use the issue tracker at \c
.\"O .URL "https://github.com/karelzak/util\-linux/issues" "" "."
.SH バグ報告
.sp
バグ報告は、 以下にある issue トラッカーを利用すること。
.URL https://github.com/karelzak/util\-linux/issues "" .
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "AVAILABILITY"
.\"O .sp
.\"O The \fBlibuuid\fP library is part of the util\-linux package since version 2.15.1. It can be downloaded from \c
.\"O .URL "https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util\-linux/" "Linux Kernel Archive" "."
.SH 入手方法
.sp
\fBlibuuid\fP ライブラリは、 util\-linux 2.15.1 以降、 このパッケージの一部であり、 以下からダウンロードできる。
.URL https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util\-linux/ "Linux Kernel Archive" .
.\"O ----------------------------------------
