.\"O .TH "UUID_UNPARSE" "3" "2021-06-02" "util\-linux 2.37.2" "Programmer\(aqs Manual"
.\"O .ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.\"O .el       .ds Aq '
.\"O .ss \n[.ss] 0
.\"O .nh
.\"O .ad l
.\"O .de URL
.\"O \fI\\$2\fP <\\$1>\\$3
.\"O ..
.\"O .als MTO URL
.\"O .if \n[.g] \{\
.\"O .  mso www.tmac
.\"O .  am URL
.\"O .    ad l
.\"O .  .
.\"O .  am MTO
.\"O .    ad l
.\"O .  .
.\"O .  LINKSTYLE blue R < >
.\"O .\}
.TH UUID_UNPARSE 3 2021\-06\-02 "util\-linux 2.37.2" プログラマーマニュアル
.ie  \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el       .ds Aq '
.ss \n[.ss] 0
.nh
.ad l
.de  URL
\fI\\$2\fP <\\$1>\\$3
..
.als MTO URL
.if  \n[.g] \{\
.  mso www.tmac
.  am URL
.    ad l
.  .
.  am MTO
.    ad l
.  .
.  LINKSTYLE blue R < >
.\}
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "NAME"
.\"O uuid_unparse \- convert a UUID from binary representation to a string
.SH 名前
uuid_unparse \- UUID のバイナリー表現を文字列に変換する
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "SYNOPSIS"
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fB#include <uuid.h>\fP
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fBvoid uuid_unparse(uuid_t \fIuu\fP, char *\fIout\fP);\fP
.\"O .br
.\"O \fBvoid uuid_unparse_upper(uuid_t \fIuu\fP, char *\fIout\fP);\fP
.\"O .br
.\"O \fBvoid uuid_unparse_lower(uuid_t \fIuu\fP, char *\fIout\fP);\fP
.SH 書式
.sp
\fB#include <uuid.h>\fP
.sp
\fBvoid uuid_unparse(uuid_t \fP\fIuu\fP\fB, char *\fP\fIout\fP\fB);\fP
.br
\fBvoid uuid_unparse_upper(uuid_t \fP\fIuu\fP\fB, char *\fP\fIout\fP\fB);\fP
.br
\fBvoid uuid_unparse_lower(uuid_t \fP\fIuu\fP\fB, char *\fP\fIout\fP\fB);\fP
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.\"O .sp
.\"O The \fBuuid_unparse\fP() function converts the supplied UUID \fIuu\fP from the binary representation into a 36\-byte string (plus trailing \(aq\(rs0\(aq) of the form 1b4e28ba\-2fa1\-11d2\-883f\-0016d3cca427 and stores this value in the character string pointed to by \fIout\fP. The case of the hex digits returned by \fBuuid_unparse\fP() may be upper or lower case, and is dependent on the system\-dependent local default.
.\"O .sp
.\"O If the case of the hex digits is important then the functions \fBuuid_unparse_upper\fP() and \fBuuid_unparse_lower\fP() may be used.
.SH 説明
.sp
\fBuuid_unparse\fP() 関数は、 指定された UUID 変数 \fIuu\fP を、 バイナリー表現から、
1b4e28ba\-2fa1\-11d2\-883f\-0016d3cca427 といった形式の 36 バイト文字列に (後ろに \(aq\(rs0\(aq
をつけて) 変換する。 そしてその値を \fIout\fP で示される文字列変数に保存する。 \fBuuid_unparse\fP() が返す 16
進数の桁表示は、 大文字か小文字のいずれかになる。 これは、 システムごとに定められたローカルのデフォルト設定による。
.sp
16 進数の桁表記の大文字小文字の区別を必要とする場合は、 \fBuuid_unparse_upper\fP() と
\fBuuid_unparse_lower\fP() を用いればよい。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.\"O .sp
.\"O This library unparses UUIDs compatible with OSF DCE 1.1.
.SH 準拠
.sp
本ライブラリは OSF DCE 1.1 と互換の UUID を解析する。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "AUTHORS"
.\"O .sp
.\"O Theodore Y. Ts\(cqo
.SH 著者
.sp
Theodore Y. Ts\(cqo
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O .sp
.\"O \fBuuid\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_clear\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_compare\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_copy\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_generate\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_time\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_is_null\fP(3),
.\"O \fBuuid_parse\fP(3)
.SH 関連項目
.sp
\fBuuid\fP(3), \fBuuid_clear\fP(3), \fBuuid_compare\fP(3), \fBuuid_copy\fP(3),
\fBuuid_generate\fP(3), \fBuuid_time\fP(3), \fBuuid_is_null\fP(3), \fBuuid_parse\fP(3)
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.\"O .sp
.\"O For bug reports, use the issue tracker at \c
.\"O .URL "https://github.com/karelzak/util\-linux/issues" "" "."
.SH バグ報告
.sp
バグ報告は、 以下にある issue トラッカーを利用すること。
.URL https://github.com/karelzak/util\-linux/issues "" .
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "AVAILABILITY"
.\"O .sp
.\"O The \fBlibuuid\fP library is part of the util\-linux package since version 2.15.1. It can be downloaded from \c
.\"O .URL "https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util\-linux/" "Linux Kernel Archive" "."
.SH 入手方法
.sp
\fBlibuuid\fP ライブラリは、 util\-linux 2.15.1 以降、 このパッケージの一部であり、 以下からダウンロードできる。
.URL https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util\-linux/ "Linux Kernel Archive" .
.\"O ----------------------------------------
