.\"	dhcpd.8
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995, 1996 The Internet Software Consortium.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The Internet Software Consortium nor the names
.\"    of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM AND
.\" CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM OR
.\" CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
.\" USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
.\" ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" This software has been written for the Internet Software Consortium
.\" by Ted Lemon <mellon@fugue.com> in cooperation with Vixie
.\" Enterprises.  To learn more about the Internet Software Consortium,
.\" see ``http://www.isc.org/isc''.  To learn more about Vixie
.\" Enterprises, see ``http://www.vix.com''.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Dec 27 2001 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH dhcpd 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O dhcpd - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol Server
.SH 名前
dhcpd \- Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (動的ホスト設定プロトコル) サーバ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B dhcpd
[
.B -p
.I port
]
[
.B -f
]
[
.B -d
]
[
.B -q
]
[
.B -cf
.I config-file
]
[
.B -lf
.I lease-file
]
[
.I if0
[
.I ...ifN
]
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The Internet Software Consortium DHCP Server, dhcpd, implements the
.\"O Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) and the Internet Bootstrap
.\"O Protocol (BOOTP).  DHCP allows hosts on a TCP/IP network to request
.\"O and be assigned IP addresses, and also to discover information about
.\"O the network to which they are attached.  BOOTP provides similar
.\"O functionality, with certain restrictions.
Internet Software Consortium DHCP サーバである dhcpd は、
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) と
Internet Bootstrap Protocol (BOOTP) とを実装したものである。
DHCP を用いると、
TCP/IP ネットワーク上のホストは
IP アドレスを要求して割り当ててもらうことができ、
また接続したネットワークの情報を取得できます。
BOOTP も同様の機能を持っていますが、少々制限があります。
.\"O .SH OPERATION
.SH 動作
.PP
.\"O The DHCP protocol allows a host which is unknown to the network
.\"O administrator to be automatically assigned a new IP address out of a
.\"O pool of IP addresses for its network.   In order for this to work, the
.\"O network administrator allocates address pools in each subnet and
.\"O enters them into the dhcpd.conf(5) file.
DHCP プロトコルは、ネットワーク管理者が知らないホストに対して、
予めそのネットワークで用意された IP アドレスの範囲 (pool) から、
自動的に新しい IP アドレスを割り当てます。
この機構を動作させるには、
ネットワーク管理者はアドレスの範囲を各サブネットごとに割り当てておき、
それを
.BR dhcpd.conf (5)
に書いておかなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O On startup, dhcpd reads the
.\"O .IR dhcpd.conf
.\"O file and stores a list of available addresses on each subnet in
.\"O memory.  When a client requests an address using the DHCP protocol,
.\"O dhcpd allocates an address for it.  Each client is assigned a lease,
.\"O which expires after an amount of time chosen by the administrator (by
.\"O default, one day).  Before leases expire, the clients to which leases
.\"O are assigned are expected to renew them in order to continue to use
.\"O the addresses.  Once a lease has expired, the client to which that
.\"O lease was assigned is no longer permitted to use the leased IP
.\"O address.
dhcpd は起動すると
.I dhcpd.conf
ファイルを読み、
各サブネットごとに利用できるアドレスのリストをメモリに保存します。
クライアントが DHCP プロトコルを用いてアドレスを要求すると、
dhcpd はそのクライアントにアドレスを割り当てます。
各クライアントに貸し出されたアドレスは、
管理者が決めておいたある期間が経過すると期限切れになります
(デフォルトでは 1 日)。
貸し出しを受けたクライアントは、
そのアドレスの利用を継続するために、
貸し出しが期限切れになる前に更新を行うことになります。
貸し出しが期限切れになると、
その貸し出しアドレスを割り当てられていたクライアントは、
もうそれ以上貸し出されていた IP アドレスを利用できなくなります。
.PP
.\"O In order to keep track of leases across system reboots and server
.\"O restarts, dhcpd keeps a list of leases it has assigned in the
.\"O dhcpd.leases(5) file.   Before dhcpd grants a lease to a host, it
.\"O records the lease in this file and makes sure that the contents of the
.\"O file are flushed to disk.   This ensures that even in the event of a
.\"O system crash, dhcpd will not forget about a lease that it has
.\"O assigned.   On startup, after reading the dhcpd.conf file, dhcpd
.\"O reads the dhcpd.leases file to refresh its memory about what leases
.\"O have been assigned.
システムやサーバが再起動した場合に貸し出し情報を保持しておくために、
dhcpd は割り当てた貸し出しの記録を
.BR dhcpd.leases (5)
ファイルに保持しています。dhcpd はホストに貸し出しを行う前に、
その貸出記録をこのファイルに記録し、
ファイルの内容を確実にディスクにフラッシュします。
これによって、システムがクラッシュした場合でも、
dhcpd は割り当てた貸し出しのことを確実に覚えておけます。
dhcpd は、起動して dhcpd.conf ファイルを読んだあと、
dhcpd.leases ファイルを読んで、現在の貸し出し情報をメモリに書き込みます。
.PP
.\"O New leases are appended to the end of the dhcpd.leases
.\"O file.   In order to prevent the file from becoming arbitrarily large,
.\"O from time to time dhcpd creates a new dhcpd.leases file from its
.\"O in-core lease database.  Once this file has been written to disk, the
.\"O old file is renamed
.\"O .IR dhcpd.leases~ ,
.\"O and the new file is renamed dhcpd.leases.   If the system crashes in
.\"O the middle of this process, whichever dhcpd.leases file remains will
.\"O contain all the lease information, so there is no need for a special
.\"O crash recovery process.
新たな貸出記録は dhcpd.leases ファイルの末尾に追加されます。
dhcpd は、貸し出しデータベースが際限なく大きくなるのを防ぐため、
時々内部に持っている貸し出しデータベースから新しい
dhcpd.leases ファイルを生成します。
このファイルがディスクに書き込まれると、古いファイルは
.I dhcpd.leases~
と名前が変更され、新しいファイルが dhcpd.leases になります。
システムがこの処理の途中でクラッシュしても、
いずれかの dhcpd.leases ファイルが残っていて、
そこにはすべての貸し出し情報が残っているはずです。
従って特殊なクラッシュリカバリ処理は必要ありません。
.PP
.\"O BOOTP support is also provided by this server.  Unlike DHCP, the BOOTP
.\"O protocol does not provide a protocol for recovering
.\"O dynamically-assigned addresses once they are no longer needed.   It is
.\"O still possible to dynamically assign addresses to BOOTP clients, but
.\"O some administrative process for reclaiming addresses is required.   By
.\"O default, leases are granted to BOOTP clients in perpetuity, although
.\"O the network administrator may set an earlier cutoff date or a shorter
.\"O lease length for BOOTP leases if that makes sense.
このサーバは BOOTP もサポートしています。
DHCP とは異なり、
BOOTP プロトコルは動的に割り当てられたアドレスが不要になったとき、
それを復帰させるプロトコルが存在しません。
BOOTP クライアントに動的にアドレスを割り当てることは可能ですが、
アドレスを回収して再割り当て可能にするような管理処理が必要になります。
デフォルトでは、BOOTP クライアントへの貸し出しは永続的なものですが、
ネットワーク管理者は (それが意味があれば)
中断をより早くしたり、貸し出し期間を短くできます。
.PP
.\"O BOOTP clients may also be served in the old standard way, which is to
.\"O simply provide a declaration in the dhcpd.conf file for each
.\"O BOOTP client, permanently assigning an address to each client.
BOOTP クライアントに、古い標準的な方法でアドレスを取得させることもできます。
これには dhcpd.conf ファイルに各 BOOTP クライアント用の宣言を書いて、
各クライアントへ永続的にアドレスを割り当てます。
.PP
.\"O Whenever changes are made to the dhcpd.conf file, dhcpd must be
.\"O restarted.   To restart dhcpd, send a SIGTERM (signal 15) to the
.\"O process ID contained in
.\"O .IR RUNDIR/dhcpd.pid ,
.\"O and then re-invoke dhcpd.  Because the DHCP server database is not as
.\"O lightweight as a BOOTP database, dhcpd does not automatically restart
.\"O itself when it sees a change to the dhcpd.conf file.
dhcpd.conf ファイルに変更を行ったときは、
dhcpd は再起動しなければなりません。
これには SIGTERM (シグナル 15) を
.I /var/run/dhcpd.pid
に保存されているプロセス ID に送り、dhcpd を再び起動します。
DHCP サーバのデータベースは BOOTP のデータベースほど軽量ではないので、
dhcpd は dhcpd.conf ファイルが変更されたことを知っても、
自動的に自分自身を再起動することはありません。
.PP
.\"O Note: We get a lot of complaints about this.   We realize that it would
.\"O be nice if one could send a SIGHUP to the server and have it reload
.\"O the database.   This is not technically impossible, but it would
.\"O require a great deal of work, our resources are extremely limited, and
.\"O they can be better spent elsewhere.   So please don't complain about
.\"O this on the mailing list unless you're prepared to fund a project to
.\"O implement this feature, or prepared to do it yourself.
注意: これにはたくさん文句が来ています。
サーバに SIGHUP を送るとデータベースをリロードしてくれれば良いだろうな、
とは我々も認識しています。これは技術的には不可能ではありませんが、
非常に多くの作業を必要とします。
我々のリソースは非常に限られており、
それらは他のところに振り向けられています。
どうかメーリングリストに文句をいうのはご遠慮ください。
この機能を実装するプロジェクトへの資金を提供してくださるとか、
あなた自身が実装してくださるのならもちろん話は別ですが。
.\"O .SH COMMAND LINE
.SH コマンドライン
.PP
.\"O The names of the network interfaces on which dhcpd should listen for
.\"O broadcasts may be specified on the command line.  This should be done
.\"O on systems where dhcpd is unable to identify non-broadcast interfaces,
.\"O but should not be required on other systems.  If no interface names
.\"O are specified on the command line dhcpd will identify all network
.\"O interfaces which are up, elimininating non-broadcast interfaces if
.\"O possible, and listen for DHCP broadcasts on each interface.
dhcpd がブロードキャストを待ち受けるネットワークインターフェースの名前は、
コマンドラインで指定できます。
ブロードキャストでないインターフェースを
dhcpd 自身が特定できないような状況下ではこれを行うべきですが、
そうでなければ指定しなくてもかまいません。
インターフェースの名前がコマンドラインにひとつも指定されなければ、
dhcpd はすべてのネットワークインターフェースが通信状態にあるとみなし、
可能ならブロードキャストでないインターフェースを対象から外し、
各インターフェースで DHCP ブロードキャストを待ち受けます。
.PP
.\"O If dhcpd should listen on a port other than the standard (port 67),
.\"O the
.\"O .B -p
.\"O flag may used.  It should be followed by the udp port number on which
.\"O dhcpd should listen.  This is mostly useful for debugging purposes.
.\"O If the
.\"O .B -p
.\"O flag is specified, the server will transmit responses to clients at a
.\"O port number that is one greater than the one specified - i.e., if you
.\"O specify
.\"O .B -p
.\"O 67, then the server will listen on port 67 and transmit to port 68.
.\"O Datagrams that must go through relay agents are sent to the port
.\"O number specified with the
.\"O .B -p
.\"O flag - if you wish to use alternate port numbers, you must configure
.\"O any relay agents you are using to use the same alternate port numbers.
dhcpd に標準のポート (ポート 67) 以外で待機させたい場合は
.B -p
フラグで指定できます。この後には dhcpd を待機させる
udp のポート番号を書きます。これはデバッグの用途に特に便利です。
.B -p
フラグが指定されると、サーバは指定した番号よりも
1 つ大きなポート番号を用いてクライアントに返事を送ります。
つまり
.BR -p " 67"
を指定した場合は、サーバはポート 67 を聴き、ポート 68 に返事を送ります。
中継エージェントを経由しなければならないデータグラムは
.B -p
フラグで指定したポートに送信されます。
もし別のポートを使いたい場合は、中継エージェントを設定して、
同じく別のポートを使わせるようにしなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O To run dhcpd as a foreground process, rather than allowing it to run
.\"O as a daemon in the background, the
.\"O .B -f
.\"O flag should be specified.  This is useful when running dhcpd under a
.\"O debugger, or when running it out of inittab on System V systems.
dhcpd をバックグラウンドでデーモンとして動作させるのではなく、
フォアグラウンドプロセスとして実行するには
.B -f
フラグを指定します。これは dhcpd をデバッガの下で動作させたり、
System V システムの inittab 以外から動作させる場合に便利です。
.\"nakano out of はこれでいいのか?
.PP
.\"O To have dhcpd log to the standard error descriptor, specify the
.\"O .B -d
.\"O flag.  This can be useful for debugging, and also at sites where a
.\"O complete log of all dhcp activity must be kept but syslogd is not
.\"O reliable or otherwise cannot be used.   Normally, dhcpd will log all
.\"O output using the syslog(3) function with the log facility set to
.\"O LOG_DAEMON.
dhcpd のログを標準エラー出力に出したい場合は、
.B -d
フラグを指定します。これはデバッグの時に便利かもしれません。
また dhcp の動作記録を完全に記録しておきたいが、
syslogd が信頼できなかったり使えないような場合にも便利でしょう。
通常 dhcpd は、すべてのログ出力を
.BR syslog (3)
機能を用いて出力します。facility は LOG_DAEMON に設定されます。
.PP
.\"O Dhcpd can be made to use an alternate configuration file with the
.\"O .B -cf
.\"O flag, or an alternate lease file with the
.\"O .B -lf
.\"O flag.   Because of the importance of using the same lease database at
.\"O all times when running dhcpd in production, these options should be
.\"O used \fBonly\fR for testing lease files or database files in a
.\"O non-production environment.
dhcpd に標準以外の設定ファイルを読み込ませるには
.B -cf
フラグを用います。また別の貸し出しファイルを指定するには
.B -lf
フラグを使います。
実用の現場では、
dhcpd の実行時には、毎度同じ貸し出しデータベースを用いさせることが重要です。
したがってこれらのオプションは、
貸し出しファイルやデータベースファイルを、
実用でない環境でテストするような場合に限るべきです。
.PP
.\"O When starting dhcpd up from a system startup script (e.g., /etc/rc),
.\"O it may not be desirable to print out the entire copyright message on
.\"O startup.   To avoid printing this message, the
.\"O .B -q
.\"O flag may be specified.
dhcpd をシステムのスタートアップスクリプト (/etc/rc など)
から起動するときには、
コピーライトメッセージ全部を出力したくないこともあるかもしれません。
このメッセージを表示させたくない場合は、
.B -q
フラグを指定します。
.\"O .SH CONFIGURATION
.SH 設定
.\"O The syntax of the dhcpd.conf(5) file is discussed seperately.   This
.\"O section should be used as an overview of the configuration process,
.\"O and the dhcpd.conf(5) documentation should be consulted for detailed
.\"O reference information.
.BR dhcpd.conf (5)
ファイルの文法は別に説明されてます。
この節は設定作業を概観するだけに使い、
詳細なリファレンス情報は
.BR dhcpd.conf (5)
のマニュアルページにあたってください。
.PP
.\"O .SH Subnets
.SH サブネット
.\"O dhcpd needs to know the subnet numbers and netmasks of all subnets for
.\"O which it will be providing service.   In addition, in order to
.\"O dynamically allocate addresses, it must be assigned one or more ranges
.\"O of addresses on each subnet which it can in turn assign to client
.\"O hosts as they boot.   Thus, a very simple configuration providing DHCP
.\"O support might look like this:
dhcpd は、サービスを提供するすべてのサブネットに対して、
サブネット番号とネットマスクを知らなければなりません。
さらに dhcpd が動的にアドレスを割り当てるには、
各サブネットごとに 1 つ以上のアドレス領域を
あてがわれておく必要があります。
クライアントホストが起動するごとに、
dhcpd はこの領域からアドレスを順番に割り当てます。
よって、DHCP サポートを提供する非常に簡単な設定は次のようになります。
.nf
.sp 1
	subnet 239.252.197.0 netmask 255.255.255.0 {
	  range 239.252.197.10 239.252.197.250;
        }
.fi
.PP
.\"O Multiple address ranges may be specified like this:
次のように複数のアドレス領域を指定することもできます。
.nf
.sp 1
	subnet 239.252.197.0 netmask 255.255.255.0 {
	  range 239.252.197.10 239.252.197.107;
	  range 239.252.197.113 239.252.197.250;
	}
.fi
.PP
.\"O If a subnet will only be provided with BOOTP service and no dynamic
.\"O address assignment, the range clause can be left out entirely, but the
.\"O subnet statement must appear.
BOOTP サービスだけを提供し、動的なアドレス割り当ては提供しない場合は、
アドレス範囲の項目は省略し、subnet 文だけを書いておけば OK です。
.PP
.\"O .SH Lease Lengths
.SH 貸し出し期間
.\"O DHCP leases can be assigned almost any length from zero seconds to
.\"O infinity.   What lease length makes sense for any given subnet, or for
.\"O any given installation, will vary depending on the kinds of hosts
.\"O being served.
DHCP 貸し出し期間は、0 秒から無限までの、ほとんどあらゆる長さにできます。
あるサブネットに対して、あるいは導入されたシステムに対して、
どのような長さが良いかは、サービスを受けるホストの種類によって異なります。
.PP
.\"O For example, in an office environment where systems are added from
.\"O time to time and removed from time to time, but move relatively
.\"O infrequently, it might make sense to allow lease times of a month of
.\"O more.   In a final test environment on a manufacturing floor, it may
.\"O make more sense to assign a maximum lease length of 30 minutes -
.\"O enough time to go through a simple test procedure on a network
.\"O appliance before packaging it up for delivery.
例えば、システムが時々追加/削除されるが、
移動することはあまりないようなオフィス環境では、
貸し出し期間は 1 か月より長くしておくのが良いでしょう。
組み立てフロアの最終テスト環境では、
最大貸し出し期間は 30 分程度
(すなわち出荷前の簡単なネットワーク動作確認テストに充分なくらい)
にしておくのがいいでしょう。
.PP
.\"O It is possible to specify two lease lengths: the default length that
.\"O will be assigned if a client doesn't ask for any particular lease
.\"O length, and a maximum lease length.   These are specified as clauses
.\"O to the subnet command:
貸し出し期間を 2 種類指定することもできます。
クライアントが特に貸し出し期間に関する要望を送ってこなかった場合の
デフォルトの期間と、最大貸し出し期間とです。
これらは subnet コマンドの内部項目として指定します。
.nf
.sp 1
	subnet 239.252.197.0 netmask 255.255.255.0 {
	  range 239.252.197.10 239.252.197.107;
	  default-lease-time 600;
	  max-lease-time 7200;
	}
.fi
.PP
.\"O This particular subnet declaration specifies a default lease time of
.\"O 600 seconds (ten minutes), and a maximum lease time of 7200 seconds
.\"O (two hours).   Other common values would be 86400 (one day), 604800
.\"O (one week) and 2592000 (30 days).
この subnet 宣言では、デフォルトの貸し出し期間を 600 秒 (10 分)、
最大貸し出し期間を 7200 秒 (2 時間) にしてあります。
他に良く使われる値としては、86400 (1 日)、604800 (1 週間)、
2592000 (30 日) などがあります。
.PP
.\"O Each subnet need not have the same lease\(emin the case of an office
.\"O environment and a manufacturing environment served by the same DHCP
.\"O server, it might make sense to have widely disparate values for
.\"O default and maximum lease times on each subnet.
各サブネットに別々の貸し出し期間を指定してもかまいません。
オフィス環境と組み立て環境とを
同じ DHCP サーバにサービスさせるような場合には、
各サブネットのデフォルト/最大貸し出し期間それぞれに、
大きく異なる値を指定するのが良いこともあるでしょう。
.\"O .SH BOOTP Support
.SH BOOTP サポート
.\"O Each BOOTP client must be explicitly declared in the dhcpd.conf
.\"O file.   A very basic client declaration will specify the client
.\"O network interface's hardware address and the IP address to assign to
.\"O that client.   If the client needs to be able to load a boot file from
.\"O the server, that file's name must be specified.   A simple bootp
.\"O client declaration might look like this:
BOOTP クライアントは、それぞれ dhcpd.conf ファイルに
明示的に宣言しておく必要があります。
もっとも基本的な宣言では、
クライアントのネットワークインターフェースのハードウェアアドレスと、
そのクライアントに割り当てる IP アドレスとを指定します。
クライアントがサーバから起動ファイルをロードできるようにしたい場合は、
そのファイル名も指定しなければなりません。
簡単な bootp クライアント宣言は次のようになります。
.nf
.sp 1
	host haagen {
	  hardware ethernet 08:00:2b:4c:59:23;
	  fixed-address 239.252.197.9;
	  filename "/tftpboot/haagen.boot";
	}
.fi
.\"O .SH Options
.SH オプション
.\"O DHCP (and also BOOTP with Vendor Extensions) provides a mechanism
.\"O whereby the server can provide the client with information about how
.\"O to configure its network interface (e.g., subnet mask), and also how
.\"O the client can access various network services (e.g., DNS, IP routers,
.\"O and so on).
DHCP では (およびベンダによる拡張のなされた BOOTP でも)、
クライアントでのネットワークインターフェースの設定情報
(例えばサブネットマスクなど) とか、
クライアントからネットワークサービス (DNS や IP ルータなど)
にアクセスするための情報などを、サーバから提供する機構を備えています。
.PP
.\"O These options can be specified on a per-subnet basis, and, for BOOTP
.\"O clients, also on a per-client basis.   In the event that a BOOTP
.\"O client declaration specifies options that are also specified in its
.\"O subnet declaration, the options specified in the client declaration
.\"O take precedence.   An reasonably complete DHCP configuration might
.\"O look something like this:
これらのオプションはサブネット単位で指定できます。
BOOTP クライアントに対しては、クライアント単位でも指定できます。
BOOTP クライアント宣言でオプション指定がされていて、
かつそのサブネット宣言でもオプション指定がされている場合は、
クライアント宣言でのオプションが優先されます。
ほぼ完全な DHCP 設定は、次のようになるでしょう。
.nf
.sp 1
	subnet 239.252.197.0 netmask 255.255.255.0 {
	  range 239.252.197.10 239.252.197.250;
	  default-lease-time 600 max-lease-time 7200;
	  option subnet-mask 255.255.255.0;
	  option broadcast-address 239.252.197.255;
	  option routers 239.252.197.1;
	  option domain-name-servers 239.252.197.2, 239.252.197.3;
	  option domain-name "isc.org";
	}
.fi
.PP
.\"O A bootp host on that subnet that needs to be in a different domain and
.\"O use a different name server might be declared as follows:
BOOTP ホストがこのサブネットにあって、
これを別のドメインにし、別のネームサーバを利用させたい場合には、
次のように宣言することになるでしょう。
.nf
.sp 1
	host haagen {
	  hardware ethernet 08:00:2b:4c:59:23;
	  fixed-address 239.252.197.9;
	  filename "/tftpboot/haagen.boot";
	  option domain-name-servers 192.5.5.1;
	  option domain-name "vix.com";
	}
.fi
.PP
.\"O A more complete description of the dhcpd.conf file syntax is provided
.\"O in dhcpd.conf(5).
dhcpd.conf ファイルの文法に関するより完全な記述は、
.BR dhcpd.conf (5)
で提供されています。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .B ETCDIR/dhcpd.conf, DBDIR/dhcpd.leases, RUNDIR/dhcpd.pid,
.\"O .B DBDIR/dhcpd.leases~.
.B /etc/dhcpd.conf, /var/state/dhcp/dhcpd.leases, /var/run/dhcpd.pid,
.B /var/state/dhcp/dhcpd.leases~.
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
dhclient(8), dhcrelay(8), dhcpd.conf(5), dhcpd.leases(5)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B dhcpd(8)
.\"O was written by Ted Lemon <mellon@vix.com>
.\"O under a contract with Vixie Labs.   Funding
.\"O for this project was provided by the Internet Software Corporation.
.\"O Information about the Internet Software Consortium can be found at
.\"O .B http://www.isc.org/isc.
.BR dhcpd (8)
は Ted Lemon <mellon@vix.com>
が Vixie Labs との契約のもとに書きました。
このプロジェクトの資金は、
Internet Software Corporation によって提供されました。
Internet Software Consortium の情報は
.B http://www.isc.org/isc
にあります。
.SH 訳注
ファイルの置き場所はインストールによって変わることがあります。
ここではデフォルトの
.IR /etc ", " /var/run/ ", " /var/state/dhcp
などを仮定してあります。
