.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Andries Brouwer
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the README file that comes with the man 1.0
.\" distribution.  
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 6 Dec 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH hman 1 "19 January 1998"
.LO 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O hman \- browse the on-line manual pages
hman \- オンラインマニュアルページをブラウズする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B hman
[ -P \fIbrowser\fP ] [ -H \fIhost\fP ] [ \fIsection\fP ] \fIname\fP
.br
.B hman
[ -P \fIbrowser\fP ] [ -H \fIhost\fP ] [ \fIsection\fP ] [ index ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The 
.\"O .B hman
.\"O script is an interface to man2html(1) that allows you to enter man page
.\"O requests at the command line and view the output in your favourite
.\"O browser.
.\"O The behaviour reminds of that of
.\"O .BR man (1)
.\"O so that many people will be able to alias
.\"O .B hman
.\"O to
.\"O .BR man .
.\"O If the browser used is netscape, and an incarnation of netscape
.\"O is running already,
.\"O .B hman
.\"O will pass the request to the existing browser.
.B hman
スクリプトは
.BR man2html (1)
に対するインターフェースで、これを用いると
man ページをコマンドラインから要求し、
好みのブラウザで出力を見ることができるようになる。
振る舞いは
.BR man (1)
と似ているので、
.B hman
を
.B man
の別名にすることも可能だろう。
ブラウザに netscape を用い、既に netscape のプロセスが
起動していた場合には、
.B hman
は要求を既に存在しているブラウザに渡す。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-\^P " browser"
.\"O Specify which browser (like lynx, xmosaic, arena, chimera,
.\"O netscape, amaya, ...) to use. 
.\"O This option overrides the
.\"O .B MANHTMLPAGER
.\"O environment variable.
.\"O The default is the non-httpd version of
.\"O .BR lynx .
どのブラウザを用いるかを指定する (lynx, xmosaic, arena, chimera,
netscape, amaya, ... など)。
このオプションは環境変数
.B MANHTMLPAGER
より優先される。
デフォルトは
.B lynx
の non-httpd バージョンである。
.TP
.B \-\^H " host"
.\"O Specify from what host to get the man pages.
.\"O This option overrides the
.\"O .B MANHTMLHOST
.\"O environment variable.
.\"O The default is
.\"O .BR localhost .
どのホストから man ページを取得するかを設定する。
このオプションは環境変数
.B MANHTMLHOST
より優先される。
デフォルトは
.BR localhost 。

.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.TP
MANHTMLPAGER
.\"O The default browser to use is selected using this environment variable.
この環境変数を使うとデフォルトで用いるブラウザを選択できる。
.TP
MANHTMLHOST
.\"O The default host to use is selected using this environment variable.
この環境変数を使うとデフォルトで用いるホストを選択できる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR man (1),
.BR man2html (1),
.BR arena (1),
.BR lynx (1),
.BR netscape (1),
.BR xmosaic (1),
.BR glimpse (1)

http://www.mcom.com/newsref/std/x-remote.html
