.\"
.\" Generated automatically from man.1.in by the
.\" configure script.
.\"
.\" Man page for man (and the former manpath)
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, John W. Eaton.
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the README file that comes with the man 1.0
.\" distribution.  
.\"
.\" John W. Eaton
.\" jwe@che.utexas.edu
.\" Department of Chemical Engineering
.\" The University of Texas at Austin
.\" Austin, Texas  78712
.\"
.\" Many changes - aeb
.\" More changes - flc
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Tanoshima Hidetohsi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Dec 31, 1996   Tanoshima Hidetoshi <tano@sainet.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Modified Thu Jan 29 01:52:36 JST 1998
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Updated Mon 6 Dec 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" Updated Tue Nov 14 22:52:03 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Dec 18 10:09:17 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\" Updated Tue Apr 12 08:43:51 JST 2011
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@kc5.so-net.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH man 1 "September 19, 2005"
.LO 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O man \- format and display the on-line manual pages
.SH 名前
man \- オンラインマニュアルページを整形し表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B man 
.RB [ \-acdfFhkKtwW ]
.RB [ --path ] 
.RB [ \-m 
.IR system ] 
.RB [ \-p 
.IR string ] 
.RB [ \-C 
.IR config_file ] 
.RB [ \-M 
.IR pathlist ]
.RB [ \-P
.IR pager ] 
.RB [ \-B
.IR browser ] 
.RB [ \-H
.IR htmlpager ] 
.RB [ \-S 
.IR section_list ] 
.RI [ section ] 
.I "name ..."

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O .B man
.\"O formats and displays the on-line manual pages.  If you specify
.\"O .IR section ,
.\"O .B man
.\"O only looks in that section of the manual.
.\"O .I name
.\"O is normally the name of the manual page, which is typically the name
.\"O of a command, function, or file.
.\"O However, if
.\"O .I name
.\"O contains a slash
.\"O .RB ( / ) 
.\"O then 
.\"O .B man 
.\"O interprets it as a file specification, so that you can do
.\"O .B "man ./foo.5"
.\"O or even
.\"O .B "man /cd/foo/bar.1.gz\fR.\fP"
.SH 説明
.B man
はオンラインマニュアルページ (man ページ) を整形し表示する。
.I section
を指定すると、
.B man
はそのセクションのみからマニュアルを探す。
通常、
.I name
は man ページの名前で、
典型的なものとしてはコマンド名・関数名・ファイル名などがある。
ただし、
.I name
にスラッシュ
.RB ( / )
が含まれていると、
.B man
はファイルの指定であると解釈する。
したがって
.B "man ./foo.5"
と指定したり、
.B "man /cd/foo/bar.1.gz\fR\fP"
と指定することも可能である。
.PP
.\"O See below for a description of where 
.\"O .B man
.\"O looks for the manual page files.
.B man
が man ページファイルを検索するディレクトリについての説明は、
以下を参照すること。
 
.\"O .SH MANUAL SECTIONS
.SH マニュアルセクション
.\"O The standard sections of the manual include:
マニュアルの標準的なセクションは以下のとおり：
.TP
.B 1
.\"O User Commands
ユーザーコマンド
.TP
.B 2
.\"O System Calls
システムコール
.TP
.B 3
.\"O C Library Functions
C ライブラリ関数
.TP
.B 4
.\"O Devices and Special Files
スペシャルファイル
.TP
.B 5
.\"O File Formats and Conventions
ファイルフォーマット
.TP
.B 6
.\"O Games et. Al.
ゲームプログラム
.TP
.B 7
.\"O Miscellanea
概要、慣習やその他
.TP
.B 8
.\"O System Administration tools and Deamons
管理コマンドと特権コマンド
.TP
.\"O Distributions customize the manual section to their specifics, which often include additional sections.  
ディストリビューションによりマニュアルセクションは変更され、追加のセクションが設けられることがある。


.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-\^C " config_file"
.\"O Specify the configuration file to use; the default is
.\"O .BR /usr/share/misc/man.conf .
.\"O (See
.\"O .BR man.conf (5).)
使用する設定ファイルを指定する。デフォルトは
.B /usr/share/misc/man.conf
である
.RB ( man.conf (5)
を参照すること)。
.TP
.B \-\^M " path"
.\"O Specify the list of directories to search for man pages.
.\"O Separate the directories with colons.  An empty list is the same as
.\"O not specifying 
.\"O .B \-M
.\"O at all.  See
.\"O .BR "SEARCH PATH FOR MANUAL PAGES" .
man ページを探すディレクトリのリストを指定する。
ディレクトリをコロンで区切って指定する。
リストが空の場合は、
.B \-M
オプションを指定しないのと同じである。
.RB 「 "MAN ページの検索パス" 」
を参照すること。
.TP
.B \-\^P " pager"
.\"O Specify which pager to use. 
.\"O This option overrides the
.\"O .B MANPAGER
.\"O environment variable, which in turn overrides the
.\"O .B PAGER
.\"O variable.  By default,
.\"O .B man
.\"O uses
.\"O .BR "/usr/bin/less -is" .
使用するページャーを指定する。
このオプションは環境変数
.B MANPAGER
より優先される。さらにこの環境変数は
環境変数
.B PAGER
よりも優先される。デフォルトでは
.B man
は
.B "/usr/bin/less -is"
を用いる。
.TP
.B \-\^B
.\"O Specify which browser to use on HTML files. 
.\"O This option overrides the
.\"O .B BROWSER
.\"O environment variable. By default,
.\"O .B man
.\"O uses
.\"O .BR /usr/bin/less -is ,
HTML ファイルで使用するブラウザを指定する。
このオプションは環境変数
.B BROWSER
より優先される。デフォルトでは
.B man
は 
.B "/usr/bin/less -is"
を用いる。
.TP
.B \-\^H
.\"O Specify a command that renders HTML files as text. 
.\"O This option overrides the
.\"O .B HTMLPAGER
.\"O environment variable. By default,
.\"O .B man
.\"O uses
.\"O .BR /bin/cat ,
HTML ファイルをテキストに変換するコマンドを指定する。
このオプションは環境変数
.B HTMLPAGER
より優先される。デフォルトでは
.B man
は 
.B "/bin/cat"
を用いる。
.TP
.B \-\^S " section_list"
.\"O List is a colon separated list of manual sections to search.
.\"O This option overrides the
.\"O .B MANSECT
.\"O environment variable.
.I section_list
はマニュアルを探すセクションを指定するコロン区切りのリストである。
このオプションは環境変数
.B MANSECT
より優先される。
.TP
.B \-\^a
.\"O By default,
.\"O .B man
.\"O will exit after displaying the first manual page it
.\"O finds.  Using this option forces
.\"O .B man
.\"O to display all the manual pages that match
.\"O .B name, 
.\"O not just the first.
デフォルトでは、
.B man
はみつかった最初の man ページを表示したあと終了する。このオプションを使うと、
.B man
は最初にみつかったものだけでなく
.B name
にマッチしたすべてのページを表示する。
.TP
.B \-\^c
.\"O Reformat the source man page, even when an up-to-date cat page exists.
.\"O This can be meaningful if the cat page was formatted for a screen
.\"O with a different number of columns, or if the preformatted page
.\"O is corrupted.
最新の cat 形式のページがあっても man ページのソースを
整形しなおす。このオプションは cat ページが現在使用している端末と違った幅で
整形されているときや壊れている場合などに有用である。
.TP
.B \-\^d
.\"O Don't actually display the man pages, but do print gobs of debugging
.\"O information.
man ページを表示せず、大量のデバッグ情報を出力する。
.TP
.B \-\^D
.\"O Both display and print debugging info.
デバッグ情報と man ページの両方を表示する。
.TP
.B \-\^f
.\"O Equivalent to
.\"O .BR whatis .
.B whatis
コマンドと同じ。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-\^F " or " \-\-preformat
.\"O Format only - do not display.
.BR \-\^F " または " \-\-preformat
整形のみ行い、表示はしない。
.TP
.B \-\^h
.\"O Print a help message and exit.
ヘルプメッセージを表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-\^k
.\"O Equivalent to
.\"O .BR apropos .
.B apropos
コマンドと同じ。
.TP
.B \-\^K
.\"O Search for the specified string in *all* man pages. Warning: this is
.\"O probably very slow! It helps to specify a section.
.\"O (Just to give a rough idea, on my machine this takes about a minute
.\"O per 500 man pages.)
「全ての」man ページから指定した文字列を探す。警告: たいていの場合これは
非常に遅いので セクションを指定した方が良い。
(だいたいの目安として、私のマシンでは
500 ページを検索するのに 1 分かかる。)
.TP
.B \-\^m " system"
.\"O Specify an alternate set of man pages to search based on the system
.\"O name given.
(現在のシステムから、別のシステムのマニュアルにアクセスできる環境で)
別のシステムの man ページ群を検索するよう、そのシステム名を指定する。

.TP
.B \-\^p " string"
.\"O Specify the sequence of preprocessors to run before
.\"O .B nroff
.\"O or
.\"O .BR troff .
.\"O Not all installations will have a full set of preprocessors.
.\"O Some of the preprocessors and the letters used to designate them are: 
.\"O eqn (e), grap (g), pic (p), tbl (t), vgrind (v), refer (r).
.\"O This option overrides the
.\"O .B MANROFFSEQ
.\"O environment variable.
.B nroff
や
.B troff
の前に実行するプリプロセッサの順番を指定する。
インストールの状態によってはフルセットの
プリプロセッサが用意されてないかもしれない。いくつ
かのプリプロセッサとそれを指し示す文字は次のとおり：
eqn (e), grap (g), pic (p), tbl (t), vgrind (v), refer (r)。
(訳注: 順番の指定方法は、例えば
.B \-\^p "egpt"
である。)
このオプションは環境変数
.B MANROFFSEQ
より優先される。
.TP
.B \-\^t
.\"O Use
.\"O .B /usr/bin/groff -Tps -mandoc
.\"O to format the manual page, passing the output to 
.\"O .B stdout.
.\"O The default output format of
.\"O .B /usr/bin/groff -Tps -mandoc 
.\"O is Postscript, refer to the manual page of
.\"O .B /usr/bin/groff -Tps -mandoc
.\"O for ways to pick an alternate format.
.\"O .PP
.\"O Depending on the selected format and the availability of printing
.\"O devices, the output
.\"O may need to be passed through some filter or another before being
.\"O printed.
man ページの整形に
.B /usr/bin/groff \-Tps \-mandoc
を使い、
.B stdout
に出力する。
.B /usr/bin/groff \-Tps \-mandoc
のデフォルトの出力フォーマットは PostScript である。
別の出力フォーマットを選ぶならば、
.\"O .B /usr/bin/groff \-Tps \-mandoc
.BR groff (1)
のマニュアルページにある利用可能なデバイスを参照すること。

選ばれた出力フォーマットと印刷装置の能力に応じて、
出力は印刷する前になんらかのフィルターを通す必要があるかもしれない。
.TP
.\"O .B \-\^w \fRor\fP \-\-path
.\"O Don't actually display the man pages, but do print the location(s) of
.\"O the files that would be formatted or displayed. If no argument is given:
.\"O display (on stdout) the list of directories that is searched by
.\"O .B man
.\"O for man pages. If
.\"O .B manpath
.\"O is a link to man, then "manpath" is equivalent to "man --path".
.B \-\^w \fRまたは\fP \-\-path
man ページを表示せず、
整形ないし表示されるファイルの位置を表示する。
引数を与えないと
.B man
が man ページを検索するディレクトリのリストを標準出力に表示する。
.B manpath
コマンドが
.B man
にリンクされているときは "manpath" は "man --path" と
同じになる。
.TP
.B \-\^W
.\"O Like \-\^w, but print file names one per line, without additional information.
.\"O This is useful in shell commands like
.\"O .ft CW
.\"O .B "man -aW man | xargs ls -l"
.\"O .ft
\-\^w に似ているが、ファイル名を追加情報なしに 1 行に 1 つづつ表示する。
これはシェルから
.ft CW
.B "man -aW man | xargs ls -l"
.ft
などと使うと便利である。

.\"O .SH "CAT PAGES"
.\"O Man will try to save the formatted man pages, in order to save
.\"O formatting time the next time these pages are needed.
.\"O Traditionally, formatted versions of pages in DIR/manX are
.\"O saved in DIR/catX, but other mappings from man dir to cat dir
.\"O can be specified in
.\"O .BR /usr/share/misc/man.conf .
.\"O No cat pages are saved when the required cat directory does not exist.
.\"O No cat pages are saved when they are formatted for a line length
.\"O different from 80.
.\"O No cat pages are saved when man.conf contains the line NOCACHE.
.SH "CAT ページ"
.B man
コマンドはすでに整形された man ページを、
次にそのページが必要になったときの整形時間の節約のために保存しようとする。
伝統的に、DIR/manX の整形済みマニュアルは DIR/catX に
セーブされるが、
man ディレクトリと cat ディレクトリの別のマッピング (対応付け) を
.B /usr/share/misc/man.conf
で指定することもできる。
指定された cat ディレクトリが存在しない場合、
cat ページはセーブされない。
整形された cat ページの 1 行の文字数が 80 文字でない場合、
cat ページはセーブされない。
man.conf に NOCACHE と書かれている場合、
cat ページはセーブされない。
.PP
.\"O It is possible to make
.\"O .B man
.\"O suid to a user man. Then, if a cat directory
.\"O has owner man and mode 0755 (only writable by man), and the cat files
.\"O have owner man and mode 0644 or 0444 (only writable by man, or not
.\"O writable at all), no ordinary user can change the cat pages or put
.\"O other files in the cat directory. If
.\"O .B man
.\"O is not made suid, then a cat directory should have mode 0777
.\"O if all users should be able to leave cat pages there.
.B man
コマンドをユーザー man に suid することもできる。
その場合、 cat ディレクトリを所有者 man、モードは 0755
(ユーザー man だけが書き込み可) とし、
cat ファイルを所有者 man、モードは 0644 または 0444
(ユーザー man だけが書き込み可、またはユーザーすべてが書き込み不可)
としておけば、一般ユーザーは
.B man
コマンドを使わずに cat ページを変更したり、
他の関係ないファイルを cat ディレクトリに置いたりすることができなくなる。
.B man
コマンドが suid されていない場合に、
すべてのユーザーが cat ページを cat ディレクトリに置けるようにするには、
cat ディレクトリのモードを 0777 にする必要がある。
.PP
.\"O The option
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O forces reformatting a page, even if a recent cat page exists.
cat ページがあったとしても、オプション
.B \-c
をつけると強制的に man ページを再整形する。

.\"O .SH "HTML PAGES"
.\"O Man will find HTML pages if they live in directories named as
.\"O 'html' followed by a section extension.  The last file extension is
.\"O expected to be ".html", thus a valid name for an HTML version of the
.\"O .BR ls (1)
.\"O man page would be
.\"O .IR /usr/share/man/htmlman1/ls.1.html .
.SH "HTML ページ"
.B man
コマンドは 'html' の後ろに 'セクション番号' が続く名前のディレクトリ中に
HTML 版の man ページがあれば、それをみつけ出す。
ファイル名の末尾に付く拡張子は、".html" でなければならない。
したがって、
.BR ls (1)
の man ページの HTML 版があれば、その有効な名前は、
.\":tati:↓のパスは間違い
.\":tati:.I /usr/share/man/htmlman1/ls.1.html
.I /usr/share/man/html1/ls.1.html
といったものになるだろう。

.\"O .SH "SEARCH PATH FOR MANUAL PAGES"
.SH "MAN ページの検索パス"
.\"O .B man
.\"O uses a sophisticated method of finding manual page files, based on the
.\"O invocation options and environment variables, the 
.\"O .B /usr/share/misc/man.conf 
.\"O configuration file, and some built in conventions and heuristics.
.B man
はマニュアルページをみつけるために洗練された方法を用いる。
すなわち、起動オプションや環境変数、設定ファイル
.B /usr/share/misc/man.conf 
、さらにプログラムに組み込まれている伝統的／発見的な検索法を合わせて
使用するのである。
.PP
.\"O First of all, when the 
.\"O .I name
.\"O argument to 
.\"O .B man
.\"O contains a slash 
.\"O .RB ( / ),
.\"O .B man
.\"O assumes it is a file specification itself,
.\"O and there is no searching involved.
まず最初に、
.B man
の引き数
.I name
にスラッシュ
.RB ( / )
がある場合は、
.B man
はファイルの指定であると解釈して、検索を行わない。
.PP
.\"O But in the normal case where 
.\"O .I name
.\"O doesn't contain a slash,
.\"O .B man
.\"O searches a variety of directories for a file that could be a manual page
.\"O for the topic named.
しかし
.I name
にスラッシュが含まれていない通常の場合、
.B man
は指定されたトピックについて、マニュアルページになりそうなファイルを
いろいろなディレクトリで検索する。
.PP
.\"O If you specify the 
.\"O .BI "-M " pathlist
.\"O option,
.\"O .I pathlist 
.\"O is a colon-separated list of the directories that 
.\"O .B man 
.\"O searches.
.BI "-M " pathlist
オプションを指定すると、
.I pathlist
が
.B man
が検索を行う対象となる。
.I pathlist
はコロンで区切ったディレクトリのリストである。
.PP
.\"O If you don't specify
.\"O .B -M
.\"O but set the
.\"O .B MANPATH
.\"O environment variable, the value of that variable is the list of the 
.\"O directories that 
.\"O .B man
.\"O searches.
.B -M
オプションを指定していないが、環境変数
.B MANPATH
は設定してある場合は、この環境変数の値が
.B man
が検索を行うディレクトリのリストである。
.PP
.\"O If you don't specify an explicit path list with 
.\"O .B -M
.\"O or 
.\"O .BR MANPATH ,
.\"O .B man
.\"O develops its own path list based on the contents of the configuration 
.\"O file
.\"O .BR /usr/share/misc/man.conf .
.\"O The
.\"O .B MANPATH
.\"O statements in the configuration file identify particular directories to 
.\"O include in the search path.
.B -M
や
.B MANPATH
でパスのリストを明示的に指定していない場合、
.B man
は設定ファイル
.B /usr/share/misc/man.conf
の内容に基づいてパスのリストを作成する。
設定ファイルの
.B MANPATH
ステートメントにより、特定のディレクトリを検索パスに追加するのだ。
.PP
.\"O Furthermore, the 
.\"O .B MANPATH_MAP 
.\"O statements add to the search path depending on your command search path
.\"O (i.e. your
.\"O .B PATH 
.\"O environment variable).  For each directory that may be in the command
.\"O search path, a
.\"O .B MANPATH_MAP
.\"O statement specifies a directory that should be added to the search
.\"O path for manual page files.
.\"O .B man
.\"O looks at the 
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O variable and adds the corresponding directories to the manual page
.\"O file search path.  Thus, with the proper use of
.\"O .BR MANPATH_MAP ,
.\"O when you issue the command
.\"O .BR "man xyz" ,
.\"O you get a manual page for the program that would run if you issued the
.\"O command 
.\"O .BR xyz .
さらに
.B MANPATH_MAP
ステートメントによって、コマンド検索パス
(すなわち、ユーザーの
.B PATH
環境変数) に応じた検索パスが追加される。
コマンド検索パスにある各ディレクトリに対して、
.B MANPATH_MAP
ステートメントが man ページファイルの検索パスに追加すべき
ディレクトリを一つづつ指定する。
.B man
は
.B PATH
変数を調べて、
.B MANPATH_MAP
で指定されている対応するディレクトリを man ページファイルの検索パスに
追加するのである。
したがって、
.B MANPATH_MAP
を適切に使用している場合には、
.B "man xyz"
を実行すると、コマンド
.B xyz
を実行したときに動作するプログラムの man ページが表示されることになる。
.PP
.\"O In addition, for each directory in the command search path (we'll call
.\"O it a "command directory") for which you do
.\"O .I not
.\"O have a 
.\"O .B MANPATH_MAP 
.\"O statement,
.\"O .B man
.\"O automatically looks for a manual page directory "nearby"
.\"O namely as a subdirectory in the command directory itself or
.\"O in the parent directory of the command directory.
なお、コマンド検索パスのディレクトリ
(「コマンドディレクトリ」と呼ぶことにする) に対して
.B MANPATH_MAP
ステートメントが\fI存在しない\fR場合、
.B man
はそうしたコマンドディレクトリの一つ一つに対して、
マニュアルページがあるディレクトリを自動的に「近隣の場所」で
検索する。
「近隣の場所」とは、コマンドディレクトリ自身のサブディレクトリや、
コマンドディレクトリの親ディレクトリのサブディレクトリ
といった場所である。
.PP
.\"O You can disable the automatic "nearby" searches by including a
.\"O .B NOAUTOPATH
.\"O statement in 
.\"O .BR /usr/share/misc/man.conf .
「近隣の場所」の自動検索を無効にするには、
.B NOAUTOPATH
ステートメントを
.B /usr/share/misc/man.conf
に指定すればよい。
.PP
.\"O In each directory in the search path as described above, 
.\"O .B man
.\"O searches for a file named
.\"O .IB topic . section\fR,
.\"O with an optional suffix on the section number and 
.\"O possibly a compression suffix.
.\"O If it doesn't find such a file, it then looks in any subdirectories
.\"O named
.\"O .BI man N
.\"O or 
.\"O .BI cat N
.\"O where
.\"O .I N
.\"O is the manual section number.
.\"O If the file is in a 
.\"O .BI cat N
.\"O subdirectory, 
.\"O .B man
.\"O assumes it is a formatted manual page file (cat page).  Otherwise,
.\"O .B man
.\"O assumes it is unformatted.  In either case, if the filename has a
.\"O known compression suffix (like
.\"O .BR .gz ),
.\"O .B man
.\"O assumes it is gzipped.
上記の検索パスにある各ディレクトリにおいて、
.B man
は
.IB topic . section
という名前のファイルを探す。
このセクション番号には (1x の x のような)
接尾辞があってもよいし、圧縮ファイルであることを示す拡張子が
さらに続いてもよい。
このようなファイルがみつからない場合、
.B man
は
.BI man N
または
.BI cat N
という名前の全てのサブディレクトリを検索する。
ここで
.I N
は man ページのセクション番号である。
ファイルが
.BI cat N
サブディレクトリにある場合、
.B man
はそれを整形済みの man ページファイル (cat ページ) であるとみなす。
それ以外の場合は、未整形の man ページであるとみなすわけだ。
どちらの場合でも、ファイル名に
.RB ( .gz
のような) 既知の圧縮ファイル拡張子が付いていれば、
.B man
は gzip されたファイルであると考える。
.PP
.\"O If you want to see where (or if)
.\"O .B man
.\"O would find the manual page for a particular topic, use the 
.\"O .BR "--path " ( -w )
.\"O option.
.B man
が特定のトピックの man ページを
どこでみつけるか (またはみつけることができるのか) を知りたいときは、
.BR "--path " ( -w )
オプションを使うこと。

.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.TP
.B MANPATH
.\"O If
.\"O .B MANPATH
.\"O is set, 
.\"O .B man
.\"O uses it as the path to search for manual page files.  It overrides the
.\"O configuration file and the automatic search path, but is overridden by
.\"O the
.\"O .B -M
.\"O invocation option.  See 
.\"O .BR "SEARCH PATH FOR MANUAL PAGES" .
.B MANPATH
を設定すると、
man ページファイルを探すときのパスとして使われる。
この環境変数は設定ファイルや自動的に指定される検索パスの設定を上書きするが、
起動オプション
.B -M
で上書きされる。
.RB 「 "MAN ページの検索パス" 」
を参照すること。
.TP
.B MANPL
.\"O If
.\"O .B MANPL
.\"O is set, its value is used as the display page length.
.\"O Otherwise, the entire man page will occupy one (long) page.
.B MANPL
を設定すると、表示する 1 ページ当たりの行数として使われる。
この環境変数を設定しない場合、man ページ全体で (長い) 1 ページになる。
.TP
.B MANROFFSEQ
.\"O If
.\"O .B MANROFFSEQ
.\"O is set, its value is used to determine the set of preprocessors run
.\"O before running
.\"O .B nroff
.\"O or
.\"O .BR troff .
.\"O By default, pages are passed through
.\"O the tbl preprocessor before
.\"O .BR nroff .
.B MANROFFSEQ
を設定すると、
.B nroff
や
.B troff
の前に実行するプリプロセッサが、この値をもとにして決定される。
(訳注: 設定方法は、例えば 
\&'MANROFFSEQ=egpt'
である。)
デフォルトでは、man ページは
.B nroff
の前に tbl 用のプリプロセッサに通される。
.TP
.B MANSECT
.\"O If
.\"O .B MANSECT
.\"O is set, its value is used to determine which manual sections to search.
.B MANSECT
を設定すると、どのマニュアルセクションを探すかが
この値をもとにして決定される。
.TP
.B MANWIDTH
.\"O If
.\"O .B MANWIDTH
.\"O is set, its value is used as the width manpages should be displayed.
.\"O Otherwise the pages may be displayed over the whole width of your
.\"O screen.
.B MANWIDTH
を設定すると、その値を表示する man ページの幅として使用する。
指定しなかった場合には画面の幅一杯まで使用する。
.TP
.B MANPAGER
.\"O If
.\"O .B MANPAGER
.\"O is set, its value is used as the name of the program to use to display
.\"O the man page.  If not, then
.\"O .B PAGER
.\"O is used. If that has no value either,
.\"O .B /usr/bin/less -is
.\"O is used.
.B MANPAGER
を設定すると、その値を man ページを表示するプログラムとして使用する。
指定しなかった場合には、
環境変数
.B PAGER
が使用される。どちらも設定されていない場合には
.B /usr/bin/less -is
が使われる。
.TP
.B BROWSER
.\"O The name of a browser to use for displaying HTML manual pages.  If
.\"O it is not set, /usr/bin/less -is is used.
HTML 版の man ページの表示に用いるブラウザ名。
設定されていない場合には
.B /usr/bin/less -is
が使われる。
.TP
.B HTMLPAGER
.\"O The command to use for rendering HTML manual pages as text.  If
.\"O it is not set, /bin/cat is used.
HTML ファイルをテキストに変換するコマンド。
設定されていない場合には
.B /bin/cat
が使われる。
.TP
.B LANG
.\"O If
.\"O .B LANG
.\"O is set, its value defines the name of the subdirectory where man
.\"O first looks for man pages. Thus, the command `LANG=dk man 1 foo'
.\"O will cause man to look for the foo man page in .../dk/man1/foo.1,
.\"O and if it cannot find such a file, then in .../man1/foo.1,
.\"O where ... is a directory on the search path.
.B LANG
を設定すると、
.B man
コマンドはまずその名前のサブディレクトリから man ページを探す。
したがってコマンドラインから 'LANG=dk man 1 foo'
と打ち込むと、
.B man
コマンドはまず .../dk/man1/foo.1 を探し、
みつからなければ .../man1/foo.1
を探す。この ... は検索パスのディレクトリである。
.TP
.B "NLSPATH, LC_MESSAGES, LANG"
.\"O The environment variables
.\"O .B NLSPATH
.\"O and
.\"O .B LC_MESSAGES
.\"O (or
.\"O .B LANG
.\"O when the latter does not exist)
.\"O play a role in locating the message catalog.
.\"O (But the English messages are compiled in, and for English no catalog
.\"O is required.)
.\"O Note that programs like
.\"O .BR col(1)
.\"O called by man also use e.g. LC_CTYPE.
環境変数
.B NLSPATH
と
.B LC_MESSAGES
(後者が指定されていなければ
.BR LANG )
はメッセージカタログの位置を指定する
(英語のメッセージはコンパイル時に組み込まれているので、
英語のカタログは必要ない)。
man に呼び出される
.BR col (1)
のようなプログラムは、LC_CTYPE
といった変数も使うことに注意すること。
.TP
.B PATH
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O helps determine the search path for manual page files.  See
.\"O .BR "SEARCH PATH FOR MANUAL PAGES" .
.B PATH
は man ページのデフォルト検索パスの決定に利用される。
.RB 「 "MAN ページの検索パス" 」
を参照すること。
.TP
.B SYSTEM
.\"O .B SYSTEM
.\"O is used to get the default alternate system name (for use
.\"O with the
.\"O .B \-m
.\"O option). 
.B SYSTEM
は
(現在のシステムから、別のシステムのマニュアルにアクセス
できる環境で) デフォルトの別のシステム名を得るのに使われる。
(この環境変数は
.B \-m
オプションと一緒に使うためにある。
.B \-m
オプションの引数に空文字列 "" を指定すると、デフォルトの
別のシステム名を指定したことになる。
)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O option only works if a troff-like program is installed.
.\"O .br
.\"O If you see blinking \e255 or <AD> instead of hyphens,
.\"O put `LESSCHARSET=latin1' in your environment.
.SH バグ
.B \-t
オプションは troff やそれと同等なプログラムがインストールされている
場合のみ有効である。
.br
もしハイフンのかわりに、点滅する \e255 や <AD> が表示された場合には
環境変数に 'LESSCHARSET=latin1' を設定すると良い。
.PP
訳注: 日本語を使用する場合にはこの方法では対応できない。
groff のオプションで
\-Tnippon 、 \-Tutf8 または \-Tascii を使用すること。
.\"O .SH TIPS
.\"O If you add the line
.\"O 
.\"O  (global-set-key [(f1)] (lambda () (interactive) (manual-entry (current-word))))
.\"O 
.\"O to your
.\"O .IR .emacs 
.\"O file, then hitting F1 will give you the man page for the library call
.\"O at the current cursor position.
.\"O .LP
.\"O To get a plain text version of a man page, without backspaces
.\"O and underscores, try
.\"O 
.\"O   # man foo | col -b > foo.mantxt
.SH ウラ技
  (global-set-key [(f1)] (lambda () (interactive) (manual-entry (current-word))))

という行を自分の
.IR .emacs
ファイルに追加しておけば、F1 を叩くと、
現在のカーソル位置にあるライブラリコールの
man ページが表示される。
.LP
バックスペースとアンダースコアがない
プレーンテキスト版の man ページを得るには、コマンド

  # man foo | col -b > foo.mantxt

を実行すること。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O John W. Eaton was the original author of
.\"O .BR "man" .
.\"O Zeyd M. Ben-Halim released man 1.2, and Andries Brouwer followed up with 
.\"O versions 1.3 thru 1.5p.
.\"O Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> is the current maintainer.
.SH 作者
.B "man"
パッケージの原作者は John W. Eaton である。
Zeyd M. Ben-Halim が man 1.2 をリリースし、引き続いて Andries Brouwer が
versions 1.3 から 1.5p までをリリースした。
現在のメンテナーは Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> である。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
apropos(1), whatis(1), less(1), groff(1), man.conf(5).

.SH 訳注
本 man ページの各ファイルのパスは、man-1.6g で
.IP
configure +fhs
.PP
することによって得られたものです。
実際のパスはディストリビューションなどによって
異なっている可能性があります。
