'\" t
.\" Man page for man2html
.\" aeb, 980101
.\"
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Mar 5 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH man2html 1 "1 January 1998"
.LO 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O man2html \- format a manual page in html
.SH 名前
man2html \- マニュアルページを整形して html にする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
man2html [options] [file]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B man2html
.\"O converts a manual page as found in
.\"O .I file
.\"O (or stdin, in case no file argument, or the argument "-", is given)
.\"O from man-style nroff into html, and prints the result on stdout.
.\"O It does support tbl but does not know about eqn.
.\"O The exit status is 0. If something goes wrong,
.\"O an error page is printed on stdout.
.B man2html
は
.I file
として指定されたファイル (ファイル引き数がなかったり、 "-" が指定され
た場合は標準入力) を変換して、 man スタイルの nroff から html を生成し、
結果を標準出力に表示します。 tbl はサポートしていますが eqn はしていま
せん。返り値は常に 0 です。なにか問題が起こった場合は、エラーページが
標準出力に表示されます。
 
.\"O This can be used as a stand-alone utility, but is mainly intended
.\"O as an auxiliary, to enable users to browse their man pages using
.\"O a html browser like
.\"O .BR lynx (1),
.\"O .BR xmosaic (1)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR netscape (1).
これはスタンドアローンのユーティリティとしても使えますが、主な目的は、
ユーザーが man ページを
.BR lynx (1),
.BR xmosaic (1),
.BR netscape (1)
などの html ブラウザを用いて見ることができるようにするための補助をする
ことです。
./" (See
./" .BR man (1)
./" for info on how to browse man pages via
./" .BR man2html .
./" Usually it would suffice to put "MANHTMLPAGER=/usr/bin/lynx"
./" in the environment.)

.\"O The main part of
.\"O .B man2html
.\"O is the troff-to-html engine written by Richard Verhoeven (rcb5@win.tue.nl).
.\"O It adds hyperlinks for the following constructs:
.B man2html
の主要部は Richard Verhoeven (rcb5@win.tue.nl) によって書かれた 
troff-to-html エンジンです。これは以下のような形式のハイパーリンクを付
加します。
.LP
.TS
l l.
foo(3x)	"http://localhost/cgi-bin/man/man2html?3x+foo"
method://string	"method://string"
www.host.name	"http://www.host.name"
ftp.host.name	"ftp://ftp.host.name"
name@host	"mailto:name@host"
<string.h>	"file:/usr/include/string.h"
.TE
.LP
.\"O (The first of these can be tuned by options - see below.)
.\"O No lookup is done - the links generated need not exist.
.\"O Also an index with internal hyperlinks to the various sections
.\"O is generated, so that it is easier to find one's way
.\"O in large man pages like
.\"O .BR bash (1).
(最初のリンクはオプションによって変更できます - 以下の記述を参照のこと)
リンク先の確認は行われず、リンク先が存在していなくてもリンク行が生成
されます。文書内部での、セクションなどへのハイパーリンクも生成されます。
したがって
.BR bash (1)
などの大きなマン・ページで必要な部分を探すのが楽になります。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O When reading from stdin, it is not always clear how to
.\"O do .so expansion. The \-D option allows a script to define
.\"O the working directory.
標準入力から読み込むとき、 .so の展開に関してはっきりしない場合もあり
ます。 \-D オプションを用いれば、スクリプトからワーキングディレクトリ
を指定することができます。
.LP
.TP
.B \-\^D pathname
.\"O Strip the last two parts from the pathname, and do a
.\"O \fIchdir\fP(\fIdir\fP) before starting the conversion.
pathname の最後の二つ分を取り除き、変換を行う前にそこに 
\fIchdir\fP(\fIdir\fP) します。
.LP
.\"O The \-E option allows the easy generation of error messages
.\"O from a cgi script.
\-E オプションを用いると cgi スクリプトから簡単にエラーメッセージを生
成することができます。
.LP
.TP
.B \-\^E string
.\"O Output an error page containing the given error message.
与えられたエラーメッセージを含むエラーページを出力します。
.LP
.\"O The general form of a hyperlink generated for a man page reference is
参照先がマン・ページであるハイパーリンク、一般に以下のような形式で生成
されます。
.IP
<method:cgipath><man2htmlpath><separator><manpage>
.LP
.\"O with a default as shown above. The parts of this hyperlink
.\"O are set using the various options.
デフォルトは上の通りですが、ハイパーリンクの各部は各種オプション
を用いることでいろいろ設定できます。
.TP
.B \-\^h
.\"O Set method:cgipath to http://localhost. This is the default.
method:cgipath を http://localhost にします。デフォルトです。
.TP
.BI \-\^H " host[.domain][:port]"
.\"O Set method:cgipath to
.\"O .RI http:// host.domain:port .
method:cgipath を
.RI htttp:// host.domain:port
に設定します。
.TP
.B \-\^l
.\"O Set method:cgipath to
.\"O .RI lynxcgi: /home/httpd .
method:cgipath を
.RI lynxcgi: /home/httpd
に設定します。
.TP
.BI \-\^L " dir"
.\"O Set method:cgipath to
.\"O .RI lynxcgi: dir .
method:cgipath を
.RI lynxcgi: dir
に設定します。
.TP
.BI \-\^M " man2htmlpath"
.\"O Set the man2htmlpath to use. The default is
.\"O .IR /cgi-bin/man/man2html .
man2htmlpath を設定します。デフォルトは
.I /cgi-bin/man/man2html
です。
.TP
.B \-\^p
.\"O Set separator to '/'.
セパレーターを '/' に設定します。
.TP
.B \-\^q
.\"O Set separator to '?'. This is the default.
セパレーターを '?' に設定します。デフォルトです。
.LP
.\"O On a machine without running
.\"O .BR httpd ,
.\"O one can use
.\"O .B lynx
.\"O to browse the man pages, using the lynxcgi method.
.\"O When some http daemon is running, lynx, or any other browser,
.\"O can be used to browse the man pages, using the http method.
.\"O The option \-l (for `lynxcgi') selects the former behaviour.
.\"O With it, the default cgipath is \fI/home/httpd\fP.
.B httpd
が稼動していないマシンでは、
.B lynx
で lynxcgi を用いればマン・ページを閲覧することができます。
http デーモンが稼動している場合は、 lynx でも他のブラウザでも閲覧でき
ます。オプション \-l (`lynxcgi' の意味) は前者を選択します。これを指定
すると、デフォルトの cgipath は \fI/home/httpd/\fP になります。

.\"O In general, a cgi script can be called by
一般には cgi スクリプトは
.IP
<path_to_script>/<more_path>?<query>
.LP
のようなかたちで呼ぶことができます。
.\"O and the environment variables PATH_INFO and QUERY_STRING
.\"O will be set to <more_path> and <query>, respectively.
.\"O Since lynxcgi does not handle the PATH_INFO part, we generate
.\"O hyperlinks with `?' as a separator by default.
.\"O The option \-p (for `path') selects '/' as a separator, while
.\"O the option \-q (for `query') selects '?' as a separator.
環境変数 PATH_INFO と QUERY_STRING がそれぞれ <more_path> と <query> 
に設定されます。 lynxcgi は PATH_INFO 部分を扱うことができないので、デ
フォルトでは `?' をセパレーターとするハイパーリンクを生成することにし
ました。オプション `\-p' (`path' の意味) は '/' をセパレーターにします。
一方 `\-q' (`query' の意味) は '?' をセパレーターにします。

.\"O The option \-H \fIhost\fP will specify the host to use
.\"O (instead of \fIlocalhost\fP).  A cgi script could use
オプション \-H \fIhost\fP は (\fIlocalhost\fP の代わりに) 用いるホスト
を指定します。環境変数 SERVER_NAME が設定されていれば、  cgi スクリプ
トから
.IP
man2html -H $SERVER_NAME
.LP
.\"O if the variable SERVER_NAME is set.  This would allow your machine
.\"O to act as a server and export man pages.
のように用いることができます。これによって、お使いのマシンを、マン・ペー
ジを提供するサーバーのように動作させることができます。

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O There are many heuristics.  The output will not always be perfect.
.\"O The lynxcgi method will not work if lynx was compiled without
.\"O selecting support for it.  There may be problems with security.
多くの発見的手法 (heuristic) が用いられています。出力は常に完全である
とは限りません。 lynxcgi は、これをサポートするように選択して lynx を
コンパイルしなければ動作しません。セキュリティ上の問題があるかもしれま
せん。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR lynx (1),
.BR man (1)
