'\"
.\" (C) Copyright 1999 David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 14 23:00:00 1999 by David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO all rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Updated Fri Aug 19 02:54:00 JST 2011
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@kc5.so-net.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH MANLINT 1 "14 July 1999" "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O manlint \- program to report errors in man or mdoc pages
.SH 名前
manlint \- man ページや mdoc ページのエラーを報告するプログラム
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR manlint " [ " options " ] [ " "list of files" " ] "
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O manlint
.\"O is a program that identifies lint (errors) in man or mdoc page formatting,
.\"O similar to a spelling checker for ordinary text.
.\"O Manlint has a list of permitted macros and escape sequences,
.\"O and reports the use of any macro or escape sequence not in the
.\"O permitted list.
.\"O This permitted list includes all the macros defined in
.\"O .BR man (7),
.\"O .BR mdoc (7),
.\"O and the safe subset of troff defined in
.\"O .BR man (7).
.\"O manlint also checks for conformance to various rules.
.B manlint
は、マクロパッケージ man や mdoc 使用したページ整形中の lint (エラー) を
見つけ出すプログラムである。
言わば、通常のテキストに対するスペルチェッカーのようなものだ。
.B manlint
は許可されるマクロとエスケープシーケンスの一覧を持ち、
許可されるリストにないマクロやエスケープシーケンスが
使用されていれば、それを報告する。
許可されるリストには、
.BR man (7)
と
.BR mdoc (7)
で定義される全てのマクロと、
.BR man (7)
で定義される troff の安全なサブセットが含まれる。
.B manlint
は、整形ページが様々なルールに従っているかもチェックする。
.PP
.\"O If a man page passes manlint, it should be widely portable, even
.\"O to tools such as
.\"O .BR man2html (1)
.\"O which don't implement all of troff.
ある man ページが
.B manlint
のチェックを通るようなら、そのページは可搬性が高いと考えられる。
troff の全てを実装しているわけではない
.BR man2html (1)
のようなツールでも使うことができるはずだ。
.PP
.\"O If a list of files is omitted, the standard input is used.
.\"O A file by the name "-" is interpreted as the standard input.
ファイルのリストを省略した場合は、標準入力を使う。
"-" という名前のファイルは標準入力として解釈される。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Currently the program is very incomplete.
.\"O It doesn't have any options, it doesn't actually check escape sequences,
.\"O and it can't handle mdoc format.
.\"O Still, it's clear what it should do, and even in its current form
.\"O it can find lots of problems in existing man files.
現在のところ、このプログラムは非常に不完全である。
オプションはなく、実際にはエスケープシーケンスをチェックしない。
また mdoc フォーマットを処理できない。
しかし、このプログラムが何をすべきかは明らかであり、
現在の状態でも既存の man ファイルにある多くの問題を見付けることができる。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 作者
.\"O David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org) was the original author of
.\"O .BR "manlint" .
.\"O Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> is the current maintainer.
.BR "manlint" 
の原作者は David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org) である。
現在のメンテナーは Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR man (7),
.BR mdoc (7).
