.\"
.\" Generated automatically from whatis.1.in by the
.\" configure script.
.\"
.\" Man page for whatis
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, John W. Eaton.
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the README file that comes with the man 1.0
.\" distribution.  
.\"
.\" John W. Eaton
.\" jwe@che.utexas.edu
.\" Department of Chemical Engineering
.\" The University of Texas at Austin
.\" Austin, Texas  78712
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jan 29 01:52:06 JST 1998
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Mon 6 Dec 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" Updated Fri 4 Mar 2011 by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@kc5.so-net.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH whatis 1 "September 19, 2005"
.LO 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O whatis \- search the whatis database for complete words.
.SH 名前
whatis \- whatis データベースで完全にマッチする単語を検索する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.\"O .BI whatis
.\"O keyword ...
.SH 書式
.BI whatis
keyword ...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O whatis searches a set of database files containing short descriptions
.\"O of system commands for keywords and displays the result on the
.\"O standard output.  Only complete word matches are displayed.
.\"O 
.\"O The whatis database is created using the command /usr/sbin/makewhatis.
.SH 説明
.B whatis
はシステム・コマンドなどの簡単な説明を収めたデータベース・ファイルで
キーワードを検索し、その結果を標準出力に表示する。
表示するのは、コマンドなどの名前がキーワードと完全にマッチする項目だけである。

whatis データベースは /usr/sbin/makewhatis コマンドを使用して作成する。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O John W. Eaton was the original author of
.\"O .BR "man" .
.\"O Zeyd M. Ben-Halim released man 1.2, and Andries Brouwer followed up with versions 1.3 thru 1.5p.
.\"O Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> is the current maintainer.
.SH 作者
.B "man"
パッケージの原作者は John W. Eaton である。
Zeyd M. Ben-Halim が man 1.2 をリリースし、引き続いて Andries Brouwer が
versions 1.3 から 1.5p までをリリースした。
現在のメンテナーは Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
apropos(1), man(1).
