.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU cat man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH CAT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBcat\fR \- concatenate and write files 
.SH 名前
cat \- ファイルを連結して出力する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B cat 
.RB [ \-benstuvABET "] [" \-\-binary "] [" \-\-number "] [" \-\-number\-nonblank ]
.RB [ \-\-show\-all "] [" \-\-show\-ends "] [" \-\-show\-nonprinting ]
.RB [ \-\-show\-tabs "] [" \-\-squeeze\-blank "] [" \fIFILE...\fR ]

.BR cat " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B cat
.\"O writes each 
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O to standard output.  If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used.
.B cat
は指定したファイルそれぞれの内容を標準出力へ書き出す。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-number\-nonblank
.\"O Number all nonblank output lines, starting with 1.
空白でない行に番号を付ける。初めの行を1行目とする。
.TP
.B \-e
.\"O Equivalent to `\fB\-vE\fR'.
`\fB\-vE\fR' と同じ。
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-number
.\"O Number all output lines, starting with 1.
すべての行に番号を付ける。初めの行を 1行目とする。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-squeeze\-blank
.\"O Replace multiple adjacent blank lines with a single blank line.
連続した空白行を、1つの空白行にまとめる。
.TP
.B \-t
.\"O Equivalent to `\fB\-vT\fR'.
`\fB\-vT\fR' と同じ。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Ignored; for Unix compatibility.
何もしない。 Unix との互換性のために存在する。
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-show\-nonprinting
.\"O Display control characters except for <LFD> and <TAB> using `^'
.\"O notation and precede characters that have the high bit set with
.\"O `M-'.		    
<LFD> と <TAB> とを除く制御文字を `^' 表記を使って表示する。
高位ビットがセットされている文字は、前に `M-' を置いて表わす。
.TP
.B \-A, \-\-show\-all
.\"O Equivalent to `\fB\-vET\fR'.
`\fB\-vET\fR' と同じ。
.TP
.B \-B, \-\-binary
.\"O On DOS platforms only,  read and write files in binary mode.  See notes
.\"O below for details on binary and text modes.
DOS プラットフォームのみ。ファイルの読み書きをバイナリモードで行う。
バイナリ/テキストモードについては以下の記述を参照のこと。
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-show\-ends
.\"O Display a
.\"O .RB ` $ '
.\"O after the end of each line.
各行の最後に
.RB ` $ '
を表示する。
.TP
.B \-T, \-\-show\-tabs
.\"O Display <TAB> characters as `^I'.
<TAB> 文字を `^I' と表示する。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH DOS TEXT/BINARY MODE
.SH DOS の テキスト/バイナリ モード
.\"O \fBcat\fR uses text mode by default, and binary mode when standard output is
.\"O redirected to a file or pipe.  This behaviour can be changed by specifying
.\"O \fB\-\-binary\-fR or \fB\-\-show\-nonprinting\fR to use binary mode, or 
.\"O \fB\-\-number\-blank\fR,  \fB\-\-show\-ends\fR and \fB\-\-number\fR to use
.\"O text mode.
.B cat
はデフォルトではテキストモードを用い、
標準出力がファイルまたはパイプにリダイレクトされたときには
バイナリモードを用いる。
この振舞いはオプションによって変更でき、
.BR \-\-binary " や " \-\-show-nonprinting
を指定すればバイナリモードに、
.BR \-\-number\-blank " や " \-\-show-ends " や " \-\-number
を指定すればテキストモードになる。

.\"O Text mode involves character translation (for example <CR> to <CR><LF>), and
.\"O therefore is unsuitable for cat-copying files because it doesn't preserve
.\"O the original contents.
テキストモードでは文字変換が行われる (例えば <CR> を <CR><LF> へ、など)。
したがって cat を使ったファイルコピーには適さない。
オリジナルの内容を保存しないからである。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
