.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Aug 22 12:42 JST 1999
.\"         by Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Oct 25 18:01:14 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.TH CHGRP 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH "名前"
.\"O chgrp \- change group ownership of files
chgrp \- ファイルのグループ所有権を変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH "書式"
.BI "chgrp [" options "] " "group file..."
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B [\-R]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-cfvR] [\-\-dereference] [\-\-reference=\fIfile\fB]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH "説明"
.\"O .B chgrp
.\"O changes the group ownership of each given
.\"O .I file
.\"O to
.\"O .I group,
.\"O which can be either a group name, a numeric group ID, or an existing
.\"O referenced file.
.B chgrp
コマンドは指定されたそれぞれの
.I file
のグループ所有権を
.I group
に変更する。
その指定方法としてグループ名、数値でのグループ ID、もしくは
参照用のファイルを使うことができる。
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B \-R
.\"O Recursively change the group ownership of directories and their contents.
.\"O (And continue even when errors are encountered.)
ディレクトリやそこに含まれるもののグループ所有権を再帰的に変更する。
(エラーが起こっても処理を続ける。)
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-c, \-\-changes"
.\"O Verbosely describe the action for each
.\"O .I file
.\"O whose group actually changes.
実際にグループの変更があった
.I file
それぞれについての動作を詳細に表示する。
.TP
.B "\-\-dereference"
.\"O Do not act on symlinks themselves but rather on what they point to.
シンボリックリンク自身ではなく、それが指している先を変更する。
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-silent, \-\-quiet"
.\"O Do not print error messages about files whose group cannot be changed.
グループを変更できなかったファイルについてのエラーメッセージを出力しない。
.TP
.B "\-h, \-\-no\-dereference"
.\"O Act on symlinks themselves instead of what they point to.  This is the
.\"O default. If
.\"O .B lchown(2)
.\"O isn't available \fBchown\fR will fail.  If any symlinks
.\"O are found during a recursive transversal and \fB\-\-verbose\fR hasn't
.\"O been specified, no error message will be printed.
指している先ではなく、シンボリックリンクそれ自身を変更する。
これがデフォルトである。
.B lchown (2)
システムコールが提供されていない場合、\fBchown\fR は失敗する。
再帰的に辿っているときにシンボリックリンクが見つかり、
かつ \fB\-\-verbose\fR が指定されていない場合、
エラーメッセージは表示されない。
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-verbose"
.\"O Verbosely describe the action (or non-action) taken for every
.\"O .IR file .
全ての
.I file
について変更した (もしくはしなかった) という動作を詳細に表示する。
.TP
.B "\-R, \-\-recursive"
.\"O Recursively change the group ownership of directories and their contents.
ディレクトリやそこに含まれるもののグループ所有権を再帰的に変更する。
.TP
.B \-\-reference=\fIfile
.\"O Change specified files and directories to the same group as \fIfile\fR.
指定されたファイルとディレクトリを \fIfile\fR と同じグループに変更する。
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストを終了する。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH "環境変数"
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH "準拠"
.\"O POSIX 1003.2 only requires the \-R option. Use of other options
.\"O may not be portable.
POSIX 1003.2 では \-R オプションのみを必要としている。
その他のオプションを使用すると互換性がないかもしれない。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH "注意"
.\"O set-uid and set-gid is preserved even on systems where
.\"O .BR chown(2)
.\"O resets these bits.
.BR chown(2)
が set-uid, set-gid のビットをリセットするようなシステムにおいても、
これらは保存される。

.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B chgrp
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
このページでは fileutils-4.1 パッケージでの
.B chgrp
コマンドについて説明している。
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛てにメールで連絡してほしい。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してほしい。
