.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Aug 22 12:42 JST 1999
.\"         by Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\" Updated Sun Jan 27 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Nov  8 13:24:56 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\" 
.\"WORD:	access permissions	アクセス権
.\"WORD:	permissions		アクセス権
.\"WORD:	options			オプション
.\"WORD:	symbolic mode		シンボルモード
.\"WORD:	numeric mode		数値モード
.\"WORD:	octal number		8 進数
.\"WORD:	octal digit		8 進数
.\"
.TH CHMOD 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH "名前"
.\"O chmod \- change access permissions of files
chmod \- ファイルのアクセス権を変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH "書式"
.BI "chmod [" options "] " "mode file..."
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B [\-R]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-cfvR] [\-\-reference=\fIfile\fB]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH "説明"
.\"O .B chmod
.\"O changes the permissions of each given
.\"O .I file
.\"O according to
.\"O .IR mode ,
.\"O which can be either a symbolic representation of changes to make, or
.\"O an octal number representing the bit pattern for the new permissions.
.B chmod
コマンドは指定したそれぞれの
.I file
のアクセス権を
.I mode
により変更する。変更方法をシンボルで表現するか、もしくは変更後の
アクセス権を表すビットパターンを 8 進数で表現したもののいずれかを
使うことができる。
.PP
.\"O The format of a symbolic mode change argument is
.\"O .br
.\"O \&`[ugoa...][[+-=][rwxXstugo...]...][,...]'.
シンボルモードでアクセス権を変更する場合の引数の書式は
.br
\&`[ugoa...][[+-=][rwxXstugo...]...][,...]' である。
.PP
.\"O Such an argument is a list of symbolic mode change commands,
.\"O separated by commas.
シンボルモードで引数にアクセス権の変更を複数指定する場合にはコンマで区切る。
.\"O Each symbolic mode change command starts with zero or more
.\"O of the letters `ugoa'; these control which users' access to
.\"O the file will be changed: the user who owns it (u), other users in the
.\"O file's group (g), other users not in the file's group (o), or all
.\"O users (a).  Thus, `a' is here equivalent to `ugo'.
シンボルモードでアクセス権を変更するそれぞれの表現は 0 個もしくは複数の文字 `ugoa' で始まる;
これらがファイルに対するどのユーザーのアクセス権を変更するかを決める: ファイルの所有者 (u)、
ファイルと同じグループに属しているが所有者ではない (訳注: 以後グループと表記) (g)、
所有者でもなく、そのファイルと同じグループにも属していない (訳注: 以後その他と表記) (o)、
もしくは全ユーザー (a) を表している。つまり `a' は `ugo' と同じである。
.\"O If none of these are given, the effect is as if `a' were
.\"O given, but bits that are set in the umask are not affected.
もしこれらのいずれも指定されない場合、`a' が指定されたのと同じ結果となるが、umask に設定された
ビット位置は変化しない。
.PP
.\"O The operator `+' causes the permissions selected to be added to the
.\"O existing permissions of each file; `-' causes them to be removed;
.\"O and `=' causes them to be the only permissions that the file has.
`+' 演算子は各々のファイルの現状のアクセス権に、選択したアクセス権を加える; `-'
は削除する; そして `=' は指定したアクセス権だけがそのファイルのアクセス権となる。
.PP
.\"O The letters `rwxXstugo' select the new permissions for the affected
.\"O users: read (r), write (w), execute (or access for directories) (x),
.\"O execute only if the file is a directory or already has execute
.\"O permission for some user (X), set user or group ID on execution (s),
.\"O sticky bit (t), the permissions that the user
.\"O who owns the file currently has for it (u), the permissions that other
.\"O users in the file's group have for it (g), and the permissions that
.\"O other users not in the file's group have for it (o).
文字 `rwxXstugo' は影響を与えるユーザーに対する新しいアクセス権を選択する: 読取り (r)、
書き込み (w)、実行 (またはディレクトリに対するアクセス) (x)、ファイルがディレクトリかもしくは
あるユーザーに対してすでに実行アクセス権が設定されている場合のみ実行 (X)、実行時にユーザー
もしくはグループ IDを設定する (s)、sticky bit (t)、そのファイルの所有者での現在のアクセス権
は (u)、そのファイルのグループでの現在のアクセス権は (g)、そのファイルのその他のユーザーでの現在
のアクセス権は (o) で表される。
.\"O (Thus, `chmod g-s file' removes the set-group-ID (sgid) bit,
.\"O \&`chmod ug+s file' sets both the suid and sgid bits, while
.\"O \&`chmod o+s file' does nothing.)
(従って、`chmod g-s file' は set-group-ID (sgid) ビットを削除する。
\&`chmod ug+s file' は suid そして sgid ビットの両方を設定するが、
\&`chmod o+s file' は何もしない。)
.PP
.\"O The `sticky bit' is not described by POSIX.
.\"O The name derives from the original meaning:
.\"O keep program text on swap device.
POSIX では `sticky bit' について記述していない。
その名前は本来の意味から来ている:
プログラムコードをスワップ上に維持する。
.\"O These days, when set for a directory, it means that
.\"O only the owner of the file and the owner of that directory
.\"O may remove the file from that directory.
最近は、ディレクトリに設定されている場合、ファイルの所有者とディレクトリの所有者だけが
そのディレクトリからファイルを削除できることを意味する。
.\"O (This is commonly used on directories like /tmp that have
.\"O general write permission.)
(全ユーザーが書き込みアクセス権を持つ /tmp のようなディレクトリでこれはごく普通に使われている。)
.PP
.\"O .B chmod
.\"O never changes the permissions of symbolic links, since the
.\"O .B chmod
.\"O system call cannot change their permissions.  This is not a problem
.\"O since the permissions of symbolic links are never used. However, for 
.\"O each symbolic link listed on the command line,
.\"O .B chmod
.\"O changes the permissions of the pointed-to file.  In contrast,
.\"O .B chmod
.\"O ignores symbolic links encountered during recursive directory traversals.
.B chmod
コマンドがシンボリックリンクのアクセス権を変更することは決してない。なぜなら、
.B chmod
システムコールはシンボリックリンクのアクセス権を変更することができないからである。
シンボリックリンクのアクセス権は決して使われることがないため、このことは問題ではない。
しかし、
.B chmod
コマンドは引数にシンボリックリンクが指定された場合、各々についてそれが指しているファイルの
アクセス権を変更する。それに対して、
.B chmod
コマンドは再帰的にディレクトリを移動しながら処理している時に見つけたシンボリックリンク
は無視する。
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B "\-R"
.\"O Recursively change permissions of directories and their contents.
ディレクトリやそこに含まれるもののアクセス権を再帰的に変更する。
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-c, \-\-changes"
.\"O Verbosely describe the action for each
.\"O .I file
.\"O whose permissions actually changes.
実際にアクセス権の変更があった
.I file
それぞれについての動作を詳細に表示する。
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-silent, \-\-quiet"
.\"O Do not print error messages about files whose permissions cannot bechanged.
アクセス権を変更できなかったファイルについてのエラーメッセージを出力しない。
.TP
.B "-v, \-\-verbose"
.\"O Verbosely describe the action or non-action taken for every
.\"O .IR file .
全ての
.I file
について変更した、もしくはしなかったという動作を詳細に表示する。
.TP
.B "\-R, \-\-recursive"
.\"O Recursively change permissions of directories and their contents.
ディレクトリやそこに含まれるもののアクセス権を再帰的に変更する。
.TP
.B \-\-reference=\fIfile
.\"O Use the mode of the reference \fIfile\fR instead of an explicit \fImode\fR.
明示的に \fImode\fR を指示する代わりに、参照用に指定した \fIfile\fR のグループを使う。
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストを終了する。
.\"O .SH NUMERIC MODES
.SH "数値モード"
.\"O File permissions are stored internally as 16 bit integers.  As an
.\"O alternative to giving a symbolic mode, you can give an octal (base 8)
.\"O number that corresponds to the internal representation of the new mode.
ファイルのアクセス権は内部的に 16 ビットの整数で保持されている。
シンボルでアクセス権を指定する代わりに、 
これから変更するアクセス権の内部表現に対応した
8 進数 (基数 8) を使って指定することができる。
.\"O This number is always interpreted in octal; you do not have to add a
.\"O leading 0, as you do in C.  Mode 0055 is the same as mode 55.  Numeric mode
.\"O is usually shorter than symbolic, but it sets perms absolutely.
この数値は常に 8 進数として扱われる;
C 言語のように数値の先頭に 0 を付加する必要はない。
mode に 0055 と指定するのと 55 と指定するのは同じである。
数値モードによる指定は、シンボルモードで指定するより大抵の場合短くすむが、
アクセス権を絶対値で指定する。
.\"O Each digit of the mode selects a group of permissions as shown below.
mode の各数字により、以下で示すようなアクセス権のグループを選択する。
.\"O Leftmost ommited numbers are treated as 0.  To combine them just OR or sum
.\"O them.
左側の省略された数値は 0 として扱われる。
アクセス権を組み合わせるには、
各数字の OR をとるか各数字を合計すればよい。
.TP
.\"O Special permissions
特別なアクセス権
.br
.\"O 1000 save text image on swap device
1000 プログラムコードをスワップに維持
.br
.\"O 2000 set group ID on execution (set-gid)
2000 実行時にグループ ID を設定
.br
.\"O 4000 set user ID on execution (set-uid)
4000 実行時にユーザー ID を設定
.TP
.\"O Same UID user (u+)
同じ UID のユーザー (u+)
.br
.\"O 100 execute
100 実行
.br
.\"O 200 write
200 書き込み
.br
.\"O 400 read
400 読み込み
.TP
.\"O Same group (g+)
同じグループ (g+)
.br
.\"O 10 execute
10 実行
.br
.\"O 20 write
20 書き込み
.br
.\"O 40 read
40 読み込み
.TP
.\"O Other users (o+)
その他のユーザー (o+)
.br
.\"O 1 execute
1 実行
.br
.\"O 2 write
2 書き込み
.br
.\"O 4 read
4 読み込み
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH "環境変数"
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH "準拠"
.\"O POSIX 1003.2 only requires the \-R option. Use of other options
.\"O may not be portable. This standard does not describe the 't' permission
.\"O bit. This standard does not specify whether \fBchmod\fP must preserve
.\"O consistency by clearing or refusing to set the suid and sgid
.\"O bits, e.g., when all execute bits are cleared, or whether \fBchmod\fP
.\"O honors the `s' bit at all.
POSIX 1003.2 では \-R オプションのみが必須である。その他のオプションを使用すると
互換性がないかもしれない。この標準では 't' の許可ビットについて説明していない。
この標準では \fBchmod\fP が suid や sgid ビットのクリアもしくは設定の拒絶での
一貫性を維持するべきかどうかについてをとり決めていない。たとえば、すべての実行ビットが
クリアされる場合に \fBchmod\fP が `s' ビットをどうするかまったくとり決めていない。
.\"O .SH "NONSTANDARD MODES"
.SH "非標準モード"
.\"O Above we described the use of the `t' bit on directories.
.\"O Various systems attach special meanings to otherwise
.\"O meaningless combinations of mode bits.
.\"O In particular, Linux, following System V (see
.\"O System V Interface Definition (SVID) Version 3),
.\"O lets the sgid bit for files without group execute permission
.\"O mark the file for mandatory locking. For more details, see
.\"O the file
.\"O .IR /usr/src/linux/Documentation/mandatory.txt .
ここまでのところでディレクトリに対する `t' ビットの使い方を説明した。
いろいろなシステムでは、他の意味のないモードビットの組合せに特別な意味を与えている。
特に、Linux は System V 系 (System V Interface Definition (SVID) Version 3 を
参照) に倣って、グループ実行許可を持たないファイルの sgid ビットに、
そのファイルが強制ロック (mandatory locking) の対象であることを示させている。
詳細については
.I /usr/src/linux/Documentation/mandatory.txt
ファイルを参照。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH "注意"
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B chmod
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions
.\"O to aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページでは fileutils-4.1 パッケージでの
.B chmod
コマンドについて説明している。
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛てにメールで連絡してほしい。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してほしい。
