.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Aug 22 12:42 JST 1999
.\"         by Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 17 09:46:35 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\"WORD: owner		所有者
.\"WORD: options	オプション
.\"WORD: shortest form	簡略形式
.\"
.TH CHOWN 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH "名前"
.\"O chown \- change file owner and group
chown \- ファイルの所有者とグループを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH "書式"
.BI  "chown [" オプション "] " user "[:" group "] " file...
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B [\-R]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-cfhvR] [\-\-dereference]
.B [\-\-from=\fIowner\fB:\fIgroup\fB] [\-\-reference=\fIfile\fB]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH "説明"
.\"O .B chown
.\"O changes the user and/or group ownership of each given
.\"O .I file
.\"O as specified by the first non-option argument
.\"O as follows: if only a user name (or numeric user ID) is given,
.\"O that user is made the owner of each given file, and the files' group is
.\"O not changed.  If the user name is followed by a colon and a group
.\"O name (or numeric group ID), with no spaces between them, the group ownership
.\"O of the files is changed as well.
.B chown
コマンドは指定されたそれぞれの
.I file
のユーザーおよびグループ、もしくはいずれかの所有権を、
オプションではない最初の引き数により以下のように変更する: 
ユーザー名 (もしくは数値の user ID) のみを指定した場合、
それぞれのファイルの所有者は指定したユーザーになり、
グループは変わらない。
ユーザー名に続けてコロンとグループ名 (もしくは数値の group ID) を
間にスペースを入れずに指定した場合、
同じようにそれらファイルのグループ所有権も指定したグループに変わる。
.\"O .SH "GNU DETAILS"
.SH "GNU 詳細"
.\"O The GNU version allows a dot instead of a colon (following BSD).
GNU 版ではコロンの代わりにドットが使える (BSD に従っている)。
.\"O [This was not allowed by POSIX since a dot is a valid character
.\"O in a user name.]
[POSIX ではユーザー名にドットが使えるため、これは許されていなかった。]

.\"O If a colon or dot but no group name follows
.\"O the user name, that user is made the owner of the files and the group of the
.\"O files is changed to that user's login group.  If the colon or dot and group
.\"O are given, but the user name is omitted, only the group of the files is
.\"O changed; in this case,
.\"O .B chown
.\"O performs the same function as
.\"O .BR chgrp .
ユーザー名に続いてコロンもしくはドットがあるのにグループ名が無い場合、
ファイルの所有権はそのユーザーになり、
ファイルのグループはそのユーザーのログイングループに変更される。
コロンもしくはドットとグループは指定されているがユーザー名が無い場合、
ファイルのグループのみが変更される;
この場合、
.B chown
コマンドは
.B chgrp
コマンドと同じ働きをする。
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B "\-R"
.\"O Recursively change ownership of directories and their contents.
ディレクトリやそこに含まれるものの所有権を再帰的に変更する。
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-c, \-\-changes"
.\"O Verbosely describe the action for each
.\"O .I file
.\"O whose ownership actually changes.
実際に所有権の変更があった
.I file
それぞれについての動作を詳細に表示する。
.TP
.B \-\-dereference
.\"O Do not act on symbolic links themselves but rather on what they point to.
シンボリックリンクそれ自身ではなく、指している先を変更する。
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-silent, \-\-quiet"
.\"O Do not print error messages about files whose ownership cannot be changed.
所有権を変更できなかったファイルについてのエラーメッセージを出力しない。
.TP
.B \-\-from=\fIowner\fB:\fIgroup
.\"O Only change files that match \fIowner\fR and \fIgroup\fR.  Either may be
.\"O omitted.
\fIowner\fR と \fIgroup\fR にマッチするファイルのみを変更する。
どちらかを省略することもできる。
.TP
.B "\-h, \-\-no\-dereference"
.\"O Act on symlinks themselves instead of what they point to.  This is the
.\"O default. If
.\"O .B lchown(2)
.\"O isn't available \fBchown\fR will fail.  If any symlinks
.\"O are found during a recursive transversal and \fB\-\-verbose\fR hasn't
.\"O been specified, no error message will be printed.
指している先ではなく、シンボリックリンクそれ自身を変更する。
これがデフォルトである。
.B lchown(2)
が提供されていない場合、\fBchown\fR は失敗する。
再帰的に処理している時にシンボリックリンクを見付けても、
\fB\-\-verbose\fR が指定されていない場合、
エラーメッセージは出力されない。
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-verbose"
.\"O Verbosely describe the action (or non-action) taken for every 
.\"O .IR file .
全ての
.IR file
について変更した (もしくはしなかった) という動作を詳細に表示する。
.TP
.B "\-R, \-\-recursive"
.\"O Recursively change ownership of directories and their contents.
ディレクトリやそこに含まれるものの所有権を再帰的に変更する。
.TP
.B \-\-reference=\fIfile
.\"O Use the user and group of the reference \fIfile\fR instead of an explicit
.\"O \fIuser\fR\-\fIgroup\fR value.
明示的に \fIuser\fR\-\fIgroup\fR 値を指示する代わりに、
参照用に指定した \fIfile\fR のユーザー、グループを使う。

.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストを終了する。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH "環境変数"
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH "準拠"
.\"O POSIX 1003.2 does not allow use of the dot as separator
.\"O between user name and group name.
POSIX 1003.2 ではユーザー名とグループ名の間の区切り文字として
ドットの使用を認めていない。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH "注意"
.\"O set-uid and set-gid is preserved even on systems where
.\"O .BR chown(2)
.\"O resets these bits.
.B chown(2)
で set-uid ビットや set-gid ビットがリセットできるシステムでも、
set-uid や set-gid は保護される。

.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B chown
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページでは fileutils-4.1 パッケージでの
.B chown
コマンドについて説明している。
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛てにメールで連絡してほしい。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してほしい。
