.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU chroot man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Update & Modified Sat Jan 17 18:08:54 JST 2004
.\"        by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH chroot 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O chroot \- run command with a different root directory
.SH 名前
chroot \- ルートディレクトリを変更してコマンドを実行する。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI chroot " directory " [ "command " [ args ]...]
.sp
.B chroot [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B chroot
.\"O runs a command with a specified root directory. On many systems only the
.\"O super-user can do this. 
.B chroot
はルートディレクトリを指定してコマンドを実行する。
多くのシステムでは、スーパーユーザーだけがこれを行える。

.\"O Ordinarily, filenames are looked up starting at the root of the
.\"O directory structure, i.e., `/'.
.\"O .B chroot
.\"O changes the root to the directory 
.\"O .I directory
.\"O (which must exist) and then runs 
.\"O .I command
.\"O with
.\"O optional 
.\"O .IR args.
.\"O If 
.\"O .I command
.\"O is not specified, the default is the value
.\"O of the 
.\"O .B SHELL
.\"O environment variable or `/bin/sh' if not set, invoked with the `\-i' option.
通常、ファイル名はディレクトリ構造のルート (root=根)、つまり `/'
を起点として調べられる。
.B chroot
はこのルートをディレクトリ
.I directory
に変更して
.I command
を実行する
.RI ( directory
は存在するディレクトリでなければならない)。
オプション
.I args
を指定することもできる。
.I command
が指定されないと、デフォルトは
.B SHELL
環境変数の値となる。
この変数が設定されていなければ、`/bin/sh' を `\-i'
オプションを指定して実行する。

.\"O Note that it may be quite possible that processes started from the chroot
.\"O jail may not have access to the system libraries.
chroot jail から起動されたプロセスが
システムライブラリにアクセスできないという状況は、
非常にありがちなので注意すること。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
