.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"
.\"     GNU cmp man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999-2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Sat Sep 25 16:34:52 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Feb 16 12:15:36 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" 
.TH CMP 1 "October 2002" "GNU diff Utilities 2.8.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBcmp\fP \- compare two files byte by byte
.SH 名前
\fBcmp\fP \- 2 つのファイルを 1 バイトずつ比較する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR "cmp " [ \-bls "] [" "\-i " \fIBYTES\fR[:\fIBYTES2\fP]]
.RB [ "\-n " \fIBYTES\fR]
.RB [ \-\-bytes\ \fIBYTES\fR]
.RB [ \-\-ignore\-initial= \fIBYTES\fR[:\fIBYTES2\fP]]
.RB [ \-\-print\-bytes "] [" \-\-quiet "] [" \-\-silent "] [" \-\-verbose ] 
.sp
.BR "cmp " [ \-v "] [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O .B cmp
.\"O compares two files of any type, byte by byte, and writes the results to the
.\"O standard output.  At most one of these three file names may be
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O which tells
.\"O .B cmp
.\"O to read the standard input for that file.
.SH 説明
.B cmp
は 2 つのファイルを比較する。
ファイルはどんな種類のものでもよく、比較は 1 バイトずつ行われる。
結果は標準出力に書き出される。
2 つのファイル名のうちの 1 つが
.RB ` \- '
にされた場合、
.B cmp
はそのファイルの代わりに標準入力を使う。

.\"O By default, \fBcmp\fP is silent if the files are the same; if they differ,
.\"O the byte and line number at which the first difference occurred is reported.
.\"O Bytes and lines are numbered beginning with one.
デフォルトでは、2 つのファイルの内容が同じ場合
\fBcmp\fP は何も出力しない。
2 つのファイルの内容が異なる場合、
最初に差異が生じたバイト位置と行番号を表示する。
バイト位置と行番号は 1 から始まる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-b, \-\-print\-bytes" 
.\"O Print the differing bytes.  Display control characters as a `^' followed by
.\"O a letter and precede the bytes that have the high bit set with `M-' (which
.\"O stands for meta).
違いのあるバイトを表示する。
制御文字は `^' とそれに続く文字で表示し、
ハイビットがセットされている (訳注: 0x80 から 0xFF までの) バイトは
(メタを示す) `M-' を先頭につけて表示する。
.TP
.BI "\-i " BYTES\fR[:\fIBYTES2\fR]] ", \-\-ignore\-initial=" BYTES\fR[:\fIBYTES2\fR]]
.\"O Ignore any differences in the the first \fIBYTES\fP bytes of 
.\"O the input files.
.\"O Treat files with fewer than \fIBYTES\fP bytes as if they are empty.  If
.\"O \fIBYTES2\fR is given, it also skips \fIBYTES2\fR from the second file
.\"O before comparing.
入力ファイルの最初の \fIBYTES\fP バイトまでにある違いを無視する。
\fIBYTES\fP バイトより小さいサイズのファイルは空のファイルとして扱われる。
\fIBYTES2\fR が指定された場合、
比較する前に 2 つ目のファイルの \fIBYTES2\fR バイトもスキップする。
.TP 
.B "\-l, \-\-verbose"
.\"O Print the (decimal) offsets and (octal) values of all differing bytes.
違いのある全てのバイトについて、
オフセット行 (10 進数) とバイト数 (8 進数) を表示する。
.TP
.BI "\-n " BYTES ", \-\-bytes=" BYTES
.\"O Only compare up to \fIBYTES\fR.
\fIBYTES\fR バイト目までだけを比較する。
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent"
.\"O Do not print anything; only return an exit status indicating
.\"O whether the files differ.
何も表示しない。
2 つのファイルが異なるかを示す終了状態のみを返す。	  
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
使用法を標準出力に表示して終了する。
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示して終了する。
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.\"O .B cmp
.\"O exits with one of the following values:
.SH 返り値
.B cmp
は次のいずれかの状態を返して終了する：
.TP
.B 0
.\"O No differences were found.
2 つのファイルに違いはない。
.TP
.B 1
.\"O Some differences were found. If one file is shorter than the the other and
.\"O the \fB\-\-verbose\fP option has been specified, \fBcmp\fP will report that
.\"O EOF has been reached on the shorter file.
2 つのファイルに違いがある。
一方のファイルが他方のファイルより小さく、
\fB\-\-verbose\fP オプションが指定されている場合、
\fBcmp\fP は短い方のファイルの終端 EOF に達したことを表示する。
.TP
.B 2
.\"O Some error has occurred.
エラーが発生した。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR diff "(1), " diff3 (1)
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
このページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> によって更新された。
