.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU comm man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH COMM 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBcomm\fR \- compare two sorted files line by line
.SH 名前
comm \- ソート済みの2つのファイルを行ごとに比較する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR "comm " [ \-123 ] " \fIFILE1 " [ \fIFILE2 ]

.BR comm " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B comm
.\"O writes to standard output lines that are common, and lines that are unique,
.\"O between two input files.  If a
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used as input for that file.
.B comm
は二つの入力ファイルを読み込み、
共通な行および共通でない行をそれぞれ表示する。
一方の
.I FILE
が省略されると、その分は標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O With no options, comm' produces three column output.  Column one
.\"O contains lines unique to \fIFILE1\fR, column two contains lines unique to
.\"O 'fIFILE2\fR, and column three contains lines common to both files.  Columns
.\"O are separated by <TAB>.
オプションが与えられない場合、
.B comm
は 3 列からなる出力を生成する。
第 1 列には
.I FILE1
だけにしか含まれない行を、
第 2 列には
.I FILE2
だけにしか含まれない行を、
そして第 3 列には両方のファイルに共通に含まれている行をそれぞれ出力する。
列は <TAB> 区切りである。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-1
.\"O Suppress output of column one.
第 1 列の出力をしない。
.TP
.B \-2
.\"O Suppress output of column two.
第 2 列の出力をしない。
.TP
.B \-3
.\"O Suppress output of column three.
第 3 列の出力をしない。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O Unlike some other comparison utilities, \fBcomm\fR has an exit status
.\"O that does not depend on the result of the comparison.  Upon normal
.\"O completion \fBcomm\fR produces an exit code of zero.  If there is an error
.\"O it exits with nonzero status.
他の比較ユーティリティと異なり、
.B comm
の返す終了ステータスは比較結果に依存しない。
通常終了をすると、
.B comm
は終了ステータスとして 0 を返し、エラーがあると 0 以外のステータスを返す。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
