.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\" 
.\"                                                                            
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999-2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Sat Oct 16 14:24:32 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Feb 16 13:28:12 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        owner		所有者
.\"WORD:        permission	アクセス権
.\"WORD:	structure	構造体
.\"WORD:	attributes	属性
.\"WORD:	original	コピー元
.\"WORD:	destination	コピー先
.\"WORD:	regular		通常の
.\"WORD:	ordinary	一般の
.\"WORD:	suffix		拡張子
.\"
.TH CP 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O cp \- copy files and directories
cp \- ファイルやディレクトリをコピーする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "cp [" "options" "] " "file path"
.br
.BI "cp [" "options" "] " "file... directory"
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B [\-fipRr]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-abdfilprsuvxHLPR]
.BI "[\-S " SUFFIX ]
.B "[\-V {numbered,existing,simple}]"
.B [\-\-remove\-destination]
.BI [\-\-sparse= WHEN ]
.B "[\-\-strip\-trailing\-slashes]"
.BI [\-\-target\-directory= DIR ]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B cp
.\"O copies files (or, optionally, directories).
.\"O You can either copy one file to a given destination,
.\"O or copy arbitrarily many files to a destination directory.
.\"O .PP
.B cp
はファイル (あるいはそのように指定すればディレクトリ) をコピーする。
1 つのファイルを指定先にコピーしたり、
複数のファイルを指定ディレクトリにコピーしたりできる。
.PP
.\"O If the last argument names an existing directory,
.\"O .B cp
.\"O copies each source
.\"O .I file
.\"O into that directory (retaining the same name).  Otherwise,
.\"O if only two files are given, it copies the first onto the second.  It
.\"O is an error if the last argument is not a directory and more than two
.\"O non-option arguments are given.
.\"O .PP
最後の引き数が既に存在するディレクトリを指している場合、
.B cp
はコピー元の
.I file
をそれぞれ (同じ名前のまま) そのディレクトリにコピーする。
2 つのファイルだけが指定された場合、
1 つ目のファイルを 2 つ目のファイルにコピーする。
最後の引き数がディレクトリでなく、
2 つ以上のオプションでない引き数が与えられた場合はエラーになる。
.PP
.\"O (Thus, `cp \-r /a /b' will copy /a to /b/a and /a/x to /b/a/x in case
.\"O /b exists already, but it will copy /a to /b and /a/x to /b/x if
.\"O there was no /b beforehand.)
.\"O .PP
(したがって `cp \-r /a /b' とすると、 /b が存在する場合は /a を /b/a に、
/a/x を /b/a/x にコピーする。しかしコピー前に /b がない場合は
/a を /b に、/a/x を /b/x にコピーする。) 
.PP
.\"O The modes of the files and directories created will be the same
.\"O as those of the original files, ANDed by 0777, minus the bits in
.\"O the umask (unless the \fB\-p\fR was specified).
.\"O (But during the recursive copy of directories, newly created
.\"O directories will temporarily get their final mode ORed with
.\"O S_IRWXU (0700), so as to allow the process to read, write
.\"O and search the newly created directory.)
.\"O .PP
作られたファイルとディレクトリのモードは、
まずオリジナルファイルのモードと同じものにされ、
0777 との AND をとられ、
ユーザーの umask のビットが引かれる
(\fB\-p\fR オプションが指定された場合を除く)。
(しかし再帰コピーの最中には、新しく作られたディレクトリの最終モードに、
一時的に S_IRWXU (0700) が OR される。
こればプロセスがこれらの新しく作られたディレクトリの
読み出し・書き込み・検索のプロセスを可能にするためである。) 
.PP
.\"O Nothing is done when copying a file to itself (except possibly
.\"O producing an error message).
.\"O When copying to a different existing file, it is opened
.\"O using `open(path, O_WRONLY | O_TRUNC)'.
.\"O When copying to a new file it is created
.\"O using `open(path, O_WRONLY | O_CREAT, mode)'.
.\"O If this fails, the file existed, and the \fB\-f\fR option was given,
.\"O .B cp
.\"O tries to delete (unlink) the existing file, and if this succeeds
.\"O proceeds as for a new file.
ファイルをそれ自身にコピーしようとした場合、
(エラーメッセージを出す以外は) 何もしない。
既存のファイルにコピーする場合、
コピー先のファイルは `open(path, O_WRONLY | O_TRUNC)'
で開かれる。
新規ファイルにコピーする場合、
新規ファイルは `open(path, O_WRONLY | O_CREAT, mode)'
で作成される。
コピー先のファイルが存在し、かつ \fB\-f\fR オプションが与えられている場合に
この形式でのファイルのオープンに失敗すると、
.B cp
は既存のファイルの削除 (もしくはアンリンク) を試みる。
そして、削除に成功した場合は新規ファイルへのコピーとして
命令を続行する。
.PP
.\"O By default \fBcp\fR only follows symlinks when copying recursively (see
.\"O options \fB\-dHL\fR)
再帰的にコピーする場合、
デフォルトでは \fBcp\fR はシンボリックリンクを辿るだけである
(\fB\-dHL\fR オプションを参照)。
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.\"O POSIX recognizes the following options:
POSIX では、以下のオプションを認識する。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Remove existing destination files if required. (See above.)
必要であれば、既存のコピー先のファイルを削除する (上記参照)。
.TP
.B \-H
.\"O Follow any symlinks specified in the command line.
コマンドラインで指定された全てのシンボリックリンクを辿る。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Prompt whether to overwrite existing regular destination files.
.\"O (Write a question on stderr, and read the answer from stdin.
.\"O Only copy upon an affirmative answer.)
コピー先に既に存在するファイルを上書きするかを問い合わせてくる。
(問い合わせは標準エラーに書かれ、返答は標準入力から読まれる。
上書きを肯定する返答があった場合のみコピーされる。) 
.TP
.B \-L
.\"O Follow symlinks, copying or overwriting the files that they point to.
シンボリックリンクを辿り、
それが指しているファイルをコピーまたは上書きする。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Preserve the original files' owner, group, permissions and time of access.
.\"O (See \fB\-\-preserve\fR below.)
オリジナルファイルの所有者・グループ・アクセス権・アクセス時刻を保存する
(以下の \fB\-\-preserve\fR を参照)。
.TP
.B \-R
.\"O Copy directories recursively, and do the right thing when
.\"O objects other than ordinary files or directories are encountered.
.\"O (Thus, the copy of a FIFO or special file is a FIFO or special file.)
ディレクトリを再帰的にコピーし、
一般のファイルでもなくディレクトリでもないものに対しては
それに相応したコピーをする。
(たとえば FIFO とスペシャルファイルのコピーは、
それぞれ FIFO とスペシャルファイルにされる。) 
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Copy directories recursively, and do something unspecified
.\"O with objects other than ordinary files or directories.
.\"O (Thus, it is allowed, in fact encouraged, to have the \-r option
.\"O a synonym for \-R. However, silly behaviour, like that of the
.\"O present GNU version of
.\"O .BR cp
.\"O (see below) is not forbidden.)
ディレクトリを再帰的にコピーするが、
一般のファイルでもなくディレクトリでもないものに
対してどうするかは規定されていない。
(したがって \-r オプションを \-R オプションの
単なる別名にすることも可能である (実は推奨されている)。
しかし、現在の GNU 版の
.BR cp
のような単純な動作 (下記参照) も禁止されていない。) 
.\"O .SH "GNU DETAILS"
.SH "GNU 詳細"
.PP
.\"O Generally, files are written just as they are read.  For exceptions,
.\"O see the
.\"O .B "\-\-sparse"
.\"O option below.
通常、ファイルは読まれた通りに書き出される。
.B "\-\-sparse"
オプションの場合は例外であるので下記を参照すること。
.PP
.\"O By default, `cp' does not copy directories (see 
.\"O .B "\-r"
.\"O below).
デフォルトでは、`cp' はディレクトリのコピーを行わない
(以下の
.B "\-r"
オプションを見よ)。
.PP
.\"O .B cp
.\"O generally refuses to copy a file onto itself, with the following
.\"O exception: if
.\"O .B "\-\-force \-\-backup"
.\"O is specified with
.\"O .I source
.\"O and 
.\"O .I dest
.\"O identical, and referring to a regular file,
.\"O .B cp
.\"O will make a backup file, either regular or numbered, as specified in 
.\"O the usual ways.  This is useful when you simply want to make a backup 
.\"O of an existing file before changing it.
.B cp
はファイルのそれ自身へのコピーを通常は拒否するが、
次のような例外がある：
.B "\-\-force \-\-backup"
が指定されていて、
.I "コピー元"
と
.I "コピー先"
が同一で、通常のファイルを参照している場合には、
.B cp
はバックアップファイルを作る。
バックアップファイル名には通常または番号付きの拡張子が、
通常の場合と同じように付く。
これは、既に存在するファイルを変更前に
単純にバックアップしたい場合に有用である。
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-archive"
.\"O Preserve as much as possible of the structure and attributes of the
.\"O original files in the copy (but do not preserve directory structure).
.\"O Equivalent to 
.\"O .BR "\-dpR" .
コピー先で、できる限り元のファイルの構成と属性を保持する
(ディレクトリ構造体は保存しない)。
.BR "\-dpR"
と同じ。
.TP
.B "\-d, \-\-no\-dereference"
.\"O Copy symlinks as symlinks rather than copying the
.\"O files that they point to, and preserve hard links between source
.\"O files in the copies.
シンボリックリンクをコピーする場合、シンボリックリンクが指している
ファイルをコピーするのではなく、シンボリックリンクとしてコピーする。
また、コピー元でのハードリンクはコピー先でもハードリンクとして保持される。
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-force"
.\"O Attempt to open the destination file for writing and unlink it if it fails,
.\"O instead of bailing out as per default.  See
.\"O .BR "\-\-remove\-destination" .
.\"O sato:
.\"O sato: if it fails 〜の訳があっているか自信なし。
.\"O sato:
コピー先のファイルを書き込みまたはアンリンクするため、
ファイルをオープンしようとする。
失敗した場合、途中で中止することなくデフォルトの動作を行う。
.B "\-\-remove\-destination"
を参照。
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-interactive"
.\"O Prompt whether to overwrite existing regular destination files.
コピー先に上書きされる通常のファイルが存在する場合、
上書きの可否を問い合わせてくる。
.TP
.B "\-l, \-\-link"
.\"O Make hard links instead of copies of non-directories.
コピーする代わりにハードリンクを作る (ただし、ディレクトリ以外)。
.TP
.B "\-L, \-\-dereference"
.\"O Follow symlinks, copying or overwriting the files that they point to.
シンボリックリンクを辿り、
それが指しているファイルをコピーまたは上書きする。
.TP
.B "\-p, \-\-preserve"
.\"O Preserve the original files' owner, group, permissions (including the setuid
.\"O and setgid bits), time of last modification and time of last access.
オリジナルファイルの所有者・グループ・
アクセス権 (setuid, setgid ビットを含む)・
最終修正時刻・最終アクセス時刻を保存する。
.\"O In case duplication of owner or group fails, the setuid and setgid
.\"O bits are cleared.
所有者やグループの複製に失敗した場合には、
setuid ビットと setgid ビットはクリアされる。
.\"O (Note that afterwards source and copy may well have different
.\"O times of last access, since the copy operation is an access
.\"O to the source file.)
(この場合コピー元とコピー先の最終アクセス時刻が異なってしまうことに注意。
コピー操作はコピー元ファイルへのアクセスであるから。)
.TP
.B "\-P, \-\-parents"
.\"O Form the name of each destination file by appending to the target
.\"O directory a slash and the specified name of the source file.  The
.\"O last argument given to
.\"O .B cp
.\"O must be the name of an existing directory.  For example, the command:
.\"O .sp
.\"O .nf
.\"O cp \-\-parents a/b/c existing_dir
.\"O .fi
.\"O .sp
.\"O copies the file `a/b/c' to `existing_dir/a/b/c', creating any
.\"O missing intermediate directories.
コピー先のファイル名の作り方を
「コピー先ディレクトリにスラッシュ (/) とコピー元ファイルの名前を加える」
とする。
.B cp
の最後の引き数は既に存在するディレクトリでなければならない。
たとえば、
.sp
.nf
cp \-\-parents a/b/c existing_dir
.fi
.sp
というコマンドは `a/b/c'というファイルを
`existing_dir/a/b/c' に (途中のディレクトリがない場合は
それも作って) コピーする。
.TP
.B "\-r"
.\"O Copy directories recursively, copying any non-directories and
.\"O non-symlinks (that is, FIFOs and special files) as if they
.\"O were regular files.  This means trying to read the data in each
.\"O source file and writing it to the destination.  It's usually a
.\"O mistake to apply `\fBcp \-r\fR' to special files, FIFOS, and the ones
.\"O typically found in the `/dev' directory.  In most cases, \fBcp\fR will
.\"O will hang indefinitely trying to read from FIFOs and special files
.\"O like `/dev/console', will fill up your destination disk if
.\"O you use it to copy `/dev/zero', will open unknown devices and have unknown
.\"O effects on the hardware, etc.  Use \fB\-\-recursive\fR or \fB\-R\fR
.\"O instead if you want to copy special files, preserving their special nature
.\"O rather than reading from them to copy their contents.
ディレクトリを再帰的にコピーする。(FIFO やスペシャルファイルといった)
ディレクトリでもなくシンボリックリンクでもないものを
通常のファイルとしてコピーする。
この場合 cp はコピー元ファイルからデータが読み込み、
コピー先に書き出そうとする。よくある間違いは、
`\fBcp \-r\fR' をスペシャルファイル、
FIFO、`/dev' ディレクトリ以下にあるものに対して使うことである。
多くの場合、\fBcp\fR は FIFO や `/dev/console' といった
スペシャルファイルから読み込もうとして永久にハングしたり、
`/dev/zero' をコピーしようとしてコピー先ディスクを溢れさせたり、
不明なディバイスを開いてハードウェアによくわからない効果を
及ぼしてしまったりする。
スペシャルファイルの内容をコピーするのでなく、
スペシャルファイルをその特性を保持したままコピーしたい場合は、
\fB\-\-recursive\fR または \fB\-R\fR オプションを使うこと。
.TP
.B \-\-remove\-destination
.\"O Unlink each file instead of attempting to open it for writing.  See
.\"O .BR "\-\-force" .
ファイルを書き込みオープンするのではなく、アンリンクする。
.B "\-\-force"
を参照。
.TP
.B "\-R, \-\-recursive"
.\"O Copy directories recursively, preserving non-directories (see
.\"O .B "\-r"
.\"O just above).
ディレクトリでないものを保存しつつ、
ディレクトリを再帰的にコピーする
(すぐ上の
.B "\-r"
オプションを見よ)。
.TP
.BI "\-\-sparse=" "WHEN"
.\"O A `sparse file' contains `holes'--a sequence of zero bytes that
.\"O does not occupy any physical disk blocks; the `read' system call
.\"O reads these as zeroes.  This can both save considerable disk space
.\"O and increase speed, since many binary files contain lots of
.\"O consecutive zero bytes.  By default, `cp' detects holes in input
.\"O source files via a crude heuristic and makes the corresponding
.\"O output file sparse as well.
「スパースなファイル」とは「ホール( 穴 )」
(物理ディスクブロックを占有しないゼロバイトの連続) を含むものである。
read システムコールはそれらのファイルをゼロとして読み込む。
多くのバイナリファイルにはゼロバイトの並びがたくさん含まれているので、
このオプションにより、かなりのディスク容量を節約し、
スピードを上げることができる。
デフォルトでは `cp' は大雑把な発見的手法で
入力されたコピー元ファイルからホールを検知し、
対応する出力ファイルもスパースにする。
.RS
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I WHEN
.\"O value can be one of the following:
.I WHEN
の値は下のいずれかである：
.TP
.B auto
.\"O The default behavior: the output file is sparse if the input
.\"O file is sparse.
デフォルトの動作：入力ファイルがスパースのとき、
出力ファイルもスパースにする。
.TP
.B always
.\"O Always make the output file sparse.  This is useful when the
.\"O input file resides on a filesystem that does not support
.\"O sparse files, but the output file is on a filesystem that does.
常に出力ファイルをスパースにする。このオプションは入力ファイルが
スパースなファイルをサポートしないファイルシステム上にあるが、
出力ファイルはスパースなファイルをサポートするファイルシステム上に
置かれる場合に有用である。
.TP
.B never
.\"O Never make the output file sparse.  If you find an application for
.\"O this option, let us know.
出力ファイルをスパースにしない。
このオプションの有意義な利用法を見付けたら筆者に教えてほしい。
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-strip\-trailing\-slashes
.\"O Remove trailing slashes from all specified args.  This is useful in
.\"O scenarios like `mkdir a; ln -s a la; mv la/ b', in which mv would actually
.\"O move the `a' directory instead of `la' as mandated by POSIX.
指定された全ての引き数について、
後ろに付いているスラッシュを取り除く。
これは `mkdir a; ln -s a la; mv la/ b' のような場合に役立つ。
この場合 POSIX の命令では、
mv はシンボリックリンク `la' ではなく 
ディレクトリ `a' を実際に移動してしまう。
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-symbolic\-link"
.\"O Make symlinks instead of copies of non-directories.  All
.\"O source file names must be absolute (starting with `/') unless the
.\"O destination files are in the current directory.  This option merely
.\"O results in an error message on systems that do not support
.\"O symlinks.
ディレクトリ以外のファイルに対して、コピーするかわりに
シンボリックリンクを作る。シンボリックリンクファイルを
カレントディレクトリに作る場合を除き、
コピー元ファイル名は ('/' で始まる) 絶対パスでなければならない。
シンボリックリンクをサポートしていないシステムでは、
このオプションは単にエラーメッセージを出力するだけである。
.TP
.BI "\-\-target\-directory=" DIR
.\"O Specify the the target directory with an option instead of as the last arg
.\"O in the command line.  This is useful with \fBxargs(1)\fR.
コピー先ディレクトリを、コマンドラインの最後の引き数ではなく、
オプションで指定する。
\fBxargs(1)\fR と一緒に用いると便利。
.TP
.B "\-u, \-\-update"
.\"O Do not copy a nondirectory that has an existing destination with
.\"O the same or newer modification time.
ディレクトリ以外のファイルのコピーで、
コピー先ファイルが既に存在し、
修正時刻がコピー元と同じかより新しい場合、
コピーを行わない。
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-verbose"
.\"O Print the name of each file before copying it, or for each backup related
.\"O renaming.
コピーする前にそれぞれのファイル名を出力する。
また名前を変更する際のバックアップファイル名も表示する。
.TP
.B "\-x, \-\-one\-file\-system"
.\"O Skip subdirectories that are on different filesystems from the one
.\"O that the copy started on.  Mount points are copied, since they are on the
.\"O same filesystem.
コピーを始めたディレクトリと
異なるファイルシステム上にあるサブディレクトリをコピーをしない。
マウントポイントは同じファイルシステム上にあるのでコピーされる。
.\"O .SH "GNU BACKUP OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU バックアップオプション"
.\"O The GNU versions of programs like
.\"O .BR cp ,
.\"O .BR mv ,
.\"O .BR ln ,
.\"O .B install
.\"O and
.\"O .B patch 
.\"O will make a backup of files about to be overwritten, changed or destroyed
.\"O if that is desired. That backup files are desired is indicated by
.\"O the \-b option. How they should be named is specified by the \-\-backup option.
.\"O In case the name of the backup file is given by the name of the file
.\"O extended by a suffix, this suffix is specified by the \-S option.
GNU 版のプログラム
.BR cp ,
.BR mv ,
.BR ln ,
.BR install ,
.B patch
は、上書き、修正、削除といった場合に、指示すればファイルの
バックアップを作成する。
バックアップファイルを必要とする場合は \-b オプションで指定する。
どのような名前にするかは \-\-backup オプションで指定する。
バックアップファイルの名前を、ファイル名に拡張子を追加する形で
与えるようにしたい場合、
この拡張子を \-S オプションで指示する。
.TP
.BI "\-b, \-\-backup[=" METHOD ]
.\"O Make backups of files that are about to be overwritten or removed.  Note
.\"O that \fB\-b\fR does not take args.
上書きもしくは削除の必要がある場合には、
ファイルのバックアップを作成する。
\fB\-b\fR は引き数を取らない点に注意すること。
.TP
.BI "\-S " SUFFIX ", \-\-suffix=" SUFFIX
.\"O Append
.\"O .I SUFFIX
.\"O to each backup file made.
.\"O If this option is not specified, the value of the
.\"O .B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O environment variable is used.  And if
.\"O .B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O is not set, the default is `~'.
.I SUFFIX
をバックアップファイルそれぞれに付け加える。
このオプションが指定されていない場合、環境変数
.B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
に設定されている値が使われる。
.B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
が設定されていない場合の標準値は `~' である。
.TP
.BI "\-V " METHOD ", \-\-version\-control=" METHOD
.RS
.\"O Specify how backup files are named. The
.\"O .I METHOD
.\"O argument can be `numbered' (or `t'), `existing' (or `nil'), or `never' (or
.\"O `simple').
.\"O If this option is not specified, the value of the
.\"O .B VERSION_CONTROL
.\"O environment variable is used.  And if
.\"O .B VERSION_CONTROL
.\"O is not set, the default backup type is `existing'.
バックアップファイルの命名方法を指定する。
引き数
.I METHOD
には、`numbered' (または `t')、`existing' (または `nil')、
`never' (または `simple') を指定できる。
このオプションが指定されていない場合、環境変数
.B VERSION_CONTROL
の値が使われる。
.B VERSION_CONTROL
が設定されていない場合の標準値は `existing' である。
.PP
.\"O This option corresponds to the Emacs variable `version\-control'.
.\"O The valid
.\"O .IR METHOD s
.\"O are (unique abbreviations are accepted):
このオプションは Emacs 変数の `version\-control' に対応している。
有効な
.I METHOD
は (他と重複しない短縮形が使える):
.TP
.BR t ", " numbered
.\"O Always make numbered backups.
常に番号の拡張子を持つバックアップが作られる。
.TP
.BR nil ", " existing
.\"O Make numbered backups of files that already have them, simple
.\"O backups of the others.
番号の拡張子を持つバックアップがすでにある場合には
番号の拡張子を持つバックアップを、
そうでない場合には単純なバックアップを作成する。
.TP
.BR never ", " simple
.\"O Always make simple backups.
常に単純なバックアップが作られる。
.\"O .RE
.\"O This option is deprecated, use \fB\-\-backup=\fIMETHOD\fR instead.
.PP
このオプションは推奨されない。
代りに \fB\-\-backup=\fIMETHOD\fR を使うこと。
.RE
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストの終りを示す。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH "環境変数"
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning. For the GNU version, the variables SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O and VERSION_CONTROL control backup file naming, as described above.
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
GNU 版では、変数 SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX と VERSION_CONTROL が
バックアップファイルの命名法を上で説明した方法で管理する。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH "準拠"
POSIX 1003.2
.\"O .SH NOTES
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B cp
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
.SH "注意"
このページは fileutils-4.1 パッケージの
.B cp
コマンドについて説明したものである;
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛にメールで連絡してください。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
