.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU csplit man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH CSPLIT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBcsplit\fR \- split a file into context-determinted pieces
.SH 名前
csplit \- ファイルを文脈ベースで分割する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.B csplit 
.RB [ \-kqsz ]
[\fB\-b \fISUFFIX\fR] [\fB\-f \fIPREFIX\fR]
[\fB\-n \fIDIGITS\fR] [\fB\-\-digits=\fIDIGITS\fR]
[\fB\-\-elide\-empty\-files\fR] [\fB\-\-keep\-files\fR]
[\fB\-\-prefix=\fIPREFIX\fR]
[\fB\-\-quiet\fR]
[\fB\-\-silent\fR]
[\fB\-\-suffix=\fISUFFIX\fR]
[\fIFILE\fR]

.BR csplit " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B csplit
.\"O creates zero or more output files containing sections of \fIFILE\fR. If 
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B csplit
は
.I FILE
の各セクション（section）の内容を持つ 0 個以上の出力ファイルを作成する。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O The contents of the output files are determined by the \fIPATTERN\fR
.\"O arguments.  An error occurs if a \fIPATTERN\fR argument refers to a
.\"O nonexistent line of the input file (e.g., if no remaining line matches a
.\"O given regular expression).  After every \fIPATTERN\fR has been matched, any
.\"O remaining input is copied into one last output file.
出力ファイルの内容は
.I PATTERN
引数によって決まる。
.I PATTERN
引き数で指定される行が入力ファイルに存在しない場合はエラーとなる
(例えば、与えられた正規表現にマッチする行が残っていない場合など)。
すべての
.I PATTERN
がマッチしおわったら、入力の残りは最後の出力ファイルにコピーされる。

.\"O The output files' names consist of a prefix (`xx' by default)
.\"O followed by a suffix.  By default, the suffix is an ascending sequence
.\"O of two-digit decimal numbers from `00' and up to `99'.  In any case,
.\"O concatenating the output files in sorted order by filename produces the
.\"O original input file.
出力ファイルのファイル名は二つの部分からなっている。
前半部のデフォルト名は `xx' である。
デフォルトでは後半部は 2 桁の 10 進数で、
`00' から `99' まで順にカウントアップされて行く。
いずれの場合でも、出力ファイルを名前でソートして順に結合させると、
入力ファイルが得られるようになっている。

.\"O By default, \fBcsplit\fR prints the number of bytes written to each
.\"O output file after it has been created.
デフォルトでは、
.B csplit
はそれぞれの出力ファイルを作成した後に、
それに書き出したバイト数を表示する。

.\"O By default, if \fBcsplit\fR encounters an error or receives a hangup,
.\"O interrupt, quit, or terminate signal, it removes any output files that
.\"O it has created so far before it exits.
.B csplit
がエラーになったり、
hangup, interrupt, quit, terminate 各シグナルを受け取った場合には、
デフォルトではそれまでに作られた出力ファイルは消去される。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b \fISUFFIX\fB, \-\-suffix=\fISUFFIX
.\"O Use \fISUFFIX\fR as the output file name suffix.  When this option is
.\"O specified, the suffix string must include exactly one
.\"O \fBprintf\fR(3)-style conversion specification, possibly including
.\"O format specification flags, a field width, a precision
.\"O specifications, or all of these kinds of modifiers.
.\"O The format letter must convert a binary integer argument to readable form;
.\"O thus, only 
.\"O .RB ` d "', `" i "', `" u "', `" o "', `" x "', and `" X '
.\"O conversions are allowed.  The entire \fISUFFIX\fR is given (with the current
.\"O output file number) to \fBsprintf\fR(3) to form the file name suffixes
.\"O for each of the individual output files in turn.  If this option is used, the
.\"O \fB\-\-digits\fR option is ignored.
.I SUFFIX
を出力ファイル名の後半部に用いる。
.I SUFFIX
には、 printf(3) 形式の変換文字列を一つだけ指定しなければならない。
書式指定フラグ、文字列の幅、精度指定なども指定できる。変換指定
文字列は整数を可読なかたちで出力するものでなければならない。
書式は整数値を可読な形式に変換するものでなければならない。したがって
使えるのは
.RB ` d "', `" i "', `" u "', `" o "', `" x "', `" X '
に限られる。
.I suffix
文字列はすべて（現在の出力ファイルが何番目かを示す数値と共に）
.BR sprintf (3)
関数に渡され、それぞれの出力ファイルに応じた名前が順番に出力される。
このオプションが指定されると、
.B \-\-digits
オプションは無視される。
.TP
.B \-f \fIPREFIX\fB, \-\-prefix=\fIPREFIX
.\"O Use \fIPREFIX\fR as the output file name prefix.
出力ファイル名の前半部を
.I PREFIX
にする。
.TP
.B \-k, \-\-keep\-files
.\"O Do not remove output files when errors are encountered.
エラーが起こったとき、
それまでに作成した出力ファイルを消去しないようにする。
.TP
.B \-n \fIDIGITS\fB, \-\-digits=\fIDIGITS
.\"O Use output file names containing numbers that are \fIDIGITS\fR digits
.\"O long instead of the default 2.
出力ファイル名の数値部分の桁数をデフォルト値の 2 から
.I DIGITS
に変更する。
.TP
.B \-q, \-s, \--quiet, \--silent
.\"O Do not print counts of output file sizes.
出力ファイルのサイズを表示しない。
.TP
.B \-z, \-\-elide\-empty\-files
.\"O Suppress the generation of zero-length output files.  (In cases
.\"O where the section delimiters of the input file are supposed to
.\"O mark the first lines of each of the sections, the first output
.\"O file will generally be a zero-length file unless you use this
.\"O option.)  The output file sequence numbers always run consecutively
.\"O starting from 0, even when this option is specified.
大きさ 0 の出力ファイルを作らないようにする。
(セクション区切りが入力の最初の行にきた場合、
このオプションを指定していなければ対応する出力ファイルの大きさは 0 になる)。
なお出力ファイルの順番を示す番号は、
このオプションが指定された場合でも、
常に 0 から連続してカウントされる。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH PATTERN ARGUMENTS
.SH PATTERN 引数
.TP
.I N
.\"O Create an output file containing the input up to but not including
.\"O line \fIN\fR (a positive integer).  If followed by a repeat count, also
.\"O create an output file containing the next \fILINE\fR lines of the input
.\"O file once for each repeat.
\fIN\fP には正の整数を指定する。出力ファイルを作成し、
入力ファイルの内容を行番号が \fIN\fP になるまで書き込む
(ただし \fIline\fP の行は書き込まない)。
この後に繰り返し回数を指定すると、
それぞれ \fIN\fR 行分の入力ファイルの内容を含む出力ファイルを作成する。
.TP
\fB/\fIREGEXP\fB/\fR[\fIOFFSET\fR]
.\"O Create an output file containing the current line
.\"O up to (but not including) the next line of the input file that contains a
.\"O match for \fIREGEXP\fR.  The optional \fIOFFSET\fR is a
.\"O .RB ` + "' or `" - '
.\"O followed by a positive integer.  If it is given, the input up to the matching
.\"O line plus or minus \fIOFFSET\fR is put into the output file, and the
.\"O line after that begins the next section of input.
出力ファイルを作成し、入力ファイルのうち
.I REGEXP
にマッチする行の前までの内容を書き込む (マッチ行は含まない)。
.I OFFSET
を付加することもでき、これは
.RB ` + "' または `" - '
に正の整数を続けて指定する。
.I OFFSET
が指定されるとマッチ行に
.I OFFSET
の値を増減した行までが出力される。
入力ファイルの残りは次のセクションの入力として利用される。
.TP
\fB%\fIREGEXP\fB%\fR[\fIOFFSET\fR]
.\"O Like the previous type, except that it does not create an output
.\"O file, so that section of the input file is effectively ignored.
直前の形式と同様だが、出力ファイルが作成されない。
したがって入力ファイルの該当するセクションは無視されることになる。
.TP
\fB{\fIREPEAT\-COUNT\fB}
.\"O Repeat the previous pattern \fIREPEAT\-COUNT\fR additional times.
.\"O \fIREPEAT\-COUNT\fR can either be a positive integer or an asterisk,
.\"O meaning repeat as many times as necessary until the input is exhausted.
直前のパターンを
.I REPEAT\-COUNT
の回数だけ余計に繰りかえす。
.I REPEAT\-COUNT
には正の整数かアスタリスクが指定できる。
アスタリスクの場合は、
入力ファイルが終わるまで直前のパターンを繰り返す。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
