.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU cut man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH CUT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBcut\fR \- print selected parts of lines
.SH 名前
cut \- 各行から選択した部分を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B cut
.RB [ \-ns ]
.RB [ "\-b \fIBYTE\-LIST" ]
.RB [ "\-c \fICHARACTER\-LIST" ]
.RB [ "\-d \fIDELIM" ]
.RB [ "\-f \fIFIELD\-LIST" ]
.RB [ \-\-bytes=\fIBYTE\-LIST ]
.RB [ \-\-characters=\fICHARACTER\-LIST ]
.RB [ \-\-delimiter=\fIDELIM ]
.RB [ \-\-fields=\fIFIELD\-LIST ]
.RB [ \-\-only\-delimited ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR cut " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B cut
.\"O writes to standard output selected parts of each line of each given 
.\"O .IR FILE .
.\"O If no
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is given or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B cut
は、与えられた
.I FILE
それぞれから、各行の一部を選択して標準出力に書き出す。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O \fIBYTE\-LIST\fR, \fICHARACTER\-LIST\fR, and \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR are one or
.\"O more numbers or ranges (two numbers separated by a dash) separated by
.\"O commas.  Bytes, characters, and fields are numbered from starting at 1.
.\"O Incomplete ranges may be given: `\-M' means `1\-M'; `N\-' means `N' through
.\"O end of line or last field.
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.IR BYTE\-LIST ", " CHARACTER\-LIST ", " FIELD\-LIST
には、一つ以上の数値か範囲 (ダッシュで接続された2つの数値) を
コンマで区切って指定する。バイト・文字・フィールドの番号は
1 から振られる。不完全な範囲を指定することもできる:
`\-M' は `1\-M' という意味に、 `N\-' は `N' 番目から
行の最後のフィールドまでという意味になる。
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b \fIBYTE\-LIST\fB, \-\-bytes=\fIBYTE\-LIST
.\"O Print only the bytes in positions listed in \fIBYTE\-LIST\fR.  Tabs and
.\"O backspaces are treated like any other character; they take up 1 byte.
.I BYTE\-LIST
にリストされた位置の各バイトだけを表示する。
タブやバックスペースもほかの普通の文字と同じように1バイトとして扱う。
.TP
.B \-c \fICHARACTER\-LIST\fB, \-\-characters=\fICHARACTER\-LIST
.\"O Print only characters in positions listed in \fICHARACTER\-LIST\fR.  The
.\"O same as \fB\-b\fR for now, but internationalization will change that.
.\"O Tabs and backspaces are treated like any other character; they take up 1
.\"O character.
.I CHARACTER\-LIST
にリストされた位置の各文字だけを表示する。
これはいまのところ \fB\-b\fP と同じだが、
国際化すると異なる動作となるだろう。
タブやバックスペースもほかの普通の文字と同じように1文字として扱う。
.TP
.B \-d \fIDELIM\fB, delimiter=\fIDELIM
.\"O For \fB\-f\fR, fields are separated by the first character in \fIDELIM\fR
.\"O (default is <TAB>).
.B \-f
と一緒に用いると、
フィールドの区切り文字として
.I DELIM
の先頭の文字を使う (デフォルトは <TAB>)。
.TP
.B \-f \fIFIELD\-LIST\fB, \-\-fields=\fIFIELD\-LIST
.\"O Print only the fields listed in \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR.  Fields are separated
.\"O by a <TAB> by default.
.I FIELD\-LIST
にリストされた各フィールドだけを表示する。
フィールドの区切りはデフォルトでは <TAB> である。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Do not split multi-byte characters (no-op for now).
マルチバイト文字を分割しない (現在は効果がない)。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-only\-delimited
.\"O For \fB\-f\fR, do not print lines that do not contain the field
.\"O separator character.
.B \-f
と一緒に用いると、フィールドの区切り文字を含まない行を表示しない。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
