.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU date man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 17 19:11:31 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	Coordinated Universal Time	協定世界時
.\"WORD:	last modification time		最終修正時刻
.\"WORD:	local time			地方時
.\"WORD:	literal		文字
.\"WORD:	zero padding	0 埋め
.\"WORD:	modifier	修正子
.\"
.TH date 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O date \- print or set the system date and time
.SH 名前
date \- システムの日付と時刻を表示・設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B date
.BI "[\-uR] [\-d " datestr "] [\-f " datefile "] [\-r " file "] [\-s " datestr ]
.BI "[\-I [" timespec ]]
.BI "[\-\-date=" datestr "] [\--file=" datefile ]
.BI [\-\-iso\-8601[= timespec ]]
.BI [\-\-reference= file ]
.BI "[\-\-set=" datestr ]
.B [--rfc-822] [\-\-universal] [\-\-utc]
.BI [+ format "] [" MMDDhhmm [[ CC ] YY ][. ss ]]
.sp
.B date [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B date
.\"O with no arguments prints the current time and date (in the format
.\"O of the `%c' directive described below).
.B date
は引数を指定しないと、現在の時刻と日付を表示する
(表示形式は `%a %b %e %H:%M:%S %Z %Y' となる。以下を参照のこと)。
.\"NAKANO: info ページでの記述による。tnx to 鵜飼さん.
.PP
.\"O If given an argument does not start with `+' and you have the appropiate
.\"O privileges,
.\"O .B date
.\"O sets the system clock to the time and date specified by that argument.
.\"O The 
.\"O .BR \-\-date " and " --set
.\"O options may not be used with
.\"O such an argument.  The 
.\"O .B --universal
.\"O option may be used with such an argument to indicate that the specified
.\"O time and date are relative to Coordinated Universal Time rather than to
.\"O the local time zone. The argument must consist entirely of digits, which
.\"O have the following meaning:
引数が指定され、かつその先頭が `+' で始まっておらず、
かつ実行者が適切な権限を持っていれば、
.B date
はシステムの時計を引数で指定された時刻・日付に設定する。
.BR \-\-date " および " \-\-set
の両オプションは、このような引数と一緒に用いることはできない。
.B \-\-universal
オプションをこのような引数とともに用いると、
指定した時刻・日付が (地方時ではなく)
協定世界時のものになる。
引数には数字だけを用いることができ、それぞれ以下の意味を持つ:
.IP \fBMM\fP
.\"O month
月
.IP \fBDD\fP
.\"O day within month
日 (月内通算)
.IP \fBhh\fP
.\"O hour
時
.IP \fBmm\fP
.\"O minute
分
.IP \fBCC\fP
.\"O first two digits of year (optional)
年の最初の 2 桁 (省略可)
.IP \fBYY\fP
.\"O last two digits of year (optional)
年の最後の 2 桁 (省略可)
.IP \fBss\fP
.\"O second (optional)
秒 (省略可)
.PP
.\"O If given an argument that starts with a `+',
.\"O .B date
.\"O prints the current time and date (or the time and date specified by the
.\"O .B \-\-date
.\"O option) in a format controlled by that argument, which has the
.\"O same format as the format string passed to the \fBstrftime\fP(3) function.
.\"O Except for fields, which start with `%', characters in the
.\"O .I format
.\"O string are printed unchanged.
指定された引数が `+' で始まる場合には、
.B date
は現在の時刻と日付を表示する (あるいは
.B \-\-date
オプションで指定された時刻と日付を指定する)。
表示形式はこの引数によって制御され、
引数の書式は
.BR strftime (3)
関数にわたす文字列の書式と同じである。
\`%' で始まるフィールドを除き、
.I format
文字列中の文字はそのまま変更されずに表示される。
.\"O .SS Time fields
.SS 時刻フィールド
.IP \fB%H\fP
.\"O hour (00..23)
時 (00..23)
.IP \fB%I\fP
.\"O hour (01..12)
時 (01..12)
.IP \fB%k\fP
.\"O hour ( 0..23)
時 (0..23)
.IP \fB%l\fP
.\"O hour ( 1..12)
時 (1..12)
.IP \fB%M\fP
.\"O minute (00..59)
分 (00..59)
.IP \fB%p\fP
.\"O locale's AM or PM
AM あるいは PM のロケール
.IP \fB%r\fP
.\"O time, 12-hour (hh:mm:ss [AP]M)
時刻、12 時間 (hh:mm:ss [AP]M)
.IP \fB%s\fP
.\"O seconds since 1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC (a nonstandard extension)
1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC からの秒数 (標準外の拡張)
.IP \fB%S\fP
.\"O second (00..60)
秒 (00..60)
.IP \fB%T\fP
.\"O time, 24-hour (hh:mm:ss)
時刻、24 時間 (hh:mm:ss)
.IP \fB%X\fP
.\"O locale's time representation (%H:%M:%S)
ロケールによる時刻の表現 (%H:%M:%S)
.IP \fB%Z\fP
.\"O time zone (e.g., EDT), or nothing if no time zone is determinable
タイムゾーン (例 EDT)、
あるいはタイムゾーンが決定できないならば無し
.\"O .SS Date fields
.SS 日付フィールド
.IP \fB%a\fP
.\"O locale's abbreviated weekday name (Sun..Sat)
ロケールの省略形の曜日名 (Sun..Sat)
.IP \fB%A\fP
.\"O locale's full weekday name, variable length (Sunday..Saturday)
ロケールの完全表記の曜日名、可変長 (Sunday..Saturday)
.IP \fB%b\fP
.\"O locale's abbreviated month name (Jan..Dec)
ロケールの省略形の月名 (Jan..Dec)
.IP \fB%B\fP
.\"O locale's full month name, variable length (January..December)
ロケールの完全表記の月名、可変長 (January..December)
.IP \fB%c\fP
.\"O locale's date and time (Sat Nov 04 12:02:33 EST 1989)
ロケールの日付と時刻 (Sat Nov 04 12:02:33 EST 1989)
.IP \fB%d\fP
.\"O day of month (01..31)
月内通算日数 (01..31)
.IP \fB%D\fP
.\"O date (mm/dd/yy)
日付 (mm/dd/yy)
.IP \fB%h\fP
.\"O same as %b
%b と同じ
.IP \fB%j\fP
.\"O day of year (001..366)
年内通算日数 (001..366)
.IP \fB%m\fP
.\"O month (01..12)
月 (01..12)
.IP \fB%U\fP
.\"O week number of year with Sunday as first day of week (00..53)
日曜日を週の最初の日とした年内通算週 (00..53)
.IP \fB%w\fP
.\"O day of week (0..6) with 0 corresponding to Sunday
週のうちの曜日 (0..6) (0 が日曜日)
.IP \fB%W\fP
.\"O week number of year with Monday as first day of week (00..53)
月曜日を週の最初の日とした年内通算週 (00..53)
.IP \fB%x\fP
.\"O locale's date representation (mm/dd/yy)
ロケールの日付表現 (mm/dd/yy)
.IP \fB%y\fP
.\"O last two digits of year (00..99)
年の最後の 2 つの数字 (00..99)
.IP \fB%Y\fP
.\"O year (1970...)
年 (1970...)
.\"O .SS Literal fields
.SS 文字フィールド
.IP \fB%%\fP
.\"O a literal %
文字 %
.IP \fB%n\fP
.\"O a newline
改行
.IP \fB%t\fP
.\"O a horizontal tab
水平タブ
.\"O .SS Padding
.SS "文字埋め (padding)"
.\"O By default,
.\"O .BR date
.\"O pads numeric fields with zeroes so that, for example, numeric months are
.\"O always output as two digits. GNU extends
.\"O .BR date
.\"O functionality to recognize the following nonstandard numeric modifiers
.\"O between the `%' 
.\"O and the field:
デフォルトでは、
.B date
は数値のフィールドを 0 で埋める。したがって、例えば
数値表示の月は常に 2 桁で出力される。
GNU は
.B date
の機能を拡張しており、以下の非標準の数値修正子を `%' と
フィールドの間に置くことができる:
.IP \fB\-\fP
.\"O (hyphen) do not pad the field; useful if output is intended for human
.\"O consumption.
(ハイフン) フィールドを埋めない。
出力が人に読まれる場合には便利である。
.IP \fB_\fP
.\"O (underscore) pad the field with spaces; useful if you need a fixed
.\"O number of characters in the output, but zeroes are too distracting.
(アンダースコア) フィールドをスペースで埋める。
出力に決まった数の文字が必要だが、0 を使いたくない場合に便利である。
.\"nakano: distracting は意訳しすぎ？
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI "\-d " datestr ", \-\-date " datestr
.\"O Display the time and date specified in
.\"O .I datestr
.\"O instead of the current time and date.
.\"O .I datestr
.\"O can be in almost any common format.
.\"O It can contain month names, timezones, am' and pm', etc.
現在の時刻・日付の代わりに、
.I datestr
で指定された時刻・日付を表示する。
.I datestr
は普通のフォーマットならだいたいなんでも使うことができる。
月名、タイムゾーン、`am' や `pm' なども用いてよい。
.TP
.BI "\-f " datefile ", \-\-file=" datefile
.\"O Parse each line in 
.\"O .I datefile as with 
.\"O .B \-d
.\"O and display the resulting time and date.  If 
.\"O .I datefile 
.\"O is `-', use standard input.  This is useful when you have many dates to
.\"O process, because the system overhead of starting up the 
.\"O .B date 
.\"O executable many times can be considerable.
.B \-d
とともに指定された
.I datefile
を 1 行ずつパースして、結果の時刻と日付を表示する。
.I datefile
が `-' の場合は標準入力が用いられる。
これは、たくさんの日付を処理しなければならない場合に便利である。
.B date
の実行ファイルを何回も起動するオーバーヘッドは無視できないからである。
.TP
.BI "\-r " file ", \-\-reference=" file
.\"O Display the time and date reference according to the last
.\"O modification time of FILE, instead of the current time and date.
表示する時刻と日付を
.I file
の最終修正時刻にする。
.TP
.BI "\-s " datestr ", \-\-set " datestr
.\"O Set the time and date to
.\"O .IR datestr ", see
.\"O .B \-d
.\"O above.  Return 0 on success, nonzero on failure.
時刻と日付を
.I datestr
に設定する。上述の
.B \-d
を見よ。成功すると 0 を返し、失敗すると 0 以外を返す。
.TP
.B "\-u, \-\-universal, \-\-utc"
.\"O Consider TZ is set to UTC0 (Coordinated Universal Time, also
.\"O known as Greenwich Mean Time or GMT) instead of in local (wall clock) time.
タイムゾーンが地方時 (壁時計の時刻) ではなく
UTC0 (協定世界時、これはグリニッジ平均時もしくは GMT として知られている) に
設定されたものとする。
.TP
.B \-I [\fItimespec\fB], \-\-iso\-8601[=\fItimespec\fB]
.\"O Display the date using the ISO 8601 specified format, `%Y\-%m\-%d', and any
.\"O time additions specified by \fItimespec\fR (default is \fBauto\fR) preceded
.\"O by `T' and concluded by `%z' (or `%Z' if \fB\-\-utc\fR is specified)
日付を ISO 8601 で指定されている書式 `%Y\-%m\-%d' で、
時刻を
.I timespec
で指定されている形式で表示する (後者のデフォルトは
.BR auto )。
時刻部分の表示には `T' が前置され、`%z' 
.RB ( \-\-utc
が指定されている場合には `%Z') が後置される。
.\"nakano: date -I hours ってのは効かないようですが...
.RS
.TP
.B auto
.\"O No time additions.
時刻を表示しない。
.TP
.B hours
.\"O Append the hour of the day.
その日の時刻を表示する。
.TP
.B minutes
.\"O Append the hour and minutes.
時・分を表示する。
.TP
.B seconds
.\"O Append the hour, minutes and seconds.
時・分・秒を表示する。
.RE
.TP
.B \-R, \-\-rfc-822
.\"O Display the time and date using the RFC-822 specified format, `%a,
.\"O %_d %b %Y %H:%M:%S %z'.  If
.\"O .B \-\-utc
.\"O is also specified, use `GMT' in place of %z.  Day and month names are
.\"O emitted according to the `C' locale.
時刻と日付を RFC-822 で指定された書式である `%a,
%_d %b %Y %H:%M:%S %z' で表示する。
.B \-\-utc
が同時に指定されると、`%z' の代わりに `GMT' を用いる。
日付と月の名前は `C' ロケールに基づいて表示される。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.PP
.\"O To print the date of the day before yesterday
一昨日の日付を表示するには:
.IP
date \-\-date \'2 days ago\'
.PP
.\"O To print the date of the day three months and one day hence
3 ヶ月と 1 日後の日付を表示するには:
.IP
date \-\-date \'3 months 1 day\'
.PP
.\"O To print the day of year of Christmas in the current year
今年のクリスマスが年の初めから何日目かを表示するには:
.IP
date --date \'25 Dec\' +%j
.PP
.\"O To print the current date in a format including the full month name and
.\"O the day of the month
完全な月名と日付からなる書式で今日を表示するには:
.IP
date \'+%B %d\'
.PP
.\"O But this may not be what you want because for the first nine days
.\"O of the month, the \`%d\' expands to a zero-padded two-digit field,
.\"O for example \`date \-d 1-may \'+%B %d\'\' will print
.\"O \`May 01\'.
しかしこの結果はお望みのものではないかもしれない。
なぜなら月の最初の 9 日を表示させるとき、\`%d\' は 2 桁のフィールドの
最初を 0 で埋めるからである。例えば \`date \-d 1-may \'+%B %d\'\'
の結果は \`May 01\' となる。
.PP
.\"O To print the same date but without the leading zero for one-digit
.\"O days of month, you can use the nonstandard \`\-\' modifier to suppress
.\"O the padding altogether.
同じ日を、1 桁の日付の前に 0 を置かないように表示するには、
標準にはない \`\-\' 修正子を用いて 0 埋めを行わないようにすればよい。
.IP
date \-d 1-may \'+%B %-d\'
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
