.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999-2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Sat Oct 16 14:35:31 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Feb 16 17:41:57 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	report		表示
.\"WORD:	disk space	ディスク容量
.\"
.TH DF 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O df \- report filesystem disk space usage
df \- ファイルシステムのディスク容量の使用状況を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "df [" options "] [" file... ]
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B [\-kP]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-ahiklmvHPT]
.BI "[\-t " fstype ]
.BI "[\-x " fstype ]
.B [\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fB]
.B [\-\-no\-sync]
.B [\-\-sync]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B df
.\"O reports the amount of disk space used and available on
.\"O filesystems.
.B df
は各ファイルシステムにおいて、
すでに使用中のディスクの量と使用可能なディスクの量を表示する。
.PP
.\"O With no arguments,
.\"O .B df
.\"O reports the space used and available on all
.\"O currently mounted filesystems (of all types).
.\"O Otherwise,
.\"O .B df
.\"O reports on the filesystem containing each argument
.\"O .IR file .
引き数がない場合、
.B df
は現在マウントされている (全てのタイプの) 
全ファイルシステムについて
使用量と使用可能量を表示する。
引き数が指定されている場合、
.B df
は引き数
.I file
が含まれるファイルシステムについて表示する。
.\"O .SH "POSIX DETAILS"
.SH "POSIX 詳細"
.\"O The output is in 512-byte units by default, but in
.\"O 1024-byte units when the \-k option is given.
.\"O The output format is undefined, unless the \-P option is given.
.\"O If
.\"O .I file
.\"O is not a regular file, a directory or a FIFO, the result
.\"O is unspecified.
出力はデフォルトでは 512 バイト単位であるが、
\-k オプションが指定された場合は 1024 バイト単位になる。
\-P オプションが指定されない場合、出力フォーマットは未定義である。
.I file
が通常のファイル、ディレクトリ、FIFO のいずれでもない場合の
結果は規定されていない。
.\"O .SH "GNU DETAILS"
.SH "GNU 詳細"
.\"O If an argument
.\"O .I file
.\"O is a disk device file containing a mounted filesystem,
.\"O .B df
.\"O shows the space available on that filesystem rather
.\"O than on the filesystem containing the device node.
引き数
.I file
がディスクデバイスファイルで、
かつそこにマウント済みのファイルシステムが含まれている場合、
.B df
はそのデバイスノードの属しているファイルシステムではなく、
デバイスファイルに対応している方のファイルシステムの使用可能量を表示する。
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B "\-k"
.\"O Use 1024-byte units instead of the default 512-byte units.
デフォルトの 512 バイト単位の代わりに 1024 バイト単位を用いる。
.TP
.B "\-P"
.\"O Output in six columns, with heading `Filesystem N-blocks
.\"O Used Available Capacity Mounted on' (with N=512, but N=1024
.\"O when the \-k option is given).
`Filesystem N-blocks Used Available Capacity Mounted on'
というヘッダをつけて 6 列で出力する
(通常は N=512、\-k オプションが指定されたときは N=1024)。
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
.\"O Include in the listing filesystems that have a size of 0 blocks, or of type
.\"O `ignore' or `auto' which are omitted by default.
サイズが 0 ブロックのファイルシステムや
タイプが `ignore' または `auto' のファイルシステムも
リスト表示に含める (デフォルトでは省かれる)。
.TP
.B "\-h, \-\-human-readable"
.\"O Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.
.\"O Powers of 2 are used, not 10; \fBM\fR stands for 1,048,576 bytes.
それぞれのサイズに、
例えばメガバイトなら \fBM\fR のようなサイズ文字を付加する。
10 の累乗ではなく 2 の累乗を用いるので、
\fBM\fR は 1,048,576 バイトを表す。
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-inodes"
.\"O List inode usage information instead of block usage.
ブロック単位での使用容量のかわりに inode の使用状況をリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-k, \-\-kilobytes"
.\"O Print sizes in 1024-byte blocks, overriding the default block size.
デフォルトのブロックサイズを無視し、
1024 バイトを 1 ブロックとしてサイズを表示する。
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-local
.\"O List only local filesystems.	  
ローカルファイルシステムのみをリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-m, \-\-megabytes"
.\"O Print sizes in megabyte (1,048,576 bytes) blocks.
メガバイト (1,048,576 バイト) ブロック単位でサイズを表示する。
.TP
.BI "\-t " "fstype, " "\-\-type=" "fstype"
.\"O List only filesystems of type
.\"O .I fstype.
.\"O Multiple types can be specified by giving multiple
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O options.  See \fB\-\-all\fR for ommited defaults.
タイプが
.I fstype
のファイルシステムのみをリスト表示する。
.B \-t
オプションを複数指定すれば、複数のタイプを表示するようにできる。
デフォルトで省略されるものについては \fB\-\-all\fR を参照すること。
.TP
.B "\-v"
.\"O Ignored; for compatibility with System V versions of
.\"O .B df.
このオプションは無視される (System V 版の
.B df
との互換性のためにある)。
.TP
.BI "\-x " "fstype, " "\-\-exclude\-type=" "fstype"
.\"O Exclude filesystems of type
.\"O .I fstype.
.\"O Multiple filesystem types can be eliminated by giving multiple
.\"O .B "\-x"
.\"O options.  By default, no filesystem types are excluded.  See \fB\-\-all\fR
.\"O for ommited defaults.
タイプが
.I fstype
のファイルシステムを除外する。
.B \-x
オプションを複数指定すれば、複数のファイルシステムタイプを表示から削除できる。
デフォルトでは、どのファイルシステムタイプも除外されない。
デフォルトで省略されるものについては \fB\-\-all\fR を参照すること。
.TP
.B \-H, \-\-si
.\"O Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.  (SI
.\"O is the International System of Units, which defines these letters)  Powers
.\"O of 10 are used, not 2; \fBM\fR stands for 1,000,000 bytes.
それぞれのサイズについて、例えばメガバイトなら \fBM\fR といった
サイズ文字を付加する。
(SIとは国際単位系のことで、これらのサイズ文字を定義している)
2 の累乗ではなく 10 の累乗を用いるので、
\fBM\fR は 1,000,000 バイトを表す。
.TP
.B "\-P, \-\-portability"
.\"O Use the
.\"O .SM POSIX
.\"O output format.  This is like the default format
.\"O except that a) the information about each filesystem is always
.\"O printed on exactly one line; a mount device is never put on a line
.\"O by itself.  This means that if the mount device name is more than
.\"O 20 characters long (e.g., for some network mounts), the columns
.\"O are misaligned. b) Rounding is upwards. c) Column headers match POSIX.  
.SM POSIX
出力形式を用いる。
これはデフォルトの表示形式に似ているが、
以下の a), b), c) の点が異なる。
a) ファイルシステムについての情報が常に 1 行で表示される。
このオプションを付けると
マウントデバイス名だけが単独で 1 行に表示されることはない。
すなわちマウントデバイス名が 20 文字以上の場合
(例えばネットワークマウントなど) コラムの整列が崩れることになる。
b) 丸めが繰上げになる。
c) コラムのヘッダが POSIX に準拠している。
.TP
.B "\-T, \-\-print\-type"
.\"O Print each filesystem's type.  See
.\"O .BR mount (8).
各ファイルシステムのタイプを表示する。
.BR mount (8)
を参照。
.TP
.B \-\-block\-size=\fISIZE
.\"O Set the block size to \fISIZE\fR, overriding the value of the environment
.\"O variables.
ブロックサイズを \fISIZE\fR に設定し、環境変数の値を無視する。
.TP
.B "\-\-no\-sync"
.\"O Do not invoke
.\"O .B sync(2)
.\"O before getting any usage data.
.\"O This may make
.\"O .B df
.\"O run significantly faster, but on some systems (notably SunOS)
.\"O the results may be slightly out of date.  This is the default.
使用量データを得る前に
.B sync(2)
を呼ばない。
このオプションは
.B df
の動作がかなり速くなるかもしれないが、
システムによっては (特に SunOS では)
結果が少し古くなるかもしれない。このオプションはデフォルトである。
.TP
.B "\-\-sync"
.\"O Invoke
.\"O .B sync(2)
.\"O before getting any usage data.  On some systems 
.\"O (notably SunOS), doing this yields more up to date results,
.\"O but in general this option makes
.\"O .B df
.\"O much slower, especially when there are many or very busy filesystems.
使用量データを得る前に
.B sync(2)
を呼ぶ。
システムによっては (特に SunOS では)
より新しい結果を得ることができる。
しかし一般的に、このオプションは
.B df
の動作をずっと遅くする
(特にファイルシステムが多い場合や、
更新が非常に頻繁なファイルシステムがある場合)。
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストの終りを示す。
.\"O .SH BLOCK SIZE
.SH ブロックサイズ
.\"O The default output file block size is 1024 bytes 
.\"O (or 512 if \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR).
.\"O You may change this value by setting any of the following environment
.\"O variables, which are overriden 
.\"O if a \fB\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR is given.
デフォルトの出力ファイルブロックサイズは
1024 バイト (\fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fRが設定されているときは 512 バイト) である。
この値は以下の環境変数のどれかを設定することで変更できる。
また、これらの環境変数の値は \fB\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR が
オプションに与えられると無視される。
.TP
.\"O In order of precedence:
優先順位：
.BR DF_BLOCK_SIZE ", " BLOCK_SIZE ", " POSIXLY_CORRECT .
.PP
.\"O The values for these variables can be either a number, 
.\"O \fBhuman\-readable\fR, or
.\"O \fBsi\fR.  Numbers may be followed by a size letter 
.\"O to specify a multiple of that
.\"O size, and a \fBB\fR to select normal bytes or a \fBD\fR to select
.\"O decimal "commercial" bytes.  For example `BLOCK_SIZE=1KB' is equal to
.\"O `BLOCK_SIZE=1024' and `BLOCK_SIZE=1KD' is equal to `BLOCK_SIZE=1000'
これらの変数の値は、数字でも \fBhuman\-readable\fR でも \fBsi\fR でもよい。
数字の後には、何倍であるかを指定するサイズ文字と、
通常のバイトを選択する \fBB\fR または
十進の「商業用」バイトを選択する \fBD\fR を続けてもよい。
たとえば `BLOCK_SIZE=1KB' は `BLOCK_SIZE=1024' に等しく、
`BLOCK_SIZE=1KD' は `BLOCK_SIZE=1000' に等しい。

.\"O The following letters are recognized (and used when printing with
.\"O \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR or \fB\-\-si\fR)
以下の文字が認識される 
(また \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR と 
\fB\-\-si\fR オプションで表示されるときに用いられる)。
.TP
.B k
.\"O kilo: 2^10 = 1024 for \fB\-\-human-readable\fR, or 
.\"O 10^3 = 1000 for \fB\-\-si\fR
キロ: \fB\-\-human-readable\fR なら 2^10 = 1024、
\fB\-\-si\fR なら 10^3 = 1000
.TP
.B M
.\"O Mega: 2^20 = 1,048,576 or 10^6 = 1,000,000
メガ: 2^20 = 1,048,576 または 10^6 = 1,000,000
.TP
.B G
.\"O Giga: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 or 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
ギガ: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 または 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
.TP
.B T
.\"O Tera: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 or 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
テラ: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 または 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B P
.\"O Peta: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 or 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
ペタ: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 または 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B E
.\"O Exa: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 or 10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
エクサ: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 または 
10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Z
.\"O Zetta: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 or 10^21 =
.\"O 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
ゼタ: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 または 10^21 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Y
.\"O Yotta: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 or 10^24 =
.\"O 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
ヨタ: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 または 10^24 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O The variables DF_BLOCK_SIZE, BLOCK_SIZE and POSIXLY_CORRECT determine the
.\"O choice of the output file block size.
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
変数 DF_BLOCK_SIZE, BLOCK_SIZE, POSIXLY_CORRECT は
出力ファイルブロックサイズの選択を決定する。
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX 1003.2
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR mount (8)
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Disk usage is rounded upwards, free space downwards.
ディスク使用量は丸めの際に繰上げられ、
空き容量は繰り下げられる。
.\"O 
.PP
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B df
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページは fileutils-4.1 パッケージの
.B df
コマンドについて説明したものである;
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛にメールで連絡してください。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
