.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU diff3 man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	overlapping (changes)	重複している (変更)
.\"
.TH DIFF3 1 "October 2002" "GNU diff Utilities 2.8.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBdiff3\fP \- find differences between three files
.SH 名前
diff3 \- 3 つのファイル間にある違いを探す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B diff3
[\fB\-3aeimxAETX\fP] [\fB-L\fP \fILABEL\fR] [\fB\-\-easy\-only\fP] [\fB\-\-ed\fP]
[\fB\-\-initial\-tab\fR] [\fB\-\-label=\fILABEL\fR] [\fB\-\-merge\fP]
[\fB\-\-overlap\-only\fP] [\fB\-\-show\-all\fP] [\fB\-\-show\-overlap\fP]
[\fB\-\-text\fP] \fIMINE OLDER YOUR

.B diff3
[\fB\-v\fP] [\fB\-\-help\fP] [\fB\-\-version\fP]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B diff3
.\"O compares three files and outputs descriptions
.\"O of their differences.
.B diff3
は 3 つのファイルを比較し、それらの違いの説明を出力する。

.\"O The files to compare are
.\"O .IR MINE ,
.\"O .IR OLDER ,
.\"O and
.\"O .IR YOURS .
.\"O At most one of these three file names may be
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O which tells
.\"O .B diff3
.\"O to read the standard input for that file.
比較対象となるファイルは
.IR MINE ", " OLDER ", " YOURS
である。これら三つのファイルのうちの一つを
.RB ` \- '
としてもよく、その場合そのファイルは標準入力から読み込まれる。

.\"O Normally \fBdiff3\fP invokes \fBdiff\fP(1) to do its work, but you can
.\"O change the program by setting the \fBDIFF\fP environment variable to the
.\"O name of other program.
通常
.B diff3
は自分の作業のために
.B diff
を起動する。しかし
.B BDIFF
環境変数に他のプログラムを設定すれば、
そのプログラムを使うように変更できる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-3, \-\-easy\-only
.\"O Like
.\"O .BR \-e ,
.\"O except output only the nonoverlapping changes.
.B \-e
と似ているが、重複していない変更部分だけを出力する。
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-text
.\"O Treat all files as text and compare them line-by-line, even if they
.\"O do not appear to be text.
ファイルがテキストには見えないような場合でも、
全てのファイルをテキストとみなして 1 行ずつ比較を行う。
.TP
.B \-e, \-\-ed
.\"O Generate an
.\"O .I ed
.\"O script that incorporates all the changes from
.\"O .I OLDER
.\"O to
.\"O .I YOURS
.\"O into
.\"O .IR MINE .
.I OLDER
から
.I YOURS
へのすべての変更を
.I MINE
にマージするような
.I ed
スクリプトを生成する。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Generate `\fBw\fP' and `\fBq\fP' commands at the end of the
.\"O .B ed
.\"O script for System V compatibility.  This option must be combined with
.\"O one of the
.\"O .B \-AeExX3
.\"O options, and may not be combined with
.\"O .BR \-m .
System V 互換性のために、
.B ed
スクリプトの末尾に
.RB ` w "' コマンドと `" q '
コマンドを生成する。このオプションは
.B \-AeExX3
のいずれかのオプションと共に用いなければならない。また
.B \-m
と同時に指定することはできない。
.TP
.B \-m, -\-merge
.\"O Apply the edit script to the first file and send the result to standard
.\"O output.  Unlike piping the output from \fBdiff3\fP to \fBed\fP
.\"O this works even for binary files and incomplete lines. \fB\-A\fP is assumed
.\"O if no edit script option is specified. 
ed スクリプトを 1 番目のファイルに適用し、その結果を標準出力に送る。
.B diff3
の出力を
.B ed
に送るのと異なり、
このオプションの動作はバイナリファイルや改行されていない行にも適用できる。
ed スクリプトのオプションが何も指定されなければ、
.B \-A
を暗黙のうちに指定する。
.TP
.B \-x, \-\-overlap\-only
.\"O Like
.\"O .BR \-e ,
.\"O except output only the overlapping changes.
.B \-e
と似ているが、重複している変更だけを出力する点が異なる。
.TP
.B \-A, \-\-show\-all
.\"O Incorporate all changes from
.\"O .I OLDER
.\"O to
.\"O .I YOURS
.\"O into
.\"O .IR MINE ,
.\"O surrounding all overlapping changes with bracket lines.
.I OLDER
から
.I YOURS
への全ての変更を
.I MINE
にマージする。重複している変更はブラケット行で囲って出力する。
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-show\-overlap
.\"O Like
.\"O .BR \-e ,
.\"O except bracket lines from overlapping changes' first
.\"O and third files.  With
.\"O .BR \-e ,
.\"O an overlapping change looks like this:
.\"nakano: これは原文から間違い。 -E の出力が以下である。
.B \-e
と似ているが、重複部分のブラケット行の第 1・第 3 行が異なる。
.B \-E
では重複している変更は以下のようになる。
.sp
.nf
<<<<<<< \fIMINE\fP
lines from \fIMINE\fP
=======
lines from \fIYOURS\fP
>>>>>>> \fIYOURS\fP
.fi
.TP
.BI "\-L " LABEL ", \-\-label=" LABEL
.\"O Use the label
.\"O .I LABEL
.\"O for the brackets output by the
.\"O \fB\-A\fP, \fB\-E\fP and \fB\-X\fP options.  This option may be given up to
.\"O three times, one for each input file.  The default labels are the names of
.\"O the input files.  Thus
.\"O .B "diff3 \-L X \-L Y \-L Z \-m A B C"
.\"O acts like
.\"O .BR "diff3 \-m A B C" ,
.\"O except that the output looks like it came from
.\"O files named
.\"O .BR X ,
.\"O .B Y
.\"O and
.\"O .B Z
.\"O rather than from files
.\"O named
.\"O .BR A ,
.\"O .B B
.\"O and
.\"O .BR C .
.BR \-A ", " \-E ", " \-X
オプションのブラケット行に、ラベル
.I LABEL
を用いる。このオプションはそれぞれの入力ファイルに対応して
3 つまで与えることができる。
デフォルトのラベルは入力ファイルのファイル名である。したがって
.B "diff3 \-L X \-L Y \-L Z \-m A B C"
は
.B "diff3 \-m A B C"
と同じように動作するが、
入力が
.BR A ", " B ", " C
ではなく
.BR X ", " Y ", " Z
のものであるかのような出力となる。
.TP
.B \-T, \-\-initial\-tab
.\"O Output a tab rather than two spaces before the text of a line in normal format.
.\"O This causes the alignment of tabs in the line to look normal.
.TP
.B \-X
.\"O Like \fB\-E\fP, except output only the overlapping changes.  In other words,
.\"O like \fB\-x\fP, except bracket changes as in \fB\-E\fP.
\fB\-E\fP と似ているが、重複している変更だけを出力する点が異なる。
別の言い方をすれば、 \fB\-x\fP と似ているが、
\fB\-E\fP のように変更をブラケット行で囲う点が異なる。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
.\"O Output the version number of
.\"O .BR diff3 .
.B diff3
のバージョン番号を出力する。
.\"O .SH OUTPUT FORMAT
.SH 出力形式
.\"O Each hunk begins with a line marked `\fB====\fP'.  Three-way hunks have
.\"O plain `\fB====\fP' lines, and two-way hunks have 
.\"O .RB ` 1 "', " 2 "', or `" 3 ' 
.\"O appended to specify which of the three input files differ in that hunk.  The
.\"O hunks contain copies of two or three sets of input lines each preceded by one
.\"O or two commands identifying where the lines came from.  The default behaviour
.\"O is to precede input lines with two spaces to distinguish them from the 
.\"O commands.  If `\fB-T\fP' is specified then \fBdiff3\fP uses a tab instead, 
.\"O lining up any other tabs correctly.
それぞれの hunk (違いを表すテキストブロック) は
`\fB====\fP' という行から始まる。 3 ファイルとも異なる hunk では
ただの `\fB====\fP' となり、 1 ファイルが異なっている hunk では
.RB ` 1 "', `" 2 "', `" 3 '
のいずれかが、その異なっているファイルを示すために付加される。
hunk には 2 つ、または 3 つの入力行のセットが含まれ、
それぞれに行セットがどのファイル由来のものかを示す
1 つまたは 2 つのコマンドが前置される。
デフォルトの動作では、入力行の前には 2 つのスペースが置かれ、
コマンドと区別できるようになっている。
.B \-T
が指定されると、代わりにタブを用いるので、
入力にあったタブによる桁揃えが正しく保存される。
.\"O .SS Command forms
.SS コマンド形式
.TP
.IB FILE : L a
.\"O This hunk appears after line \fIL\fP of \fIFILE\fP, and contains no lines
.\"O in that file.  To edit this file to yield the other files, one
.\"O must append hunk lines taken from the other files.  For example,
.\"O `1:11a' means that the hunk follows line 11 in the
.\"O first file and contains no lines from that file.
この hunk は
.IR FILE " の " L
行以降に現れるべきもので、そのファイルには存在していない。
このファイルを修正して他のファイルと同じにするには、
他の行からの hunk の行を追加しなければならない。例えば
`1:11a' は、その hunk はファイル 1 の 11 行目以降に追加すべきもので、
ファイル 1 には含まれていないこと示す。
.TP
.IB FILE : R c
.\"O This hunk contains the lines in the range \fIR\fP of \fIFILE\fP.  The
.\"O range \fIR\fP is a comma-separated pair of line numbers, or just one
.\"O number if the range is a singleton.  To edit this file
.\"O to yield the other files, one must change the specified lines to be the lines
.\"O taken from the other files.  For example, `2:11,13c' means that
.\"O the hunk contains lines 11 through 13 from the second file.
この hunk には、
.IR FILE " の行範囲 " R
が含まれている。行範囲 \fIR\fP は 2 つの行番号をコンマで区切ったものである。
数字が一つだったら 1 行だけの範囲と解釈される。
このファイルを編集して他のファイルと同じにするには、
その行範囲を、他のファイルからとってきて変更しなければならない。
例えば `2:11,13c' は、この hunk は 2 番目のファイルの
11〜13 行目からとってきたものであることを示す。
.sp
.\"O If the last line in a set of input lines is incomplete it is distinguished
.\"O on output from a full line by a following line that starts with `\fB\\\fP'.
入力行セットの最後の行が改行で終わっていない場合は、
出力の次の行が `\fB\\\fP' で始まるので、改行で終わっている場合と区別できる。
.\"nakano: 動作確認はしていない(^^;
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O .B diff3
.\"O exits with one of the following values:
.B diff3
は以下のどれかの値で終了する:
.TP
.B 0
.\"O \fBdiff3\fR was successful, no overlapping changes (conflicts) found.
.B diff3
は成功し、重複している変更 (衝突) は存在しなかった。
.TP
.B 1
.\"O Some conflict was found.
重複が見付かった。
.TP
.B 2
.\"O Some error occurred.
何らかのエラーが起こった。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O cmp(1), comm(1), diff(1), ed(1), patch(1), sdiff(1).
.BR cmp (1),
.BR comm (1),
.BR diff (1),
.BR ed (1),
.BR patch (1),
.BR sdiff (1),
.\"O .SH NOTES
.\"O Report bugs to bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.SH 注意
プログラムのバグについては bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。

