.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU dirname man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	component	部分
.\"
.TH dirname 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O dirname \- strip non-directory suffix from file name
.SH 名前
dirname \- ファイル名からディレクトリ名以外の部分を除去する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "dirname " filename
.sp
.B dirname [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B dirname
.\"O prints all but the final slash-delimited component of 
.\"O .IR filename .
.\"O If
.\"O .I filename
.\"O is a single component,
.\"O .B dirname
.\"O prints `.' (meaning the current directory).
.B dirname
は
.I filename
のスラッシュ (/) で区切られた各部分のうち、
最後を除いた残りすべてを表示する。
.I filename
に含まれる部分が一つだけなら、
.B dirname
は (カレントディレクトリを意味する) `.' を表示する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
