.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999-2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                   
.\" Translated Sun Oct 17 18:05:20 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Feb 23 00:55:58 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" 
.\"WORD:	report		表示する
.\" 
.TH DU 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O du \- estimate file space usage
du \- ファイルのディスク使用量を見積もる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "du [" options "] [" file... ]
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B [\-askx]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-abchklmsxDHLS] [\-X \fIFILE\fB]
.B [\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fB] [\-\-max\-depth=\fIDEPTH\fB]
.B [\-\-exclude=\fIPATTERN\fB]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B du
.\"O reports the amount of disk space used by the specified files,
.\"O and by each directory in the hierarchies rooted at the
.\"O specified files.
.\"O Here `disk space used' means space used for the entire
.\"O file hierarchy below the specified file.
.B du
はディスクの使用量を表示する。
対象は指定したファイルと、
それをルート (根) とする階層中にある全ディレクトリである。
ここで「ディスク使用量」とは、指定したファイル以下の
全ファイル階層による使用量を意味する。
.PP
.\"O With no arguments,
.\"O .B du
.\"O reports the disk space for the current directory.
引き数がない場合、
.B du
は現在のディレクトリのディスク使用量を表示する。
.\"O .SH "POSIX DETAILS"
.SH "POSIX 詳細"
.\"O The output is in 512-byte units by default, but in
.\"O 1024-byte units when the \-k option is given.
出力はデフォルトでは 512 バイト単位であるが、
\-k オプションが指定された場合は 1024 バイト単位になる。
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B "\-a"
.\"O Show counts for all files encountered, not just directories.
ディレクトリだけでなく、全てのファイルについて容量を表示する。
.TP
.B "\-k"
.\"O Use 1024-byte units instead of the default 512-byte units.
デフォルトの 512 バイト単位の代わりに 1024 バイト単位を使用する。
.TP
.B "\-s"
.\"O Only output space usage for the actual arguments given,
.\"O not for their subdirectories.
実際に引き数で指定された対象による使用量のみを表示し、
そのサブディレクトリによる使用量は表示しない。
.TP
.B "\-x"
.\"O Only count space on the same device as the argument given.
引き数で指定されたファイルと同じディバイス上のみで使用量を集計する。
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
.\"O Show counts for all files, not just directories.
ディレクトリだけでなく、全てのファイルについて容量を表示する。
.TP
.B "\-b, \-\-bytes"
.\"O Print sizes in bytes, overriding the default block size.
デフォルトのブロックサイズを無視し、バイト単位でサイズを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-c, \-\-total"
.\"O Print a grand total of all arguments after all arguments have been
.\"O processed.  This can be used to find out the total disk usage of a
.\"O given set of files or directories.
全ての引き数について使用量表示の処理をした後、
全ての引き数の使用量の総計を表示する。
このオプションは、ファイル・ディレクトリのセットを与え、
それらのディスク総使用量を調べるために使用される。
.TP
.B "\-h, \-\-human\-readable"
.\"O Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.
.\"O Powers of 2 are used, not 10; \fBM\fR stands for 1,048,576 bytes.
それぞれのサイズに、
例えばメガバイトなら \fBM\fR のようなサイズ文字を付加する。
10 の累乗ではなく 2 の累乗を用いるので、
\fBM\fR は 1,048,576 バイトを表す。
.TP
.B "\-k, \-\-kilobytes"
.\"O Print sizes in kilobytes.
サイズをキロバイト単位で表示する。
.TP
.B "\-l, \-\-count\-links"
.\"O Count the size of all files, even if they have appeared already
.\"O (as a hard link).
あるファイルが (ハードリンクとして) 既に集計されている場合を含め、
全てのファイルの使用量を集計する。
.TP
.B "\-m, \-\-megabytes"
.\"O Print sizes in megabyte (that 1,048,576 bytes) blocks.
メガバイト (1,048,576 バイト) 単位でサイズを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-summarize"
.\"O Display only a total for each argument.
それぞれの引き数について、総計のみを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-x, \-\-one\-file\-system"
.\"O Skip directories that are on different filesystems from the one
.\"O that the argument being processed is on.
引き数で指定されたファイルのあるファイルシステムとは異なる
ファイルシステム上にあるディレクトリを集計に含めない。
.TP
.B "\-D, \-\-dereference\-args"
.\"O Dereference symlinks that are command line arguments.  Does
.\"O not affect other symlinks.  This is helpful for finding out
.\"O the disk usage of directories, such as
.\"O .IR /usr/tmp ,
.\"O which are often symlinks.
コマンドライン引き数で指定したシンボリックリンクをたどる。
他のシンボリックリンクはたどらない。
このオプションは、たいていシンボリックリンクになっている
.IR /usr/tmp
のようなディレクトリのディスク使用量を調べるのに便利である。
.TP
.B \-H, \-\-si
.\"O Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.  (SI
.\"O is the International System of Units, which defines these letters
.\"O as prefixes)  Powers of 10 are used, not 2; \fBM\fR stands for
.\"O 1,000,000 bytes.
それぞれのサイズに、
例えばメガバイトなら \fBM\fR のようなサイズ文字を付加する
(SIとは国際単位系のことで、これらの文字を接頭辞と定義している)。
2 の累乗ではなく 10 の累乗を用いるので、
\fBM\fR は 1,000,000 バイトを表す。
.TP
.B "\-L, \-\-dereference"
.\"O Dereference symlinks (show the disk space used by the file
.\"O or directory that the link points to instead of the space used by
.\"O the link).
シンボリックリンクをたどる (シンボリックリンク自体が使用する容量の代わりに、
リンク先のファイルやディレクトリの使用量を表示する)。
.TP
.B "\-S, \-\-separate\-dirs"
.\"O Report the size of each directory separately, not including the
.\"O sizes of subdirectories.
サブディレクトリの使用量を含めずに、
個々のディレクトリの使用量を分けて表示する。
.TP
.B \-X \fIFILE\fB, \-\-exclude\-from=\fIFILE
.\"O As \fB\-\-exclude\fR, except take the patterns to exclude from \fIFILE\fR,
.\"O one per line.  If \fIFILE\fR is `\fB-\fR', read the patterns from standard
.\"O input.
\fB\-\-exclude\fR と類似するが、
除外するためのパターンを \fIFILE\fR から一行ずつ取り込む。
\fIFILE\fR が `\fB-\fR' のときはパターンを標準入力から読み込む。
.TP
.B \-\-block\-size=\fISIZE
.\"O Set the block size to \fISIZE\fR, overriding the value of the environment
.\"O variables.
環境変数の値を無視し、ブロックサイズを \fISIZE\fR に設定する。
.TP
.B \-\-exclude=\fIPATTERN
.\"O When recursing, skip subdirectories or 
.\"O files matching pattern \fIPATTERN\fR.
.\"O For example, `du \-\-exclude='*~'' excludes files whose names end in `~'
再帰的に集計する際、\fIPATTERN\fR にマッチする名前の
サブディレクトリやファイルを除外する。
`du \-\-exclude='*~'' の場合には `~' で終わる名前のファイルは除外される。
.TP
.B \-\-max\-depth=\fIDEPTH
.\"O Show the total for each directory (and file if \fB\-all\fR) that is at
.\"O most \fIDEPTH\fR depth levels down from the root of the hierarchy.  The
.\"O root is at level 0, so `du \-\-max\-depth=0' is equivalent to `du \-s'.
階層のルートから深さレベルが最大 \fIDEPTH\fR までにある
各ディレクトリの (\fB\-all\fR が指定されている場合はファイルも含めた)
ディスク使用量の合計を表示する。
ルートはレベル 0 であるので、`du \-\-max\-depth=0' は `du \-s' と等しい。
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストの終りを示す。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O On BSD systems,
.\"O .B du
.\"O reports sizes that are half the correct values
.\"O for files that are NFS-mounted from HP-UX systems.  On HP-UX systems,
.\"O it reports sizes that are twice the correct values for files that are
.\"O NFS-mounted from BSD systems.  This is due to a flaw in HP-UX; it also
.\"O affects the HP-UX
.\"O .B du
.\"O program.
BSD システムでは、HP-UX システムから NFS マウントしたファイルに対して、
.B du
は正しい値の半分の値を表示してしまう。
HP-UX システムでは、BSD システムから NFS マウントした
ファイルに対して、正しい値の 2 倍の値を表示してしまう。
これは HP-UX の欠陥によるもので、HP-UX の 
.B du
プログラムにも影響を及ぼしている。
.\"O .SH BLOCK SIZE
.SH ブロックサイズ
.\"O The default output file block size is 1024 bytes 
.\"O (or 512 if \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR).
.\"O You may change this value by setting any of the following environment
.\"O variables, which are overriden 
.\"O if a \fB\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR is given.
デフォルトの出力ファイルブロックサイズは
1024 バイト (\fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fRが設定されているときは 512 バイト) である。
この値は以下の環境変数のどれかを設定することで変更できる。
また、これらの環境変数の値は \fB\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR が
オプションに与えられると無視される。
.TP
.\"O In order of precedence:
優先順位：
.BR DU_BLOCK_SIZE ", " BLOCK_SIZE ", " POSIXLY_CORRECT .
.PP
.\"O The values for these variables can be either a number, 
.\"O \fBhuman\-readable\fR, or \fBsi\fR.  
.\"O Numbers may be followed by a size letter to specify a multiple of that
.\"O size, and a \fBB\fR to select normal bytes or a \fBD\fR to select
.\"O decimal "commercial" bytes.  For example `BLOCK_SIZE=1KB' is equal to
.\"O `BLOCK_SIZE=1024' and `BLOCK_SIZE=1KD' is equal to `BLOCK_SIZE=1000'
これらの変数の値は、数字でも \fBhuman\-readable\fR でも \fBsi\fR でもよい。
数字の後には、何倍であるかを指定するサイズ文字と、
通常のバイトを選択する \fBB\fR または
10 進の「商業用」バイトを選択する \fBD\fR を続けてもよい。
たとえば、`BLOCK_SIZE=1KB' は `BLOCK_SIZE=1024' に等しく、
`BLOCK_SIZE=1KD' は `BLOCK_SIZE=1000' に等しい。

.\"O The following letters are recognized (and used when printing with
.\"O \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR or \fB\-\-si\fR)
以下の文字が認識される 
(また \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR と 
\fB\-\-si\fR オプションで表示されるときに用いられる)
.TP
.B k
.\"O kilo: 2^10 = 1024 for \fB\-\-human-readable\fR, or 10^3 = 1000 for \fB\-\-si\fR
キロ: \fB\-\-human-readable\fR なら 2^10 = 1024、
\fB\-\-si\fR なら 10^3 = 1000 
.TP
.B M
.\"O Mega: 2^20 = 1,048,576 or 10^6 = 1,000,000
メガ: 2^20 = 1,048,576 または 10^6 = 1,000,000
.TP
.B G
.\"O Giga: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 or 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
ギガ: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 または 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
.TP
.B T
.\"O Tera: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 or 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
テラ: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 または 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B P
.\"O Peta: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 or 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
ペタ: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 または 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B E
.\"O Exa: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 or 10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
エクサ: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 または 
10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Z
.\"O Zetta: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 or 10^21 =
.\"O 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
ゼタ: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 または 10^21 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Y
.\"O Yotta: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 or 10^24 =
.\"O 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
ヨタ: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 または 10^24 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O The variables DU_BLOCK_SIZE, BLOCK_SIZE and POSIXLY_CORRECT determine the
.\"O choice of the output file block size.
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
変数 DF_BLOCK_SIZE, BLOCK_SIZE, OSIXLY_CORRECT は
出力ファイルブロックサイズの選択を決定する。
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX 1003.2
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Disk usage is rounded upwards, free space downwards.
ディスク使用量は丸めの際に繰上げられ、空き容量は繰り下げられる。
.\"O 
.PP
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B du
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページは fileutils-4.1 パッケージの
.B du
コマンドについて説明したものである;
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛にメールで連絡してください。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
