.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU echo man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH echo 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O echo \- display a line of text
.SH 名前
echo \- 1 行のテキストを表示する
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "echo [-ne] [" string... ]
.sp
.B echo [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B echo
.\"O writes each given \fIstring\fP to the standard output, with a space
.\"O between them and a newline after the last one except if option
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O is specified.
.B echo
は与えられた
.I string
をそれぞれ標準出力に書き出す。それぞれの間にはスペースを挟み、
最後の引数の後には改行を行う。ただし
.B \-n
オプションが指定されている場合は改行しない。
.PP
.\"O Because most shells have a built-in command by the same name, using
.\"O the unadorned command name may get you different functionality than that
.\"O described here. 
ほとんどのシェルには同名の組み込みコマンドがあるので、
単に `echo' として実行すると、
ここで記述されたものとは異なった機能のものが実行されるだろう。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Do not output the trailing newline.
行末の改行を行わない。
.TP
.B \-e
.\"O Enable interpretation of the following backslash-escaped characters in
.\"O each 
.\"O .IR string :
.I string
中の、バックスラッシュでエスケープされた文字の解釈を有効にする。
それぞれの意味は以下の通り:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \ea
.\"O alert (bell)
アラート (ベル)
.TP
.B \eb
.\"O backspace
バックスペース
.TP
.B \ec
.\"O suppress trailing newline
行末の改行を出力しない
.TP
.B \ef
.\"O form feed
フォームフィード (form feed)
.TP
.B \en
.\"O new line
改行 (newline)
.TP
.B \er
.\"O carriage return
復帰 (carriage return)
.TP
.B \et
.\"O horizontal tab
水平タブ
.TP
.B \ev
.\"O vertical tab
垂直タブ
.TP
.B \e\e
.\"O backslash
バックスラッシュ
.TP
.BI \e nnn
.\"O the character whose ASCII code is \fInnn\fP (octal)
アスキーコードが \fInnn\fP (8 進) の文字
.PD
.RE
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.\"O When GNU
.\"O .B echo
.\"O is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are recognized:
.\"nakano add the PP here instead of "SH OPTIONS"
.PP
GNU
.B echo
が引数一つだけで起動された場合には、
以下のオプションが認識される:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
