.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU env man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH env 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O env \- run a program in a modified environment
.SH 名前
env \- 環境を変更してプログラムを実行する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "env [\-] [\-i] [\-u " name "] [\-\-ignore-environment] [\-\-unset=" name ]
.BI [ name = value ] ... "] [" command " [" args... ]]
.sp
.B env [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B env
.\"O runs a 
.\"O .I command
.\"O with an environment modified as specified by the
.\"O command line arguments.  Arguments of the form `variable=value'
.\"O set the environment variable
.\"O .I variable
.\"O to value
.\"O .IR value .
.\"O .I value
.\"O may be empty (`variable=').  Setting a variable to an empty value is
.\"O different from unsetting it.
.B env
は、コマンドラインで指定したように環境を変更して
.I command
を実行する。`variable=value' の形式の引数は、環境変数
.I variable
を値
.I value
に設定する。
.I value
は空でもよい (`variable=')。変数を空の値に設定するのは、
その変数自体を無効にするのとは異なる。
.PP
.\"O The first remaining argument specifies a program to invoke; it is
.\"O searched for according to the specification of the \fBPATH\fP environment
.\"O variable.  Any arguments following that are passed as arguments to
.\"O that program.
残った引き数のうちの最初のものが、実行されるプログラムを指定する。
プログラムの在処は環境変数 PATH の指定に基づいて検索される。
これ以降の引き数はすべて実行プログラムに引き数として渡される。
.PP
.\"O If no command name is specified following the environment
.\"O specifications, the resulting environment is printed.  This is like
.\"O specifying a command name of \fBprintenv\fP(1).
環境変数設定の後にコマンド名が指定されない場合は、
結果として得られた環境を印刷する。
この動作はコマンドに
.BR printenv (1)
を指定したときと同じ。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-, \-i, \-\-ignore-environment"
.\"O Start with an empty environment, ignoring the inherited environment.
継承された環境を無視して、空の環境から始める。
.TP
.BI "\-u, \-\-unset " name
.\"O Remove variable
.\"O .I name
.\"O from the environment, if it was in the environment.
変数
.I name
が環境にあれば削除する
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
