.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU expr man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 13:37:04 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	token			トークン
.\"WORD:	operand			オペランド
.\"WORD:	null (character)	ナル(文字)
.\"WORD:	operator		演算子
.\"WORD:	subexpression		副表現
.\"
.TH expr 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O expr \- evaluate expressions
.SH 名前
expr \- 式を評価する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "expr " expression...
.sp
.B expr [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.br
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B expr
.\"O evaluates an expression and writes the result on its standard output.
.\"O Each token of the expression must be a separate argument.
.B expr
は式を評価し、その結果を標準出力に書き出す。
式のトークン (token) はそれぞれ別々の引数で与える必要がある。
.P
.\"O Operands are either numbers or strings. \fBexpr\fP converts anything
.\"O appearing in an operand position to an integer or a string depending on
.\"O the operation being applied to it. Strings are not quoted for
.\"O \fBexpr\fP itself, though you may need to quote them to protect
.\"O characters with special meaning to the shell (e.g, spaces) 
オペランド (operand) は数字または文字列である。
.B expr
はオペランドの位置に現れたものを、それに対して行われる演算に応じて
整数または文字列に変換する。
文字列は
.B expr
ではクォートしなくてよいが、
シェルから保護するための引用符が必要かもしれない (スペースなど)。
.P
.\"O Operators may given as infix symbols or prefix keywords.  Parentheses
.\"O may be used for grouping in the usual manner (you must quote parentheses
.\"O to avoid the shell evaluating them, however).
演算子は 2 項間に挿入されるシンボルとして、
または前置されるキーワードとして与えられる。
括弧も通常のようにグループ化に利用できる
(しかしシェルによる解釈を避けるためには括弧をクォートしなければならない)。
.P
.\"O .B expr
.\"O returns the following exit status:
.B expr
は以下の終了ステータスを返す:
.br
.\"O 0 if the expression is neither null nor 0,
0: 式がナルでも 0 でもない
.br
.\"O 1 if the expression is null or 0,
1: 式がナルまたは 0
.br
.\"O 2 for invalid expressions.
2: 式が正しくない
.\"O .SH OPERATORS (in order of increasing precedence)
.SH 演算子 (優先度順)
.\"O .SS Connectives
.SS 関係演算
.IP "\fB|\fP"
.\"O Yields its first argument if it is neither null nor 0, otherwise its
.\"O second argument.  This is the usual `or' operation.
左項がナルでも 0 でもなければ左項を返す。
ナルや 0 だった場合は右項を返す。
これは通常の `or' 演算にあたる。
.IP "\fB&\fP"
.\"O Yields its first argument if neither argument is null or 0,
.\"O otherwise 0.
左項、右項ともナルでも 0 でもなければ左項を返す。
それ以外の場合は 0 となる。
.IP "\fB<\fP\0 \fB<=\fP\0 \fB=\fP\0 \fB==\fP\0 \fB!=\fP\0 \fB>=\fP\0 \fB>\fP"
.\"O Compare their arguments and return 1 if the relation is true, 0
.\"O otherwise.  (\fB==\fP is a synonym for \fB=\fP.)
.\"O \fBexpr\fP tries to convert both arguments to numbers and
.\"O do a numeric comparison; if it fails when trying to convert either
.\"O argument it then does a lexicographic comparison.
両項を比較し、関係が真なら 1、偽なら 0 を返す
(\fI==\fP は \fI=\fPと同義）。
\fBexpr\fP はまず両方の項を数値に変換し、
数値的な比較を行おうとする。
どちらかの引数が数値に変換できなかった場合は辞書的な比較を行う。
.\"O .SS Numeric expressions
.SS 数値演算
.IP "\fB+\fP\0 \fB-\fP"
.\"O Arithmetic addition and substraction.  Both arguments are converted to numbers;
.\"O an error occurs if this cannot be done.
代数的な加減算を行う。
左右の項は数値に変換され、失敗した場合はエラーとなる。
.IP "\fB*\fP\0 \fB/\fP\0 \fB%\fP"
.\"O Arithmetic multiplication, division and remainder (`%' is the remainder
.\"O operation, as in C).  Both arguments are converted to numbers; an error
.\"O occurs if this cannot be done.
代数的な乗算・除算・剰余演算を行う
(`%' は C の場合と同じく剰余演算に対応する)。
左右の項は数値に変換され、これに失敗した場合はエラーとなる。
.\"O .SS String expressions
.SS 文字列演算
.IP "\fIstring\fP \fB:\fP \fIregex\fP"
.\"O Perform pattern matching.  The arguments are converted to strings and the
.\"O second one is considered to be a (basic, a la \fBgrep\fP(1) regular
.\"O expression, with a `^'implicitly added at the beginning.  The first
.\"O argument is then matched against this regular expression.
パターンマッチを実行する。
左右の項は文字列に変換され、
右項は (\fBgrep\fP(1) の使う基本的な) 正規表現として扱われる。
右項には暗黙のうちに先頭に `^' が自動的に付加され、
左項がその正規表現にマッチするかのテストが行われる。

.\"O If the match succeeds and .\fIregex\fP uses `\e(' and
.\"O `\e)', the \fB:\fP expression returns the part of \fIstring\fP that
.\"O matched the subexpression; otherwise returns an integer whose value is
.\"O the number of characters matched. 
マッチが成功した場合、
正規表現の一部が `\e(' と '\e)' で囲われていれば、
\fB:\fP 演算子は \fIstring\fP のうち、
副表現 (subexpression) にマッチした部分を返す。
それ以外の場合はマッチした部分の文字数が返される。

.\"O If the match fails, the \fB:\fP operator returns the null string if `\e('
.\"O and `\e)' are used, otherwise 0.
マッチに失敗した場合、
`\e(' と `\e)' が使われていた場合にはナル文字列が、
そうでない場合には 0 が返される。

.\"O Only the first `\e(' and `\e)' pair is relevant to the return value;
.\"O additional pairs are meaningful only for grouping the regular expression
.\"O operators.
`\e(' と `\e)' のペアのうち、最初のものだけが返り値に影響する。
それ以外のペアは、正規表現の演算子をグループ化するという意味だけを持つ。

.\"O Unlike other \fBexpr\fR'ss, `\+' (one or more), `\?' (zero or one), and `\|'
.\"O (or connective) are recognized as matching operators.
他の
.B expr
と異なり、`+' (1 つ以上)、`?' (0 または 1)、`|'
(or 接続) もマッチング演算子として認識される。
.TP
.\"O In addition, the following keywords are recognized:
さらに、以下のキーワードも認識される:
.TP
.BI index " string charset"
.\"O Return the first position in \fIstring\fP where the first character in
.\"O \fIcharset\fP was found.  If no character in
.\"O \fIcharset\fP is found in \fIstring\fP, return 0.
\fIcharset\fP にあるどれかの文字が \fIstring\fP に見付かれば、
その最初に見付かった位置を返す。どの文字も見付からなければ 0 を返す。
.TP
.BI length " string"
.\"O Return the length of \fIstring\fP.
\fIstring\fP の長さを返す。
.TP
.BI match " string regex"
.\"O An alternative way to do pattern matching.  This is the same as
.\"O ``\fIstring\fP \fB:\fP \fIregex\fP''.
パターンマッチを行う別のやり方。
これは ``\fIstring\fP \fB:\fP \fIregex\fP'' と同じ。
.TP
.BI quote " string"
.\"O Interpret \fIstring\fR as a regular string, no matter if it is an operator or
.\"O a keyword.  Disabled when the environment variable \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR is
.\"O set.
\fIstring\fP を (演算子またはキーワードが含まれていても) 通常の文字列とみなす。
環境変数 \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR が設定されていると無効になる。
.TP
.BI substr " string position length"
.\"O Return the substring of \fIstring\fP beginning at \fIposition\fP with
.\"O length at most \fIlength\fP.  If either \fIposition\fP or \fIlength\fP
.\"O isn't positive or numeric, return a null string.
\fIstring\fP の部分文字列を返す。
部分文字列は \fIstring\fP の \fIposition\fP から始まり、
最大 \fIlength\fP の長さを持つ。
\fIposition\fP や \fIlength\fP が正でなかったり数値でなかった場合は、
ナル文字列を返す。
.PP
.\"O Parentheses are used for grouping in the usual manner.  The keywords
.\"O (match, substr, index, length) cannot be used as strings.
括弧は通常のグループ化の意味に用いることができる。
キーワード (match, substr, index, length) は文字列として用いることはできない。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O When GNU
.\"O .B expr
.\"O is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are recognized:
GNU
.B expr
が引数 1 つだけで起動された場合には、
以下のオプションが認識される:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.PP
.\"O To add 1 to the shell variable
.\"O .IR foo :
シェル変数
.I foo
に 1 を加える:
.IP
foo=\`expr $a + 1\`
.PP
.\"O To print the non-directory part of the file name stored in variable
.\"O .IR bar
.\"O (the value in
.\"O .IR bar
.\"O need not contain `/'):
変数
.IR bar
に格納されているファイル名のうち、
ディレクトリ以外の部分を表示する
.RI ( bar
の値には `/' が含まれていなくても良い):
.IP
expr $bar : \'.*/\e(\^.*\e)\' \'\^|\' $a
.PP
.\"O Matching character `b' in the string `abc'
文字列 `abc' に文字 `b' をマッチさせる:
.IP
expr abc : 'a\e(.\e)c'
.PP
.\"O Finding out the index for any occurences of `c' and `z' in the string
.\"O `abcdef'
文字列 `abcdef' に `c' または `z' のいずれかが存在している位置を探す:
.IP
expr index abcdef cz
.PP
.\"O Erroneuosly using a keyword (index) as a string
キーワード (index) を文字列として用いている誤った例:
.IP
expr index index a
.PP
.\"O Correctly using a keyword (index) as a string
キーワード (index) を文字列として用いている正しい例:
.IP
expr index quote index d
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
