.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU fmt man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH FMT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBfmt\fR \- reformat paragraph text
.SH 名前
fmt \- テキストを段落に整形する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B fmt
.RB [ \-ctsu "] [" -\fIWIDTH\fR "] [" "\-p \fIREFIX\fR" "] [" "\-w \fIWIDTH\fR" ]
.RB [ \-\-crown\-margin ]
.RB [ \-\-split\-only ]
.RB [ \-\-tagged\-paragraph ]
.RB [ \-\-uniform\-spacing ]
.RB [ "\-\-prefix=\fIPREFIX\fR" ] 
.RB [ "\-\-width=\fIWIDTH\fR" ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR fmt " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B fmt
.\"O inserts and removes newlines to produce output lines of (at most) a
.\"O given number of characters (75 by default).  \fBfmt\fR reads from the
.\"O specified
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O arguments (or from standard input if none is given) and writes to standard
.\"O output.
.B fmt
は行を結合したり隙間を埋めたりして、
出力各行を与えられた文字数に揃える (正確には越えないようにする)。
デフォルトは 75 桁。
.B fmt
は
.I FILE
引数 (ファイルが一つも指定されなかった場合は標準入力) から読み、
標準出力に書く。

.\"O By default, blank lines, spaces between words, and indentation are
.\"O preserved in the output; successive input lines with different
.\"O indentation are not joined; tabs are expanded on input and introduced on
.\"O output.
デフォルトでは、空行・単語間のスペースの数・インデントは出力に保存される。
インデントの異なる連続行は結合しない。タブは入力で一度スペースに変換され、
出力で挿入される。

.\"O \fBfmt\fR prefers breaking lines at the end of a sentence, and tries to
.\"O avoid line breaks after the first word of a sentence or before the last
.\"O word of a sentence.  A "sentence break" is defined as either the end of
.\"O a paragraph or a word ending in any of `.?!', followed by two spaces or
.\"O end of line, ignoring any intervening parentheses or quotes.  Like
.\"O \fBTeX\fR(1), \fBfmt\fR reads entire "paragraphs" before choosing line
.\"O breaks; the algorithm is a variant of that in "Breaking Paragraphs Into
.\"O Lines" (Donald E. Knuth and Michael F. Plass, Software--Practice and
.\"O Experience', 11 (1981), 1119-1184).
.B fmt
は文の最後で改行しようとする。
また文の最初の単語の直後や、文の最後の単語の直前での改行は避けようとする。
「文の区切り」は、段落の最後か、`.?!' のどれかで終わる単語に
2 つのスペースまたは続いたものとして定義される。
ただし括弧や引用符の内部では文区切りとはみなされない。
.BR TeX (1)
と同じく、
.B fmt
も「段落」全体を読み込んでから改行位置を決める。
このアルゴリズムは、
"Breaking Paragraphs into Lines"
(Donald E. Knuth and Michael F. Plass,
Software--Practice and Experience', 11 (1981) 1119-1184)
で提案されたものをちょっと変更したものである。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-crown\-margin
.\"O "Crown margin" mode: preserve the indentation of the first two
.\"O lines within a paragraph, and align the left margin of each
.\"O subsequent line with that of the second line.
クラウンマージンモード (crown margin mode)。
段落の最初の二行のインデントを保存し、
引き続く行の左マージンをそれぞれ第二行のものに揃える。
.TP
.B \-p \fIPREFIX\fB, \-\-prefix=\fIPREFIX
.\"O Only lines beginning with \fIPREFIX\fR (possibly preceded by whitespace)
.\"O are subject to formatting. The \fIPREFIX\fR and any preceding whitespace
.\"O are stripped for the formatting and then re-attached to each
.\"O formatted output line.  One use is to format certain kinds of
.\"O program comments, while leaving the code unchanged.
.I PREFIX
で始まる行 (スペースが前置されていても良い) だけを再配置する。
.I PREFIX
(と前置されるスペース) は整形前にいったん削除され、
整形された出力行に再び挿入される。
利用法としては、例えばある種のプログラムのコメントだけを整形して、
コード部分は変更したくない場合などが考えられる。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-split\-only
.\"O Split lines only.  Do not join short lines to form longer ones.
.\"O This prevents sample lines of code, and other such "formatted"
.\"O text from being unduly combined.
行分割だけを行う。短い行を結合して長い行を生成する作業を行わない。
プログラムコードなどの「整形済み」テキストが
不正に結合されるのを避けることができる。
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-tagged\-margin
.\"O "Tagged paragraph" mode: like crown margin mode, except that if
.\"O indentation of the first line of a paragraph is the same as the
.\"O indentation of the second, the first line is treated as a one-line
.\"O paragraph.
タグ付き段落モード (tagged paragraph mode)。
クラウンモードと似ているが、
段落の最初の行のインデントは第二行のものとは異なっていなければならない。
同じである場合は、最初の行は一行だけからなる段落とみなされる。
.TP	  
.B \-u, \-\-uniform\-spacing
.\"O Uniform spacing.  Reduce spacing between words to one space, and
.\"O spacing between sentences to two spaces.		    
一様なスペース配置 (uniform spacing)。
単語間のスペースをスペース文字ひとつに減らす。
ただし文の間には二つのスペース文字が用いられる。
.TP
.B \-\fIWIDTH\fB, \-w \fIWIDTH\fB, \-\-width=\fIWIDTH
.\"O Fill output lines up to \fIWIDTH\fR characters (default 75).  \fBfmt\fR
.\"O initially tries to make lines about 7% shorter than this, to give
.\"O it room to balance line lengths.
出力行を
.I WIDTH
桁まで埋めようとする (デフォルトは 75)。
.B fmt
は各行の長さを揃えるための空間を確保する目的から、
およそ 7% ほど行を短くする傾向にある。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。

