.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU fold man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH FOLD 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBfold\fR \- wrap input lines to fit into specified width
.SH 名前
fold \- 入力行を指定された幅にあわせて折りたたむ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B fold
.RB [ \-bs "] [" "\-w \fIWIDTH\fR" "]  [" \-\-bytes "] [" \-\-spaces ]
.RB [ \-\-width=\fIWIDTH ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR fold " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B fold
.\"O writes each 
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O to standard output, breaking long lines.  If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B fold
は指定されたファイルの内容を標準出力に書き込む。
その際、長い行は複数の短い行に分割する。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O By default, \fBfold\fR breaks lines wider than 80 columns.  The output is
.\"O split into as many lines as necessary.
デフォルトでは、
.B fold
は 80 桁以上の行を分割する。
出力は必要な分の行数になる。

.\"O \fBfold\fR counts screen columns by default; thus, a tab may count more
.\"O than one column, backspace decreases the column count, and carriage
.\"O return sets the column to zero.
デフォルトでは桁数の評価は画面出力のイメージをもとに行われる。
したがってタブ文字は複数桁に数えられることが多いだろうし、
バックスペース文字は桁数を減らすことになり、
復帰 (carriage return) 文字は桁数のカウントを 0 に戻すことになる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-bytes
.\"O Count bytes rather than columns, so that tabs, backspaces, and
.\"O carriage returns are each counted as taking up one column, just
.\"O like other characters.
桁数ではなくバイト数をカウントする。
したがってタブ、バックスペース、復帰の各文字は、
他の文字と同じくカウントをひとつだけ増す効果のみを持つことになる。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-spaces
.\"O Break at word boundaries: the line is broken after the last blank
.\"O before the maximum line length.  If the line contains no such
.\"O blanks, the line is broken at the maximum line length as usual.
単語 (word) の境界で行の分割を行う。
行に空白 (blank) があれば、行の最大長を越えないうち、
最も大きな桁にある空白で改行が行われる。
行に空白がひとつもなければ、行の最大長の位置で改行が行われる
(通常の動作と同じ)。
.TP
.B \-w \fIWIDTH\fB, \-\-width=\fIWIDTH
.\"O Use a maximum line length of \fIWIDTH\fR columns instead of 80.
行の最大長を
.I WIDTH
桁にする (デフォルトは 80)。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。

