.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU groups man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	supplementary groups	補助グループ
.\"
.TH groups 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O groups \- print the groups a user is in
.SH 名前
groups \- ユーザが所属するグループをすべて表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "groups [" username... ]
.sp
.B groups [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B groups
.\"O prints the names of the supplementary groups that each given
.\"O .IR username ,
.\"O or the current process if none are given.
.\"O If user names are given, the name of each user is printed before the
.\"O list of that user's groups.
.B groups
は与えられた
.I username
がそれぞれ所属する補助グループ群の名前を表示する。
引数が与えられなければ現在のプロセスの所属が表示される。
ユーザー名が与えられると、そのユーザーのグループリストの前に
ユーザーの名前が表示される。
.PP
.\"O The group lists are equivalent to the output of the command `id \-Gn'.
グループリストはコマンド `id \-Gn' の出力と等価である。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O When GNU
.\"O .B groups
.\"O is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are recognized:
GNU
.B groups
が引数一つだけで起動された場合には、
以下のオプションが認識される:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
