.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU id man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH id 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O id \- print real and effective uid and gid
.SH 名前
id \- 実 uid, 実効 uid, 実 gid, 実効 gid を表示する。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B id
.B [\-gnruG] [\-\-group] [\-\-name] [\-\-real] [\-\-user] [\-\-groups]
.BI [ username ]
.sp
.B id [\-\-help] [\-\-version] 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B id
.\"O prints information about the given user, or the process running it if
.\"O no user is specified.
.B id
は与えられたユーザーの情報を表示する。
ユーザーが与えられなかった場合は、親プロセスの情報を表示する。
.P
.\"O By default, it prints the real user id, real
.\"O group id, effective user id if different from the real user id,
.\"O effective group id if different from the real group ID, and
.\"O supplemental group ids. 
デフォルトでは、
.B id
は実ユーザー id, 実グループ id,
実効ユーザー id (実ユーザー id と違うとき),
実効グループ id (実グループ id と違うとき),
所属している各グループの id を表示する。

.\"O Each of these numeric values is preceded by an identifying string and
.\"O followed by the corresponding user or group name in parentheses.
それぞれの数値の前には識別用の文字列が置かれ、
後には対応するユーザー名、グループ名が括弧に括られて追加される。
.PP
.\"O The options cause
.\"O .B id
.\"O to print only part of the above information.
オプションによって、
上記の情報のうちの一部だけを
.B id
に表示させることもできる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-g, \-\-group"
.\"O Print only the group id.
グループ id だけを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-G, \-\-groups"
.\"O Print only the supplementary groups.
所属グループだけを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-n, \-\-name"
.\"O Print the user or group name instead of the id number.
.\"O Requires
.\"O .BR \-u ,
.\"O .BR \-g ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR \-G .
id 番号の代わりにユーザー名・グループ名を表示する。
.BR \-u ,
.BR \-g ,
.B \-G
のいずれかを同時に指定しなければならない。
.TP
.B "\-r, \-\-real"
.\"O Print the real, instead of effective, user or group id.
.\"O Requires
.\"O .BR \-u ,
.\"O .BR \-g ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR \-G .
実効ユーザー id、実効グループ id ではなく、
実ユーザー id、実グループ id を表示する。
.BR \-u ,
.BR \-g ,
.B \-G
のいずれかを同時に指定しなければならない。
.TP
.B "\-u, \-\-user"
.\"O Print only the user id.
ユーザー id だけを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
