.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999-2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Sat Oct 30 00:21:57 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Mar  1 23:04:53 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	permissions		アクセス権
.\"WORD:	attribute		属性
.\"WORD:	symbolic mode		シンボルモード
.\"WORD:	numeric mode		数値モード
.\"WORD:	octal number		8 進数
.\"
.TH INSTALL 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O install \- copy files and set attributes
install \- ファイルをコピーし、その属性を設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B install
.BI [ options ]
.B [\-s] [\-\-strip]
.I source dest
.br
.B install
.BI [ options ]
.B [\-s] [\-\-strip]
.I source... directory
.br
.B install
.BI [ options ]
.B [\-d,\-\-directory]
.I directory...
.sp
.\"O Options (shortest form):
オプション (簡略形式):
.br
.B [\-bcpvD]
.BI "[\-g " group ]
.BI "[\-m " mode ]
.BI "[\-o " owner ]
.BI "[\-S " suffix ]
.B [\-V {numbered,existing,simple}]
.B [\-\-preserve\-timestamps]
.BI [\-\-target\-directory= dir ]
.B [\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B install
.\"O copies files while setting their permission modes and, if
.\"O possible, their owner and group.
.B install
はファイルをコピーし、そのアクセス権を設定する。
可能ならば所有者とグループを設定する。
.PP
.\"O In the first of these invocation forms, the
.\"O .I source
.\"O file is copied to the
.\"O .I dest
.\"O target file.  In the second, each of the
.\"O .I source
.\"O files are copied to the destination
.\"O .IR directory .
.\"O In the last, each
.\"O .I directory
.\"O (and any missing parent directories) is created.
1 番目の呼び出し形式では、ファイル
.I source
が目的のファイル
.I dest
にコピーされる。
2 番目の形式では、複数のファイル
.I source
のそれぞれが指定ディレクトリ
.I directory
にコピーされる。
最後の形式では、個々のディレクトリ
.I directory
が (親ディレクトリがない場合はそれも含めて) 作成される。
.PP
.\"O .B install
.\"O is similar to
.\"O .BR cp ,
.\"O but allows you to control the attributes of destination files.
.\"O It is typically used in Makefiles to copy programs into their
.\"O destination directories.  It refuses to copy files onto themselves.
.B install
は
.B cp
と似ているが、コピー先ファイルの属性を制御できる。
プログラムを指定ディレクトリにコピーするために、
Makefile 内でよく用いられる。
ファイルをそれ自身へコピーすることはできない。
.PP
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-c"
.\"O Ignored; for compatibility with old Unix versions of
.\"O .BR install .
無視される。古い Uxix 版の
.B install
との互換性のためにある。
.TP
.B "\-d, \-\-directory"
.\"O Create each given directory and any missing parent directories,
.\"O setting the owner, group and mode as given on the command line or
.\"O to the defaults.  It also gives any parent directories it creates
.\"O those attributes.
指定されたディレクトリを作成する。
親ディレクトリが存在しない場合は、それも作成する。
所有者・グループ・モードを、コマンドラインで指定された設定、
またはデフォルトの設定にする。
このとき作成した親ディレクトリにも同じ属性を与える。
.TP
.BI "\-g " "group" ", \-\-group=" "group"
.\"O Set the group ownership of installed files or directories to
.\"O .IR group .
.\"O The default is the process's current group.
.\"O .I group
.\"O may be either a group name or a numeric group id.
インストールされたファイルやディレクトリの所有グループを
.I group
に設定する。
デフォルトではプロセスが属する現在のグループになる。
.I group
はグループ名でも数字のグループ ID でもよい。
.TP
.BI "\-m " "mode" ", \-\-mode=" "mode"
.\"O Set the permissions for the installed file or directory to
.\"O .IR mode ,
.\"O which can be either an octal number, or a symbolic mode as in
.\"O .BR chmod ,
.\"O with 0 as the point of departure. The default mode is 0755 - read,
.\"O write, and execute for the owner, 
.\"O and read and execute for group and other.
インストールされたファイルやディレクトリのアクセス権を
.I mode
に設定する。
モードは 0 を基点とし、8 進数、
.B chmod
におけるシンボルモードのどちらでもよい。
デフォルトのモードは 0755 で、所有者の読み取り・書き込み・実行、
グループとその他の人の読み取り・実行が可能である。
.TP
.BI "\-o " "owner" ", \-\-owner=" "owner"
.\"O If
.\"O .B install
.\"O has appropriate privileges (is run as root), set the ownership of
.\"O installed files or directories to
.\"O .IR owner .
.\"O The default is `root'.
.\"O .I owner
.\"O may be either a user name or a numeric user ID.
.B install
が適正な権利を持っている (root で実行された) 場合、
インストールされたファイルやディレクトリの所有者を
.I owner
に設定する。
デフォルトは `root' である。
.I owner
はユーザー名でも数字のユーザー ID でもよい。
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-preserve\-timestamps
.\"O Set the time of last access and the time of last modification of
.\"O each installed file to match those of each corresponding original
.\"O file.
インストールされたファイルの最終アクセス時刻と最終修正時刻を
それぞれコピー元ファイルと合わせる。

.\"O When a file is installed without this option, its last
.\"O file.  When a file is installed without this option, its last
.\"O access and last modification times are 
.\"O both set to the time of installation.
.\"O This option is useful if you want to use the last modification times of
.\"O installed files to keep track of when they were last built as opposed to
.\"O when they were last installed.
このオプションなしでファイルがインストールされると、
最終アクセス時刻と最終修正時刻は共にインストール時刻に合わせられる。
このオプションは、インストールされたファイルの最終修正時刻を、
「いつインストールされたか」ではなく「いつ作られたか」を
記憶させるために使いたい場合に便利である。
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-strip"
.\"O Strip the symbol tables from installed binary executables.
インストールされたバイナリ実行ファイルからシンボルテーブルを strip する。
.TP
.BI "\-\-target\-directory=" dir
.\"O Specify the the target directory with an option instead of as the last arg
.\"O in the command line.  This is useful with \fBxargs(1)\fR.
コマンドラインの最後の引き数ではなく、
オプションでインストール先ディレクトリを指定する。
\fBxargs(1)\fR と一緒に使う場合に役立つ。
.TP
.B \-D
.\"O Create all leading components of \fIdest\fR except the last,
.\"O then copy \fIsource\fR to \fIdest\fR; useful in the 1st format.
\fIdest\fR にコピーするために必要な全ディレクトリ構造を
(それがない場合は) 前もって作成する。
それから \fIsource\fR を \fIdest\fR にコピーする。
1 番目の形式の場合に便利である。
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
.\"O Print the name of each file before installing it.
インストールする前にそれぞれのファイル名を出力する。
.\"O .SH "GNU BACKUP OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU バックアップオプション"
.\"O The GNU versions of programs like
.\"O .BR cp ,
.\"O .BR mv ,
.\"O .BR ln ,
.\"O .B install
.\"O and
.\"O .B patch 
.\"O will make a backup of files about to be overwritten, changed or destroyed
.\"O if that is desired. That backup files are desired is indicated by
.\"O the \-b option. How they should be named is specified by the \-\-backup option.
.\"O In case the name of the backup file is given by the name of the file
.\"O extended by a suffix, this suffix is specified by the \-S option.
GNU 版のプログラム
.BR cp ,
.BR mv ,
.BR ln ,
.BR install ,
.B patch
は、上書き・修正・削除といった場合に、指示すればファイルの
バックアップを作成する。
バックアップファイルを必要とする場合は \-b オプションで指定する。
どのような名前にするかは \-\-backup オプションで指定する。
バックアップファイルの名前を、ファイル名に拡張子を追加する形で
与えるようにしたい場合、
この拡張子を \-S オプションで指示する。
.TP
.BI "\-b, \-\-backup[=" method ]
.\"O Make backups of files that are about to be overwritten or removed.  Note
.\"O that \fB\-b\fR does not take args.
上書きもしくは削除の必要がある場合には、
ファイルのバックアップを作成する。
\fB\-b\fR が引き数をとらない点に注意すること。
.TP
.BI "\-S " suffix ", \-\-suffix=" suffix
.\"O Append
.\"O .I SUFFIX
.\"O to each backup file made.
.\"O If this option is not specified, the value of the
.\"O .B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O environment variable is used.  And if
.\"O .B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O is not set, the default is `~'.
.I SUFFIX
をバックアップファイルそれぞれに付け加える。
このオプションが指定されていない場合、環境変数
.B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
に設定されている値が使われる。
.B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
が設定されていない場合のデフォルトは `~' である。
.TP
.BI "\-V " method ", \-\-version\-control=" method
.RS
.\"O Specify how backup files are named. The
.\"O .I method
.\"O argument can be `numbered' (or `t'), `existing' (or `nil'), or `never' (or
.\"O `simple').
.\"O If this option is not specified, the value of the
.\"O .B VERSION_CONTROL
.\"O environment variable is used.  And if
.\"O .B VERSION_CONTROL
.\"O is not set, the default backup type is `existing'.
バックアップファイルの命名方法を指定する。
引き数
.I method
には、`numbered' (または `t')、`existing' (または `nil')、
`never' (または `simple') を指定できる。
このオプションが指定されていない場合、環境変数
.B VERSION_CONTROL
の値が使われる。
.B VERSION_CONTROL
が設定されていない場合のデフォルトは `existing' である。
.PP
.\"O This option corresponds to the Emacs variable `version-control'.
.\"O The valid
.\"O .IR method s
.\"O are (unique abbreviations are accepted):
このオプションは Emacs 変数の `version-control' に対応している。
有効な
.I method
は以下の通り。(他と重複しない短縮形が使える):
.TP
.BR t ", " numbered
.\"O Always make numbered backups.
常に番号の拡張子を持つバックアップが作られる。
.TP
.BR nil ", " existing
.\"O Make numbered backups of files that already have them, simple
.\"O backups of the others.
番号の拡張子を持つバックアップがすでにある場合には
番号の拡張子を持つバックアップを、
そうでない場合には単純なバックアップを作成する。
.TP
.BR never ", " simple
.\"O Always make simple backups.
常に単純なバックアップが作られる。
.\"O .RE
.\"O This option is deprecated, use \fB\-\-backup=\fImethod\fR instead.
.PP
このオプションは推奨されない。
代りに \fB\-\-backup=\fImethod\fR を使うこと。
.RE
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストの終りを示す。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning. For the GNU version, the variables SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O and VERSION_CONTROL control backup file naming, as described above.
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
GNU 版では、変数 SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX と VERSION_CONTROL が
バックアップファイルの命名法を上で説明した方法で管理する。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O BSD 4.2 (which had the \-c, \-m, \-o, \-g and \-s options).
BSD 4.2 (\-c, \-m, \-o, \-g, \-s オプションがある)。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B install
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページは fileutils-4.1 パッケージの
.B install
コマンドについて説明したものである;
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛にメールで連絡してください。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
