.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU join man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH JOIN 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBjoin\fR \- join lines on a common field
.SH 名前
join \- 二つのファイルを読み、フィールドが共通な行を結合する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B join
[\fB\-i\fR]
[\fB\-1 \fIFIELD\fR]
[\fB\-2 \fIFIELD\fR]
[\fB\-a \fIFILE\-NUMBER\fR]
[\fB\-e \fISTRING\fR]
[\fB\-j \fIFIELD\fR]
[\fB\-j1 \fIFIELD\fR]
[\fB\-j2 \fIFIELD\fR]
[\fB\-o \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR]
[\fB\-t \fICHAR\fR]
[\fB\-v \fIFILE-NUMBER\fR]
.RB [ \-\-ignore\-case ]
.IR FILE1 " [" FILE2 ]

.BR join " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B join
.\"O writes to standard output a line for each pair of input lines that have
.\"O identical join field.
.\"O If one
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is missing or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used as input for that file.
.B join
は join フィールドが一致している入力行の各ペアを標準出力に表示する。
一方の
.I FILE
が与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O \fIFILE1\fR and \fIFILE2\fR should be already sorted in increasing order
.\"O (not numerically) on the join fields; unless the \fB\-t\fR option is given,
.\"O they should be sorted ignoring blanks at the start of the join field,
.\"O as in `sort \-b'.  If the \fB\-\-ignore\-case\fR option is given, lines should
.\"O be sorted without regard to the case of characters in the join field,
.\"O as in `sort \-f'.
.IR FILE1 " と " FILE2
は実行前に join フィールドの昇順にソートしておかなければならない
(数値順のソートはだめ)。
.B \-t
オプションが与えられなかった場合は、ファイルは join フィールドの
先頭にある空白を無視してソートしておかなければならない
(`sort \-b' のようなかたち)。
.B \-\-ignore\-case
オプションを与える場合には、各行は
join フィールドの英大文字小文字を無視してソートしておかなければならない
(`sort \-f' のようなかたち)。

.\"O The defaults are: the join field is the first field in each line;
.\"O fields in the input are separated by one or more blanks, with leading
.\"O blanks on the line ignored; fields in the output are separated by a
.\"O space; each output line consists of the join field, the remaining
.\"O fields from \fIFILE1\fR, then the remaining fields from \fIFILE2\fR.
デフォルトの動作は以下の通り:
join フィールドは各行の先頭に来る。
入力は 1 つ以上の空白でフィールドに分割され、
行頭の空白は無視される。出力のフィールドは 1 つのスペースで区切られる。
出力行は、 join フィールド、
.I FILE1
の残りのフィールド、
.I FILE2
の残りのフィールドからなる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-1 \fIFIELD\fB, \-j1 \fIFIELD
.\"O Join on field \fIFIELD\fR (a positive integer) of \fIFILE1\fR.
.I FILE1
の
.I FIELD
番目のフィールドを用いて join を行う
.RI ( FIELD
は正の整数)。
.TP
.B \-2 \fIFIELD\fB, \-j2 \fIFIELD
.\"O Join on field \fIFIELD\fR (a positive integer) of \fIFILE2\fR.
.I FILE2
の
.I FIELD
番目のフィールドを用いて join を行う
.RI ( FIELD
は正の整数)。
.TP
.B \-a \fIFILE\-LIST\fB
.\"O Print a line for each unpairable line in file \fIFILE\-NUMBER\fR (either
.\"O .RB ` 1 "' or `" 2 '),
.\"O in addition to the normal output.
.I FILE\-NUMBER
.RB (` 1 "' または `" 2 ')
のファイルにあるペアにならなかった行を、通常の出力に追加して表示する。
.TP
.B \-e \fISTRING
.\"O Replace those output fields that are missing in the input with \fISTRING\fR.
入力にフィールドがなかった場合、それに対応する出力フィールドを
.I STRING
にする。
.\"nakano: ちょっと動作がよくわからん...
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-ignore\-case
.\"O Ignore differences in case when comparing keys.  With this option,
.\"O the lines of the input files must be ordered in the same way.  Use
.\"O `sort \-f' to produce this ordering.
キーを比較するときに英大文字小文字の違いを無視する。
このオプションを指定するときは、
入力ファイルも同じように整列させておかなければならない。
このような整列を行うには `sort \-f' を使えば良い。
.TP
.B \-j \fIFIELD
.\"O Equivalent to \fB\-1 \fIFIELD \fB\-2 \fIFIELD\fR.
.B \-1
.I FIELD
.B \-2
.I FIELD
と同じ。
.TP
.B \-o \fIFIELD\-LIST...
.\"O Construct each output line according to the format in \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR.
.\"O Each element in \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR is either the single character `\fB0\fR' or
.\"O has the form \fIM\fB.\fIN\fR where the file number, \fIM\fR, is 
.\"O .RB ` 1 "' or `" 2 '
.\"O and \fIN\fR is a positive field number.
出力行のフォーマットに
.I FIELD\-LIST
を用いる。
.I FIELD\-LIST
の各要素は、一文字 `\fB0\fP' または \fIM\fB.\fIN\fR の形式である。
ここで \fIM\fP はファイル番号で
.RB ` 1 "' または `" 2 '
である。 \fIN\fP は正の整数で、フィールドの番号である。
.sp
.\"O A field specification of `\fB0\fR' denotes the join field.  In most
.\"O cases, the functionality of the `\fB0\fR' field spec may be reproduced
.\"O using the explicit \fIM\fB.\fIN\fR that corresponds to the join field.
.\"O However, when printing unpairable lines (using either or \fB\-a\fR
.\"O or \fB\-v\fR options), there is no way to specify the join field using
.\"O \fIM\fB.\fIN\fR in \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR if there are unpairable lines in both
.\"O files.  To give \fBjoin\fR that functionality, POSIX invented the 
.\"O `\fB0\fR' field specification notation.
フィールド指定 `\fB0\fP' は join フィールドを表す。
ほとんどの場合は、 `\fB0\fP' の機能は \fIM\fB.\fIN\fR を用いて
join フィールドを明示的に指定するやり方でも再現可能であろう。
しかし、 (\fB\-a\fP や \fB\-v\fP オプションを使ったときに)
ペアにならなかった行も表示する場合は、両方のファイルに
そのような行があると、 \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR で
\fIM\fB.\fIN\fR を使うやり方では
join フィールドを指定することはできない。
.B join
にこの機能を与えるため、 POSIX で
`\fB0\fR' フィールド指定の記述が発明された。
.sp
.\"O The elements in \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR are separated by commas or blanks.
.\"O Multiple \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR arguments can be given after a single \fB\-o\fR
.\"O option; the values of all lists given with \fB\-o\fR are concatenated
.\"O together.  All output lines \- including those printed because of
.\"O any \fB\-a\fR or \fB\-v\fR option \- are subject to the specified
.\"O \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR.
\fIFIELD\-LIST\fP の各要素はコンマまたは空白で区切られる。
一つの \fB\-o\fP オプションの後に複数の \fIFIELD\-LIST\fP
引数を指定することも出来る。 \fB\-o\fP オプション以降の
全てのリストの値は結合される。
\fIFIELD\-LIST\fR の指定は、
(\fB\-a\fP や \fB\-v\fP オプションに由来するものも含め)
全ての出力行に適用される。
.TP
.B \-t \fICHAR
.\"O Use character \fICHAR\fR as the input and output field separator.
入力・出力のフィールド区切りに文字 \fICHAR\fP を用いる。
.TP
.B \-v \fIFILE\-NUMBER
.\"O Print a line for each unpairable line in file \fIFILE\-NUMBER\fR (either 
.\"O .RB ` 1 "' or `" 2 '),
.\"O instead of the normal output. 
通常の出力ではなく、
.I FILE\-NUMBER
.RB (` 1 "' または `" 2 ')
のファイルにある、ペアにならなかった行だけを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
