.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	libtoolize man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Mon Jun  5 02:27:10 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	dlopen			ダイナミックロード
.\"WORD:	dlopen support		ダイナミックロード機能
.\"WORD:	library			ライブラリ
.\"WORD:	seamless		シームレス
.\"WORD:	shared			共有
.\"WORD:	static			静的
.\"
.TH LIBTOOLIZE 1 "June 2002" "libtoolize 1.4.2"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O \fBlibtoolize\fR \- add libtool support to your Makefile
\fBlibtoolize\fR \- Makefile に libtool の機能を付加する。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B libtoolize
.RB [ \-cfn ]
.RB [ \-\-automake ]
.RB [ \-\-copy ]
.RB [ \-\-debug ]
.RB [ \-\-dry\-run ]
.RB [ \-\-force ]
.RB [ \-\-ltdl ]
.RB [ \-\-ltdl\-tar ]

.BR libtoolize " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B libtoolize
.\"O provides a standard way to add \fBlibtool\fR(1) support to your Makefiles.
.B libtoolize
は Makefile に \fBlibtool\fR(1) の機能を
付加するための標準的な方法を提供する。

.\"O If you are using \fBautoconf\fR or \fBautomake\fR, you should add a call to
.\"O \fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR to your `\fBconfigure.in\fR' file.  This macro offers
.\"O seamless integration between the `\fBconfigure\fR' script and \fBltconfig\fR.
もし \fBautoconf\fR や \fBautomake\fR を使っているならば、
`\fBconfigure.in\fR' ファイルに \fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR の呼び出しを
追加すべきである。
このマクロを使うと `\fBconfigure\fR' スクリプトと \fBltconfig\fR を
シームレスに統合できる。

.\"O The \fBaclocal\fR program will automatically add \fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR
.\"O support to your \fBconfigure\fR script.  It is advisable to include copy of
.\"O your \fBlibtool.m4\fR into \fBacinclude.m4\fR, so that if the user rebuilds
.\"O \fBaclocal.m4\fR or \fBconfigure\fR they won't end up with possible
.\"O incompatible macros if your and their version don't match.
\fBaclocal\fR プログラムは \fBconfigure\fR スクリプトに
\fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR 機能を自動的に付加する。
あなたの \fBlibtool.m4\fR のコピーを \fBacinclude.m4\fR に
インクルードしておくことを推奨する。
なぜなら、あなたのマクロのバージョンと \fBacinclude.m4\fR の
バージョンが合わない場合にユーザーが \fBaclocal.m4\fR や \fBconfigure\fR を 
リビルドすると、互換性のないマクロのために終了しないかもしれないからである。

.\"O The macro requires that you define the Makefile variable \fBtop_builddir\fR in your
.\"O `\fBMakefile.in\fR'.  \fBautomake\fR does this automatically, but
.\"O \fBautoconf\fR users should set it to the relative path to the top of their
.\"O build directory (`../..', for example)
マクロでは `\fBMakefile.in\fR' において Makefile の変数
\fBtop_builddir\fR を定義する必要がある。
\fBautomake\fR はこれを自動で行うが、
\fBautoconf\fR ユーザーは、この変数をビルドディレクトリのトップへの相対パスで
(`../..' といったように) 設定すべきである。
.TP
.B AM_PROG_LIBTOOL
.\"O Add support for \fB\-\-enable\-shared\fR[\fB=\fIPACKAGE\fB,...\fR] so
.\"O that the user may specify wether they want shared or static libraries built
.\"O based on the name of the package.  The package name `default' matches any
.\"O packages that don't have their name in the \fBPACKAGE\fR environment variable.
ライブラリパッケージの名前によって、
共有/静的のどちらのライブラリをビルドするかをユーザーが指定できるように、
\fB\-\-enable\-shared\fR[\fB=\fIPACKAGE\fB,...\fR] をサポートする。
パッケージ名が `default' の場合、環境変数 \fBPACKAGE\fR にその名前がない
すべてのパッケージがマッチする。

.\"O By default, this macro turns on shared libraries if they are
.\"O available, and also enables static libraries if they don't
.\"O conflict with the shared libraries.  You can modify these defaults
.\"O by setting calling either the \fBAM_DISABLE_SHARED\fR or
.\"O \fBAM_DISABLE_STATIC\fR macros.
デフォルトではこのマクロは、もし可能であれば、
共有ライブラリの使用を有効にする。
さらに静的ライブラリが共有ライブラリと衝突しなければ、
静的ライブラリの使用も有効にする。
\fBAM_DISABLE_SHARED\fR または \fBAM_DISABLE_STATIC\fR マクロを
呼び出すことにより、このデフォルトを変更することができる。
.sp
.nf
.\"O # Turn off shared libraries during beta-testing, 
.\"O # since they make the build process take too long.
# ビルドプロセスが非常に長くなるので、
# ベータテストの間は共有ライブラリを無効にする。
AC_DISABLE_SHARED
AM_PROG_LIBTOOL
.fi
.sp
.\"O The macro also sets the environment variable \fBLIBTOOL_DEPS\fR, that you
.\"O can use to automaticall update the libtool scrit if it becomes out of date.
.\"O To do this, add to your \fBconfigure.in\fR
マクロは環境変数 \fBLIBTOOL_DEPS\fR も設定する。
この変数は libtool スクリプトが古くなったときに
自動的に更新するために使われる。
そのためには、\fBconfigure.in\fR に以下を加え、
.sp
.RS
.RS
.nf
AC_SUBST(LIBTOOL_DEPS)
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O and to \fBMakefile.in\fR or \fBMakefile.am\fR the following
さらに \fBMakefile.in\fR または \fBMakefile.am\fR に以下を加えること。
.sp
.RS
.nf
LIBTOOL_DEPS = @LIBTOOL_DEPS@
libtool: $(LIBTOOL_DEPS)
        $(SHELL) ./config.status --recheck
.fi
.RE
.RE
.sp
.TP
.B AC_DISABLE_FAST_INSTALL
.\"O Change the default behaviour from \fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR to disable any
.\"O optimizations for fast installation.  The user may override this macro by
.\"O specifying \fB\-\-enable\-fast\-install[\fB=\fIPACKAGE\fB,...\fR] as in
.\"O \fB\-\-enable\-shared\fR
デフォルトの動作を \fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR でなく
すべての最適化を無効にするよう変更し、インストールを高速化する。
ユーザーは \fB\-\-enable\-shared\fR と同じように、
\fB\-\-enable\-fast\-install[\fB=\fIPACKAGE\fB,...\fR] を指定することで
このマクロを上書きすることができる。
.TP
.B AC_DISABLE_SHARED
.\"O Change the default behaviour for \fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR to disable
.\"O shared libraries.  The user may still override this default by
.\"O specifying \fB\-\-enable\-shared\fR.
\fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR に対するデフォルトの動作を
共有ライブラリを無効とするように変更する。
ユーザーは \fB\-\-enable\-shared\fR を指定することにより、
このデフォルトの動作を更に変更することができる。
.TP
.B AC_DISABLE_STATIC
.\"O Change the default behaviour for \fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR to disable
.\"O static libraries.  The user may still override this default by
.\"O specifying \fB\-\-enable\-static.
\fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR に対するデフォルトの動作を
静的ライブラリを無効とするように変更する。
ユーザーは \fB\-\-enable\-static\fR を指定することにより、
このデフォルトの動作を更に変更することができる。
.TP
.B AC_LIBTOOL_DLOPEN
.\"O Use this macro if a package uses \fB\-dlopen\fR or \fB\-dlpreopen\fR.  It
.\"O must be called before \fBAMPROG_LIBTOOL\fR, and enables checking for dlopen
.\"O support.  Otherwise libtool will assume the platform doesn't support it.
パッケージが \fB\-dlopen\fR または \fB\-dlpreopen\fR を
使用するためには、このマクロを使用すること。
このマクロは \fBAMPROG_LIBTOOL\fR より前に呼ばれなければならず、
ダイナミックロード機能のチェックを有効にする。
さもなければ、libtool はプラットホームがダイナミックロードを
サポートしていないと仮定する。
.TP
.B AC_LIBTOOL_WIN32_DLL
.\"O Use this macro if a package has been ported to build clean dlls on win32
.\"O platforms. It must be called before \fBAMPROG_LIBTOOL\fR and
.\"O \fB\-no\-undefined must be passed to \fBlibtool\fR in link mode.
パッケージが win32 プラットホーム上でクリーンな dll をビルドするように
移植された場合には、このマクロを使用すること。
このマクロは \fBAMPROG_LIBTOOL\fR より前に呼ばれなければならず、
リンクモードで \fB\-no\-undefined が \fBlibtool に渡されなければならない\fR。

.\"O It usually this means that any library data items are exported with
.\"O `__declspec(dllexport)' and imported with `__declspec(dllimport)'.  If this
.\"O macro is not used, libtool will assume that the package libraries are not
.\"O dll clean and will build only static libraries on win32 hosts.	    
これは通常、ライブラリデータアイテムが `__declspec(dllexport)' で
エクスポートされ、`__declspec(dllimport)' インポートされることを意味している。
このマクロが使用されないと、libtool はパッケージライブラリは
dll クリーンでないと仮定して、win32 ホスト上で静的ライブラリしか作らなくなる。
.PP
.\"O See \fBlibtool\fR(1) for a Makefile.am example.
Makefile.am の例は \fBlibtool\fR(1) を参照すること。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-copy
.\"O Copy files from the libtool data directory rather than creating
.\"O symlinks.
シンボリックリンクを作らず、
libtool データディレクトリからファイルをコピーする。
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-force
.\"O Replace existing \fBlibtool\fR files.  By default, \fBlibtoolize\fR won't
.\"O overwrite existing files.
既存の \fBlibtool\fR ファイルを置き換える。
デフォルトでは \fBlibtoolize\fR は既存のファイルを上書きしない。
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-dry\-run
.\"O Don't create, modify, or delete any files, just show what commands
.\"O would be executed by \fBlibtoolize\fR.
ファイルの作成・修正・削除をせず、\fBlibtoolize\fR によって
どのようなコマンドが実行されるかを表示する。
.TP
.B \-\-automake
.\"O Work silently, and assume that Automake libtool support is used.
.\"O `libtoolize \-\-automake' is used by Automake to add libtool files to
.\"O your package, when \fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR appears in your `\fBconfigure.in\fR'.
静かに動作させるとともに、
Automake の libtool 機能が使用されることを仮定する。
\fBAM_PROG_LIBTOOL\fR が `\fBconfigure.in\fR' にある場合、
パッケージに libtool ファイルを追加するために
Automake により `libtoolize \-\-automake' が使用される。
.TP
.B \-\-debug
.\"O Enables shell script trace mode, writing to standard output.
シェルスクリプトのトレースモードを有効にし、標準出力に書き出す。
.TP
.B \-\-ltdl
.\"O Install libltdl in a subdirectory of your package.
パッケージのサブディレクトリに libltdl をインストールする。
.TP
.B \-\-ltdl\-tar
.\"O Add the file libltdl.tar.gz to your package.
パッケージに libtdl.tar.gz を追加する。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
使用法のメッセージを標準出力に表示し、正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示し、正常終了する。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
 \fBlibtool\fR(1), \fBltconfig\fR(1)
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to <bug-libtool@gnu.org>.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては <bug-libtool@gnu.org> へ報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
