.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Aug 22 12:42 JST 1999
.\"         by Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 17 11:26:54 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.TH LN 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH "名前"
.\"O ln \- make links between files
ln \- ファイルへのリンクを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH "書式"
.B ln [options]
.IB source " [" dest ]
.br
.B ln [options]
.I source... directory
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B [\-f]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-bdfinsvF]
.BI "[\-S " backup-suffix ]
.B "[\-V {numbered,existing,simple}]"
.BI [\-\-target\-directory= dir ]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH "説明"
.\"O .B ln
.\"O makes links between files.  By default, it makes hard links;
.\"O with the
.\"O .B "\-s"
.\"O option, it makes symbolic (or `soft') links.
.B ln
コマンドはファイルへのリンクを作成する。特に指定がないとハードリンクを作成する;
.B "\-s"
オプションを指定するとシンボリック (もしくはソフト) リンクを作成する。
.PP
.\"O There are two concepts of `link' in Unix, usually called
.\"O hard link and soft link. A hard link is just a name for a file.
Unix には通常ハードリンクとソフトリンクと呼ばれる、
2 つの「リンク」の概念がある。
ハードリンクは単にファイルの名前である。
.\"O (And a file can have several names. It is deleted from disk only
.\"O when the last name is removed. The number of names is given by
.\"O .BR ls (1).
(ファイルは複数の名前を持つことができる。
その最後の名前が削除された場合にのみディスク上から実体が消去される。
ファイルが持つ名前の数は
.BR ls (1)
コマンドで知ることができる。
.\"O There is no such thing as an `original' name: all names have the
.\"O same status. Usually, but not necessarily, all names of a file
.\"O are found in the filesystem that also contains its data.)
「もともと」の名前というものは無い: 
すべての名前は同じステータスを持っている。
通常、必須では無いが、ファイルの名前はすべてそのファイルシステム内にあり、
それ自身のデータもそこに持っている。
.PP
.\"O A soft link (or symbolic link, or symlink) is an entirely different
.\"O animal: it is a small special file that contains a pathname.
ソフトリンク (もしくはシンボリックリンク、または symlink) というのは
まったく違った種類のものである:
実体はパス名を含んだ小さくて特殊なファイルである。
.\"O Thus, soft links can point at files on different filesystems
.\"O (possibly NFS mounted from different machines), and need not point
.\"O to actually existing files.
従って、ソフトリンクは異なるファイルシステム上
(たぶん他のマシンからマウントされた NFS) のファイルを指すことができる。
また実際には存在しないファイルを指していても構わない。
.\"O When accessed (with the
.\"O .BR open (2)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR stat (2)
.\"O system calls), a reference to a symlink is replaced by the operating
.\"O system kernel with a reference to the file named by the path name.
.\"O (However, with
.\"O .BR rm (1)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR unlink (2)
.\"O the link itself is removed, not the file it points to.
.RB ( open (2)
または
.BR stat (2)
といったシステムコールにより) アクセスされた場合、
シンボリックリンクへの参照は、オペレーティングシステムのカーネルにより
そのパス名で指示されるファイルへの参照として置き換えられる。
(しかし、
.BR rm (1)
コマンドや
.BR unlink (2)
関数ではリンク自身が削除され、リンクが指しているファイルは削除されない。
.\"O There are special system calls
.\"O .BR lstat (2)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR readlink (2)
.\"O that read the status of a symlink and the filename it points to.
.BR lstat (2)
や
.BR readlink (2)
関数といったシンボリックリンクや、リンクが指しているファイル名のステータスを
得る特殊なシステムコールがある。
.\"O For various other system calls there is some uncertainty
.\"O and variation between operating systems as to whether
.\"O the operation acts on the symlink itself, or on the file pointed to.)
その他の色々なシステムコールでは、その操作の対象がシンボリックリンク
そのものなのか、それが指しているファイルなのかといったことについて、
オペレーティングシステム間で不明瞭さや違いがある。)
.PP
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR\ If only one file is given, it links that file into
.\"O the current directory, that is, creates a link to that file
.\"O in the current directory, with name equal to (the last component of)
.\"O the name of that file. (This is a GNU extension)
\fB\(bu\fR\ 1 つのファイルのみ与えられた場合、
そのファイルをカレントディレクトリにリンクする。
つまり、(一番最後におかれた)
ファイル名と同じ名前でファイルへのリンクをカレントディレクトリに作る。
(これは GNU での拡張機能である)
.PP
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR\ If the last argument names an existing directory,
.\"O .B ln
.\"O will create links to each mentioned
.\"O .I source
.\"O file in that directory, with a name equal to (the last component of)
.\"O the name of that
.\"O .I source
.\"O file.  (But see the description of the
.\"O .B "\-\-no\-dereference"
.\"O option below)
\fB\(bu\fR\ 最後の引き数がすでに存在するディレクトリであった場合、
.B ln
コマンドはそのディレクトリ内に
.I source
ファイルで指示されたそれぞれに対するリンクを作る。
その名前は (一番最後におかれた)
.I source
ファイルの名前と同じ名前を持つ。
(以下の
.B "\-\-no\-dereference"
オプションの説明を参照)
.PP
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR\ If only two files are given, it creates a link named
.\"O .I dest
.\"O to the file
.\"O .IR source .
\fB\(bu\fR\ 引き数にファイルが2つ指定された場合、
.IR source
を指す
.I dest
という名前のリンクが作成される。
.\"O It is an error if the last argument is not a directory and
.\"O more than two files are given.
最後の引き数がディレクトリでは無いのに、2 つ以上のファイルが指定された
場合はエラーとなる。
.PP
.\"O By default,
.\"O .B ln
.\"O does not remove existing files or existing symbolic links.
.\"O (Thus, it can be used for locking purposes: it will succeed only if
.\"O .I dest
.\"O did not exist already.)
.\"O But it can be forced to do so with the option \-f.
特に指定がないと、
.B ln
コマンドは存在しているファイルや、シンボリックリンクの削除はできない。
(そのため、ロックの目的で使うことができる:
.I dest
が存在しない場合のみ正常終了する)
\-f オプションを指定することで強制的に削除することができる。
.PP
.\"O On existing implementations, if it is at all possible to make a hard link
.\"O to a directory, this may be done by the superuser only. POSIX forbids
.\"O the system call
.\"O .BR link (2)
.\"O and the utility
.\"O .B ln
.\"O to make hard links to directories (but does not forbid
.\"O hard links to cross filesystem boundaries).
今ある実装では、ディレクトリへのハードリンクの作成ができる場合でも、
スーパーユーザーにのみ許される操作としている。
.BR link (2)
システムコールや
.B ln
コマンドでのディレクトリへのハードリンクの作成を POSIX では禁止している。
(しかし異種のファイルシステムをまたがったハードリンクは禁止していない。)
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B "\-f"
.\"O Remove existing destination files.
指定したリンクファイルがすでにあった場合は削除する。
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-d, \-F, \-\-directory"
.\"O Allow the super-user to make hard links to directories.
スーパーユーザーがディレクトリへのハードリンクを作成するのを許す。
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-force"
.\"O Remove existing destination files.
指定したリンクファイルがすでにあった場合は削除する。
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-interactive"
.\"O Prompt whether to remove existing destination files.
指定したリンクファイルがすでにあった場合は、削除するかどうか問い合わせを行う。
.TP
.B "\-n, \-\-no\-dereference"
.\"O When given an explicit destination that is a symlink to a
.\"O directory, treat that destination as if it were a normal file.
明示的にディレクトリにシンボリックリンクしているリンクファイル
が指定された場合、それを普通のファイルと同じように扱う。
.br
.\"O When the destination is an actual directory (not a symlink to one),
.\"O the link is created in that directory.
.\"O But when the specified destination is a symlink to a directory,
.\"O there are two possibilities:
リンク先が実際のディレクトリ (どこかへのシンボリックリンクではない) の場合、
そのディレクトリ内にリンクが作成される。
しかしディレクトリへのシンボリックリンクがリンクファイルとして指定された場合、
2 つの可能性がある。
.\"O .B ln
.\"O can treat the destination just as it would a normal directory and
.\"O create the link in it.  On the other hand, the destination can be
.\"O viewed as a non-directory--as the symlink itself.  In that case,
.\"O .B ln
.\"O must delete or backup that symlink before creating the new link.
.B ln
コマンドは指定されたリンクファイルを通常のディレクトリのように扱い、
その中にリンクを作成することができる。
もう 1 つは、リンクファイルが非ディレクトリ - 
シンボリックリンクそのものであるとして扱うことができる。
その場合には、
.B ln
コマンドは新しいリンクを作成する前にシンボリックリンクを削除、
またはバックアップする必要がある。
.\"O The default is to treat a destination that is a symlink to a directory
.\"O just like a directory.
デフォルトでは、ディレクトリへのシンボリックリンクが指定された場合には、
ディレクトリと同じように扱う。
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-symbolic"
.\"O Make symbolic links instead of hard links.  This option merely
.\"O produces an error message on systems that do not support symbolic links.
ハードリンクの代わりにシンボリックリンクを作成する。
シンボリックリンクをサポートしないシステムでは、
このオプションを指定すると単にエラーメッセージを出力する。
.TP
.BI "\-\-target\-directory=" DIR
.\"O Specify the the target directory with an option instead of as the last arg
.\"O in the command line.  This is useful with \fBxargs(1)\fR.
コマンドラインの最後の引き数として指定する代わりに、
このオプションでリンク先ディレクトリを指定する。
\fBxargs(1)\fR と一緒に使う場合に便利である。
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-verbose"
リンクを作成する前にそれぞれの名前を出力する。
.\"O .SH "GNU BACKUP OPTIONS"
.\"O The GNU versions of programs like
.SH "GNU バックアップオプション"
.\"O .BR cp ,
.\"O .BR mv ,
.\"O .BR ln ,
.\"O .B install
.\"O and
.\"O .B patch 
.\"O will make a backup of files about to be overwritten, changed or destroyed
.\"O if that is desired. That backup files are desired is indicated by
.\"O the \-b option. How they should be named is specified by the \-\-backup option.
GNU 版のプログラム
.BR cp ,
.BR mv ,
.BR ln ,
.BR install,
.B patch 
は、指示すれば上書き、修正、削除といった場合に
ファイルのバックアップを作成する。
バックアップファイルを必要とする場合は \-b オプションで指示する。
どういう名前にするかは  \-\-backup オプションで指定する。
.\"O In case the name of the backup file is given by the name of the file
.\"O extended by a suffix, this suffix is specified by the \-S option.
バックアップファイルの名前を、ファイル名の添字の拡張によって
与えるようにしたい場合、この添字を \-S オプションで指示する。
.TP
.BI "\-b, \-\-backup[=" METHOD ]
.\"O Make backups of files that are about to be overwritten or removed.  Note
.\"O that \fB\-b\fR does not take args.
上書きもしくは削除の必要がある場合にはファイルのバックアップを作成する。
\fB\-b\fR は引き数をとらない点に注意すること。
.TP
.BI "\-S " SUFFIX ", \-\-suffix=" SUFFIX
.\"O Append
.\"O .I SUFFIX
.\"O to each backup file made.
.\"O If this option is not specified, the value of the
.\"O .B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O environment variable is used.  And if
.\"O .B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O is not set, the default is `~'.
.I SUFFIX
をバックアップファイルそれぞれに付け加える。
このオプションが指定されていない場合、環境変数
.B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
に設定されている値が使われる。
.B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
が設定されていない場合、デフォルトは `~' である。
.TP
.BI "\-V " METHOD ", \-\-version\-control=" METHOD
.\"O This option is deprecated, use \fB\-\-backup=\fIMETHOD\fR instead.
このオプションは推奨されない。
代わりに \fB\-\-backup=\fIMETHOD\fR を使うこと。
.RS
.\"O Specify how backup files are named. The
.\"O .I METHOD
.\"O argument can be `numbered' (or `t'), `existing' (or `nil'), or `never' (or
.\"O `simple').
.\"O If this option is not specified, the value of the
.\"O .B VERSION_CONTROL
.\"O environment variable is used.  And if
.\"O .B VERSION_CONTROL
.\"O is not set, the default backup type is `existing'.
バックアップファイルの命名方法を指定する。
.I METHOD
引き数として `numbered' (または `t')、`existing' (または `nil')、
`never' (または `simple') を指定できる。
このオプションが指定されていない場合、環境変数
.B VERSION_CONTROL
の値が使われる。
.B VERSION_CONTROL
が設定されていない場合、デフォルトのバックアップタイプは `existing' である。
.PP
.\"O This option corresponds to the Emacs variable `version-control'.
.\"O The valid
.\"O .IR METHOD s
.\"O are (unique abbreviations are accepted):
このオプションは Emacs 変数の `version-control' に対応している。
有効な
.I METHOD
は (他と重複しない短縮形が使える):
.TP
.BR t ", " numbered
.\"O Always make numbered backups.
常に番号の添字を持つバックアップが作られる。
.TP
.BR nil ", " existing
.\"O Make numbered backups of files that already have them, simple
.\"O backups of the others.
番号の添字を持つバックアップがすでにある場合には番号の添字を持つバックアップを、そうでない場合には単純なバックアップを作成する。
.TP
.BR never ", " simple
.\"O Always make simple backups.
常に単純なバックアップが作られる。
.RE
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストを終了する。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH "環境変数"
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH "準拠"
.\"O POSIX 1003.2. However, POSIX 1003.2 (1996) does not discuss soft links.
.\"O Soft links were introduced by BSD, and do not occur in System V release 3
.\"O (and older) systems.
POSIX 1003.2 に準拠する。
しかし、POSIX 1003.2 (1996) ではソフトリンクについて触れていない。
ソフトリンクは BSD により持ち込まれ、System V release 3
(そしてそれ以前) のシステムでは無い。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
.BR ls (1),
.BR rm (1),
.BR link (2),
.BR lstat (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR readlink (2),
.BR stat (2),
.BR unlink (2)
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH "注意"
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B ln
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページでは fileutils-4.1 パッケージでの
.B ln
コマンドについて説明している。
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛てにメールで連絡してほしい。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してほしい。
