.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU logname man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 14:41:26 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH logname 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O logname \- print user's login name
.SH 名前
logname \- ユーザーのログイン名を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B logname
.sp
.B logname [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B logname
.\"O prints the calling user's name, as found in the file /var/run/utmp, and
.\"O exits with a status of 0.  If there is no /var/run/utmp entry for the
.\"O calling process,
.\"O .B logname
.\"O prints an error message and exits with a status of 1.
.B logname
は呼び出したユーザーの名前を /var/run/utmp ファイルから探し出して表示し、
ステータス 0 で終了する。/var/run/utmp に呼び出しプロセスのエントリがなければ、
.B logname
はエラーメッセージを表示してステータス 1 で終了する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.  Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
