.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999-2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Wed Nov  3 15:25:24 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Mar  2 14:47:25 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	allocation	割り当て
.\"WORD:	permission	アクセス権
.\"WORD:	fancy searching	ファンシー検索
.\"WORD:	sequence	シーケンス
.\"
.TH LS 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ls, dir, vdir \- list directory contents
.SH 名前
ls, dir, vdir \- ディレクトリの中身をリスト表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "ls [" options "] [" file... ]
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.BI "[\-CFRacdilqrtu1]"
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-1abcdfghiklmnopqrstuvxABCDFGHLNQRSUX]
.BI "[\-w " cols ]
.BI "[\-T " cols ]
.BI "[\-I " pattern ]
.B [\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR]
.B [\-\-classify]
.B [\-\-color[={none,always,auto}]]
.B [\-\-file\-type]
.B [\-\-full\-time]
.B [\-\-format={across,commas,long,single-column,verbose,vertical}]
.B [\-\-human\-readable]
.B [\-\-indicator\-style={none,file-type,classify}]
.B [\-\-quoting\-style={c,clocale,escape,literal,locale,shell,shell\-always}]
.B [\-\-show\-control\-chars]
.B [\-\-si]
.B [\-\-sort={none,extension,size,time,version}]
.B [\-\-time={atime,access,ctime,status,use}]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The program
.\"O .B ls
.\"O lists first its non-directory
.\"O .I file
.\"O arguments, and then for each directory argument all listable files
.\"O contained within that directory. If no non-option arguments are present,
.\"O a default argument `.' (the current directory) is assumed.
.\"O The \-d option causes directories to be treated as 
.\"O non-directory arguments.
.\"O A file is listable when either its name does not start with `.',
.\"O or the \-a option is given.
プログラム
.B ls
は、最初にディレクトリでない引き数
.I file
をリスト表示する。それから、ディレクトリである引き数について、
それぞれのディレクトリにあるリスト表示可能なすべてのファイルを表示する。
オプション以外の引き数が何もない場合、デフォルトの引き数として `.'
(現在のディレクトリ) を仮定する。
\-d オプションは、ディレクトリを
ディレクトリでない引き数として扱わせるようにする。
ファイル名が `.' で始まっていなければ、そのファイルは表示される。
`.' で始まる名前のファイルでも、\-a オプションが指定されていれば表示される。
.PP
.\"O Each of the lists of files (that of non-directory files, and for
.\"O each directory the list of files inside) is sorted separately
.\"O according to the collating sequence in the current locale.
.\"O When the \-l option is given, each list is preceded by a summary
.\"O line giving the total size of all files in the list, 
.\"O measured according the selected block size.
それぞれのファイルリスト
(ディレクトリでないファイルのリストと
各ディレクトリ内のファイルのリスト) は、
現在のロケールにおける文字の順序に従って個別にソートされる。
\-l オプションが指定された場合、
リスト中の全ファイルの合計サイズを表示する要約行が
各リストの前に付加される。
このサイズは選択されているブロックサイズを単位とする数値になる。
.PP
.\"O The output is to stdout, one entry per line, unless multicolumn
.\"O output is requested by the \-C option. However, for output to a
.\"O terminal, it is undefined whether the output will be single-column
.\"O or multi-column. The options \-1 and \-C can be used to force
.\"O single-column and multi-column output, respectively.
出力は標準出力に対して行われ、
\-C オプションで複数列出力が要求されない限り、1 行に 1 エントリである。
しかし、端末に対する出力では、出力が 1 列または複数列の
どちらになるかが定められていない。
オプション \-1 と \-C は、
それぞれ 1 列出力と複数列出力を強制させるために使用される。
.\"O .SH POSIX OPTIONS
.SH POSIX オプション
.TP
.B "\-C"
.\"O List files in columns, sorted vertically.
ファイルを複数列でリスト表示する。垂直方向にソートする。
.TP
.B "\-F"
.\"O Suffix each directory name with `/', each FIFO name with `|', and
.\"O each name of an executable with `*'.
ディレクトリ名の後に `/' を、FIFO の名前の後に `|' を、
実行可能なファイル名の後に `*' をそれぞれ付加する。
.TP
.B "\-R"
.\"O Recursively list subdirectories encountered.
サブディレクトリがあれば、再帰的にリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-a"
.\"O Include files with a name starting with `.' in the listing.
`.' で始まる名前のファイルをリスト表示に含める。
.TP
.B "\-c"
.\"O Use the status change time instead of the modification time
.\"O for sorting (with \-t) or listing (with \-l).
ソート (\-t) やリスト表示 (\-l) のとき、
修正時刻ではなく状態変更時刻を使う。
.TP
.B "\-d"
.\"O List names of directories like other files, rather than
.\"O listing their contents.
ディレクトリの中身を表示せず、
他のファイルと同じようにディレクトリ名をリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-i"
.\"O Precede the output for the file by the file serial number (i-node number).
ファイルのシリアル番号 (i-node 番号) をファイル名の出力の前に置く。
.TP
.B "\-l"
.\"O Write (in single-column format) the file mode, the number of links
.\"O to the file, the owner name, the group name, 
.\"O the size of the file (in bytes), the timestamp, and the filename.
.\"O By default, the timestamp shown is that of the last modification; the
.\"O options \-c and \u select the other two timestamps.
.\"O For device special files the size field is commonly replaced
.\"O by the major and minor device numbers.
ファイルのモード・リンクの数・所有者名・グループ名・
(バイト単位の) サイズ・タイムスタンプ・名前を (1 列形式で) 書き出す。
デフォルトでは、表示されるタイムスタンプは最終修正時刻である。
オプション \-c と \-u のときは、他の 2 つのタイムスタンプを選択する。
デバイススペシャルファイルの場合、通例として、サイズを表示する場所が
デバイスのメジャー番号とマイナー番号に置き換えられる。
.TP
.B "\-q"
.\"O Output nonprintable characters in a filename as question marks.
.\"O (This is permitted to be the default for output to a terminal.)
ファイル名の中の非表示文字をクエスチョンマークで出力する。
(端末への出力では、このオプションをデフォルトにすることが許されている。)
.TP
.B "\-r"
.\"O Reverse the order of the sort.
ソートの順序を逆にする。
.TP
.B "\-t"
.\"O Sort by the timestamp shown.
表示されるタイムスタンプでソートする。
.TP
.B "\-u"
.\"O Use the time of last access instead of the modification time
.\"O for sorting (with \-t) or listing (with \-l).
ソート (\-t) やリスト表示 (\-l) のとき、
修正時刻ではなく最終アクセス時刻を使う。
.TP
.B "\-1"
.\"O For single-column output.
出力を 1 列にする。
.\"O .SH "GNU DETAILS"
.SH GNU 詳細
.\"O If standard output is a terminal, 
.\"O the output is in columns (sorted vertically).
標準出力が端末の場合、出力は (垂直方向にソートされて) 複数列になる。
.PP
.\"O .B dir
.\"O (also installed as
.\"O .BR d )
.\"O is equivalent to `ls \-C'; that is, files are by default listed
.\"O in columns, sorted vertically.
.B dir
.RB "(" d
という名前でもインストールされる) は `ls \-C' と等しい。
つまり、デフォルトとして、
ファイルは垂直方向にソートされて複数列でリスト表示される。
.\"O .B vdir
.\"O (also installed as
.\"O .BR v )
.\"O is equivalent to `ls \-l'; that is, files are by default listed in long
.\"O format.
.B vdir
.RB "(" v
という名前でもインストールされる) は `ls \-l' と等しい。
つまり、デフォルトとして、ファイルは長い形式でリスト表示される。
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH GNU オプション
.TP
.B "\-1, \-\-format=single-column"
.\"O List one file per line. This is the default for when standard output is
.\"O not a terminal.
1 行に 1 ファイルをリスト表示する。
標準出力が端末でない場合のデフォルトである。
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
.\"O List all files in directories, including all files that start with `.'.
`.' ではじまるファイルを含め、
ディレクトリ中のすべてのファイルをリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-b, \-\-escape, \-\-quoting\-style=escape"
.\"O Quote nongraphic characters in file names using alphabetic and octal
.\"O backslash sequences like those used in C.
ファイル名の中の非表示文字を表すため、
バックスラッシュとアルファベットのシーケンスや
バックスラッシュと 8 進数のシーケンスを用いる。
これらのシーケンスは C 言語で使われているものと同じである。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Sort directory contents according to the files' status change time (the
.\"O `ctime' in the inode). If the long listing format is being
.\"O .RB "used (" \-l )
.\"O print the status change time instead of the modification time.
ディレクトリの内容をファイルの状態変更時刻
(inode の `ctime') でソートする。
長いリスト表示形式が使われる
.RB "(" \-l
オプションの) 場合、修正時刻ではなく状態変更時刻が表示される。
.TP
.B "\-d, \-\-directory"
.\"O List names of directories like other files, 
.\"O rather than listing their contents.
ディレクトリの中身を表示せず、
他のファイルと同じようにディレクトリ名をリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-f"
.\"O Do not sort directory contents; list them in whatever order they are
.\"O stored on the disk.
.\"O Also enables
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O and disables 
.\"O .BR \-l ,
.\"O .BR \-\-color ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O if they were specified before the
.\"O .BR \-f .
ディレクトリの中身をソートせず、ディスク上にある順番にリスト表示する。
このオプションは
.B \-a
も有効にする。
.B \-f 
より前に
.BR \-l ,
.BR \-\-color ,
.B \-s
が指定された場合、それらのオプションは無効になる。
.TP
.B \-g
.\"O Ignored; for Unix compatibility.
無視される。Unix との互換性のためにある。
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-human\-readable
.\"O Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.
.\"O Powers of 2 are used, not 10; \fBM\fR stands for 1,048,576 bytes.
.\"O Use the \fB\-H\fR or \fB\-\-si\fR option if you prefer powers of 10.
それぞれのサイズについて、
例えばメガバイトなら \fBM\fR といったサイズ文字を付加する。
10 の累乗ではなく 2 の累乗を用いるので、\fBM\fR は 1,048,576 バイトを表す。
10 の累乗にしたいときは \fB\-H\fR または \fB\-\-si\fR オプションを使うこと。
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-inode"
.\"O Print the inode number (also called the file serial number and index
.\"O number) of each file to the left of the file name. (This number uniquely
.\"O identifies each file within a particular filesystem)
それぞれのファイルについて、ファイル名の左に inode 番号
(ファイルシリアル番号やインデックス番号とも呼ばれる) を表示する。
(この番号が、あるファイルシステム上のそれぞれファイルを
他と重ならないように区別する。)
.TP
.B "\-k, \-\-kilobytes"
.\"O If file sizes are being listed, print them in kilobytes.
ファイルサイズがリスト表示される場合は、キロバイト単位で表示する。
.TP
.B "\-l, \-\-format=long, \-\-format=verbose"
.\"O In addition to the name of each file, print the file type,
.\"O permissions, number of hard links, owner name, group name, size in
.\"O bytes, and timestamp (the modification time unless other times are
.\"O selected).  For files with a time that is more than 6 months old or
.\"O more than 1 hour into the future, the timestamp contains the year
.\"O instead of the time of day.
ファイル名に加えて、ファイルタイプ・アクセス権・ハードリンクの数・
所有者名・グループ名・バイト単位のサイズ・タイムスタンプ
(他の時刻が選択されなければ、修正時刻) を表示する。
ファイルの時刻が 6 カ月以上前または 1 時間以上先の場合、
タイムスタンプには時刻のかわりに年が入る。

.\"O For each directory that is listed, preface the files with a line
.\"O `total 
.\"O .IR blocks "', where " blocks " is the total disk space used by all"
.\"O files in that directory.  By default 1024-byte blocks are used, but this
.\"O value can be overriden. The \fIblocks\fR computed counts each hard link
.\"O separately; this is arguably a bug.
リスト表示される各ディレクトリについて、ファイル表示の前に `total
.IR blocks "'"
という行を置く。ここで、
.I blocks
はディレクトリ内の全てのファイルによって使用されるディスク容量の合計である。
デフォルトでは 1024 バイトブロックが用いられるが、
この値は上書きすることができる。
計算された \fIblocks\fR では、それぞれのハードリンクが別個に数えられている。
これはバグだという議論もある。

.\"O The permissions listed are similar to symbolic mode specifications but
.\"O .B ls
.\"O combines multiple bits into the third character of 
.\"O each set of permissions 
リスト表示されるアクセス権はシンボルモードの仕様と同じであるが、
.B ls
は複数のビットを各アクセス権のセットの 3 文字目に組み入れている。
.RS
.TP
.B s
.\"O If the setuid or setgid bit and the corresponding executable bit are
.\"O both set.
setuid ビットまたは setgid ビットが設定されていて、
さらに対応する実行ビットが設定されている場合。
.TP
.B S
.\"O If the setuid or setgid bit is set but the corresponding executable bit
.\"O is not set. 
setuid ビットまたは setgid ビットが設定されているが、
対応する実行ビットが設定されていない場合。
.TP
.B t
.\"O If the sticky bit and the other-executable bit are both set.
sticky ビットとその他のユーザーに対する実行ビットがともに設定されている場合。
.TP
.B T
.\"O If the sticky bit is set but the other-executable bit is not set.
sticky ビットは設定されているが、
その他のユーザーに対する実行ビットが設定されていない場合。
.TP
.B x
.\"O If the executable bit is set and none of the above apply.
実行ビットは設定されているが、上のどれも適用されていない場合。
.TP
.B -
.\"O Otherwise.
その他。
.RE     
.TP
.B "\-m, \-\-format=commas"
.\"O List files horizontally, with as many as will fit on each line,
.\"O each separated by a comma and a space.
ファイル名をコンマとスペースで区切って、
それぞれの行にできるだけ多く詰め込み、横にリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-n, \-\-numeric-uid-gid"
.\"O List the numeric UID and GID instead of the names.
所有者のユーザ名・グループ名のかわりに数字の UID と GID をリスト表示する。
.TP
.B \-o
.\"O Produce long format directory listings, but don't display group
.\"O information.  It is equivalent to using
.\"O .BR "\-\-format=long \-\-no-group" .
.\"O This option is provided for compatibility with other versions of 
.\"O .BR ls .
長い形式でのディレクトリのリスト表示をするが、グループ情報は表示しない。
.B "\-\-format=long \-\-no-group"
を用いるのと同じである。
このオプションは他のバージョンの
.B ls
との互換性のために提供された。
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-file\-type, \-\-indicator\-style=file\-type
.\"O Append a character to each file name indicating the file type. 
.\"O This is like
.\"O .B \-F
.\"O except that executables aren't marked.
ファイルタイプを示す文字を各ファイル名に加える。
.B \-F
と似ているが、実行可能ファイルにはマークしない。
.TP
.B "\-q, \-\-hide-control-chars"
.\"O Print question marks instead of nongraphic characters in file names. This
.\"O is the default if the output is a terminal and the program is \fBls\fR.
ファイル名の中の非表示文字の代わりにクエスチョンマークを表示する。
出力が端末、プログラムが \fBls\fR の場合のデフォルトである。
.TP
.B "\-r, \-\-reverse"
.\"O Sort directory contents in reverse order.
ディレクトリの中身を逆順にソートする。
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-size"
.\"O Print the disk allocation of each file to the left of the file
.\"O name.  This is the amount of disk space used by the file, which is
.\"O usually a bit more than the file's size, but it can be less if the
.\"O file has holes.
それぞれのファイルのディスク割り当て量をファイル名の左に表示する。
これはファイルによって使用されるディスクの総量である。
この大きさは普通はファイルのサイズよりいくらか大きいが、
ファイルがホール (穴) を持っている場合は小さくなることもある。

.\"O The allocation of each file is printed in 1024-byte blocks 
.\"O to the left of the file name, but this block size may be overriden.
各ファイルの割り当て量は 1024 バイトブロック単位でファイル名の左に表示される。
しかし、このブロックサイズは上書きされるかもしれない。
.TP
.B "\-t, \-\-sort=time"
.\"O Sort by modification time (the `mtime' in the inode) instead of
.\"O alphabetically, with the newest files listed first.
アルファベット順ではなく修正時刻 (inode の `mtime') でソートする。
最も新しいファイルが最初にくる。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Sort directory contents according to the files' last access time
.\"O instead of the modification time (the `atime' in the inode). If the long 
.\"O listing format is being used, print the last access time instead of the
.\"O modification time.
修正時刻ではなく最終アクセス時刻 (inode の `atime') で
ディレクトリの中身をソートする。
長いリスト表示形式が使われる場合、
修正時刻ではなく最終アクセス時刻が表示される。
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-sort=version
.\"O Sort by version name and number, lowest first.  It behaves like a
.\"O default sort, excepted that each sequence of decimal digits is
.\"O treated numericaly as an index/version number; numeric parts with
.\"O leading zeroes are considered as fractional
バージョン名とバージョン番号でソートする。
バージョンの一番低いものが最初にくる。
デフォルトのソートのように動作するが、10 進の数字のシーケンスは、
インデックス番号またはバージョン番号として数値的に扱われる。
ゼロを前にもつ数値部分は小数として扱われる。
.sp
.nf
.B "   ls \-1           ls \-1v"
   bar\-1.gz        bar\-1.gz
   bar\-100.gz      bar\-2.gz
   bar\-12.gz       bar\-12.gz
   bar\-2.gz        bar\-100.gz
   foo\-1.007.gz    foo\-1.007.gz
   foo\-1.012b.gz   foo\-1.01a.gz
   foo\-1.01a.gz    foo\-1.012b.gz
.fi
.sp
.TP
.BI "\-w, \-\-width " cols
.\"O Assume the screen is
.\"O .I cols
.\"O columns wide.  The default is taken from the terminal driver if
.\"O possible; otherwise the environment variable
.\"O .B COLUMNS
.\"O is used if it is set; otherwise the default is 80.
スクリーンの幅を
.I cols
文字と仮定する。
可能ならばターミナルドライバからデフォルトの値を採用する。
それが不可能な場合には、環境変数
.B COLUMNS
が設定されていればその値を使う。
設定されていない場合のデフォルトは 80 文字である。
.TP
.B "\-x, \-\-format=across, \-\-format=horizontal"
.\"O List the files in columns, sorted horizontally.
ファイルを複数列でリスト表示する。水平方向にソートする。
.TP
.B "\-A, \-\-almost\-all"
.\"O List all files in directories, except for `.' and `..'.
ディレクトリ内の `.' と `..' 以外のすべてのファイルをリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-B, \-\-ignore\-backups"
.\"O Do not list files that end with `~', unless they are given on the
.\"O command line.
コマンドラインで指定した場合を除いて、`~' で終わるファイルをリスト表示しない。
.TP
.B "\-C, \-\-format=vertical"
.\"O List files in columns, sorted vertically. This is the default if standard
.\"O output is a terminal. It is always the default for 
.\"O .BR dir " and " d .
.\"O GNU \fBls\fR uses variable width columns to display as many files as
.\"O possible in the fewest lines.
ファイルを複数列でリスト表示する。垂直方向にソートする。
標準出力が端末のときのデフォルトである。
.BR dir " と " d 
ではこのオプションが常にデフォルトになっている。
最も少ない行でなるべく多くのファイルを表示するため
GNU \fBls\fR は可変幅の列を使う。
.TP
.B "\-D, \-\-dired"
.\"O With the long listing (
.\"O .BR \-l  ) 
.\"O format, print an additional line after the main output:
長いリスト表示
.RB ( \-l  )
と一緒に使われた場合、メインの出力の後に以下のような追加の行を表示する：
.sp
.nf
.B "   //DIRED//"
.I "   BEG1 END1 BEG2 END2 ..."
.fi
.sp
.\"O The
.\"O .IR BEGn " and " ENDn
.\"O are unsigned integers which record the byte position of
.\"O the beginning and end of each file name in the output. This makes it easy
.\"O for Emacs to find the names, even when they contain unusual characters
.\"O such as space or newline, without fancy searching.
.IR BEGn " と " ENDn
は符号なし整数で、リスト出力における
各ファイル名の始めと終わりのバイト位置を記録したものである。
このオプションを使うと、
ファイル名にスペースや改行といった普段使わない文字が含まれている場合でも、
Emacs でファイル名を探すのが (ファンシー検索 (fancy searching) を使わ
なくても) 簡単になる。

.\"O If directories are being listed recursively
.\"O .RB ( \-R ),
.\"O output a similar line after each subdirectory:
ディレクトリが再帰的にリスト表示される
.RB ( \-R
オプションの) 場合、各サブディレクトリの後に以下ような行を出力する：
.sp
.nf
.B "   //SUBDIRED//"
.I "   BEG1 END1 ..."
.fi
.sp
.\"O Finally, output a line like
最後に、以下のような行を出力する。
.sp
.nf
.B "   //DIRED-OPTIONS// \-\-quoting-style=\fIWORD\fR"
.fi
.sp
.\"O where \fIWORD\fR is the quoting style.
ここで \fIWORD\fR はクォートのスタイルである。
.TP
.B "\-F, \-\-classify
.\"O Same as \fB\-\-indicator\-style=classify.
\fB\-\-indicator\-style=classify\fR と同じ。
.TP
.B "\-G, \-\-no\-group"
.\"O Inhibit display of group information in a long format directory listing.
長い形式でのディレクトリのリスト表示の場合に、グループ情報の表示をさせない。
.TP
.B \-H, \-\-si
.\"O Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.  (SI
.\"O is the International System of Units, which defines these letters
.\"O as prefixes)  Powers of 10 are used, not 2; \fBM\fR stands for
.\"O 1,000,000 bytes.  Use the \fB\-h\fR or \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR option if
.\"O you prefer powers of 2.
それぞれのサイズについて、
例えばメガバイトなら \fBM\fR といったサイズ文字を付加する
(SIとは国際単位系のことで、これらの文字を接頭辞と定義している)。
2 の累乗ではなく 10 の累乗を用いるので、
\fBM\fR は 1,000,000 バイトを表す。
2 の累乗にしたいときは \fB\-h\fR または
\fB\-\-human\-readable\fR オプションを使うこと。
.TP
.BI "\-I, \-\-ignore=" pattern
.\"O Do not list files whose names match the shell pattern
.\"O .I pattern
.\"O (not regular expression) unless they are given on the command line.  As
.\"O in the shell, an initial `.' in a filename does not match a wildcard at
.\"O the start of 
.\"O .IR pattern .
.\"O For example,
コマンドラインで与えられない限り、
シェルパターン 
.I pattern
(注：正規表現とは異なる) にマッチする名前のファイルはリスト表示しない。
シェルと同様に、ファイル名の先頭にある `.' は
.I pattern
の始めにあるワイルドカードにはマッチしない。
たとえば、
.sp
.nf
lightside:~% ls \-\-ignore='.??*' \-\-ignore='.[^.]' \e
   \-\-ignore='#*'
.fi	  
.sp
.\"O The first option ignores names of length 3 or more that start with
.\"O `.', the second ignores all two-character names that start with `.'
.\"O except `..', and the third ignores names that start with `#'.
では、
1 つ目のオプションが `.' で始まる 3 文字以上の長さの名前を
リストから除外する。
また、2 つ目のオプションが `..' 以外の `.' で始まる 2 文字の名前を除外する。
さらに、3 つ目のオプションが `#' で始まる名前をリストから除外する。
.TP
.B "\-L, \-\-dereference"
.\"O List the file information corresponding to the referrents of symbolic
.\"O links rather for the links themselves.
シンボリックリンクそのものではなく、
参照しているファイルの情報をリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-N, \-\-literal"
.\"O Do not quote file names.
ファイル名中の非表示文字の変換を行わない。
.TP
.B "\-Q, \-\-quote\-name, \-\-quoting\-style=c"
.\"O Enclose file names in double quotes and quote nongraphic characters as
.\"O in C.
ファイル名をダブルクォートで囲む。
さらに、非表示文字を C 言語で使われている形式に変換して表示する。
.TP
.B "\-R, \-\-recursive"
.\"O List the contents of all directories recursively.
すべてのディレクトリの中身を再帰的にリスト表示する。
.TP
.B "\-S, \-\-sort=size"
.\"O Sort directory contents by file size instead of alphabetically, with
.\"O the largest files listed first.
アルファベット順でなく、ファイルサイズでディレクトリの中身をソートする。
最も大きいファイルが最初に表示される。
.TP
.BI "\-T, \-\-tabsize " cols
.\"O Assume that each tabstop is
.\"O .I cols
.\"O columns wide.  The default is 8. 
.\"O .B ls
.\"O uses tabs where possible in the output, for efficiency. If 
.\"O .I cols 
.\"O is zero, do not use tabs at all.
タブストップの幅を
.I cols
文字分と仮定する。デフォルトは 8 文字分。
.B ls
は効率をよくするために出力中の可能な場所でタブを使う。
.I cols
がゼロの場合、タブをまったく使わない。
.TP
.B "\-U, \-\-sort=none"
.\"O Do not sort directory contents; list them in whatever order they are
.\"O stored on the disk. (The difference between 
.\"O .BR \-U " and " \-f 
.\"O is that the later doesn't disable or enable options). This is especially
.\"O useful when listing very large directories, since not doing any sorting
.\"O can be noticeably faster.
ディレクトリの中身をソートせず、ディスク上にある順番にリスト表示する
.RB ( \-U 
と
.B \-f
の違いは、\-f オプションが他のオプションを
有効にしたり無効にしたりする点にある)。
非常に大きなディレクトリをリスト表示する場合、
このオプションは特に有用である。
なぜなら、ソートをしないことにより著しく速くできるからである。
.TP
.B "\-X, \-\-sort=extension"
.\"O Sort directory contents alphabetically by file extension (characters
.\"O after the last `.'); files with no extension are sorted first.     
ディレクトリの中身をファイル拡張子 (最後の `.' の後につづく文字列) の
アルファベット順にソートする。
拡張子のないファイルは最初にソートされる。
.TP
.B \-\-block\-size=\fISIZE
.\"O Set the block size to \fISIZE\fR, overriding the value of the environment
.\"O variables.
環境変数の値を上書きして、ブロックサイズを \fISIZE\fR に設定する。
.TP
.BI "\-\-color[=" when ]
.\"O Specify whether to use color for distinguishing file types.
.\"O Colors are specified using the LS_COLORS environment variable.
.\"O For information on how to set this variable, see 
.\"O .BR dircolors (1). 
.\"O .I when
.\"O may be omitted, or one of:
ファイルタイプを区別するための色づけの有無を指定する。
色は環境変数 LS_COLORS を用いて指定される。
この変数の設定法についての情報は
.BR dircolors (1)
を参照すること。
.I when
は省略できる。
以下のいずれか 1 つを指定することもできる：
.RS
.TP
.B none
.\"O Do not use color at all. This is the default.
まったく色づけしない。これがデフォルトである。
.TP
.B auto
.\"O Only use color if standard output is a terminal.
標準出力が端末の場合のみ色づけする。
.TP
.B always
.\"O Always use color.  Specifying 
.\"O .B \-\-color
.\"O and no 
.\"O .I when
.\"O is equivalent to
.\"O .BR "\-\-color=always" .
常に色づけする。
.B \-\-color
を指定して
.I when
に何にも指定しないのは
.B \-\-color=always
と等しい。
.RE
.TP
.B "\-\-full-time"
.\"O List times in full, rather than using the standard abbreviation
.\"O heuristics. The format is the same as 
.\"O .BR date (1)'s
.\"O default; it's not possible to change this, but you can extract out the
.\"O date string with 
.\"O .BR cut (1)
.\"O and then pass the result to `date \-d'.
時刻に関する情報を標準の省略形式ではなく完全な形式でリスト表示する。
時刻の表示形式は
.BR date (1)
のデフォルトと同じ。この形式は変更できないが、
時刻の文字列を
.BR cut (1)
で取り出し、結果を `date \-d' に渡すことができる。

.\"O This is most useful because the time output includes the seconds.
.\"O (Unix filesystems store file timestamps only to the nearest
.\"O second, so this option shows all the information there is.)  For
.\"O example, this can help when you have a Makefile that is not
.\"O regenerating files properly.		    
時刻の出力に秒単位の情報を含んでいるので、このオプションはとても有用である。
(Unix ファイルシステムは、
四捨五入した秒単位までのタイムスタンプしか持たないので、
このオプションはタイムスタンプにあるすべての情報を表示する。)
例えば、Makefile でファイルを正しく再生成してくれない場合に
このオプションが役立つ。
.TP
.B \-\-indicator\-style=\fIWORD
.\"O Append a character to each file name indicating the file type, 
.\"O and depending on \fIWORD\fR:
各ファイル名にファイルタイプを示す文字を付加する。
付加される文字は \fIWORD\fR に依存する：
.RS
.TP
.B none
.\"O Do not append any character indicator; this is the default behaviour
ファイルタイプを示す文字を付加しない。これがデフォルトの動作である。
.TP
.B file\-type
.\"O Append `/' for directories, `@' for symbolic links, `|' for FIFOs, `=' for
.\"O sockets, and nothing for regular files.  This is the same as \fB\-p\fR or
.\"O \fB\-\-file\-type\fR.
ディレクトリに `/' を、シンボリックリンクに `@' を、
FIFO に `|' を、ソケットに `=' を付加する。
通常のファイルには何もつけない。
\fB\-p\fR と \fB\-\-file\-type\fR に等しい。
.TP
.B classify
.\"O As \fBfile\-type\fR, but also append a `*' for execultables.  This is the
.\"O same as \fB\-F\fR or \fB\-\-classify\fR.
\fBfile\-type\fR と同じであるが、
さらに実行可能ファイルには `*' をつける。
\fB\-F\fR と \fB\-\-classify\fR に等しい。
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-quoting\-style\=\fIWORD
.\"O Use style \fIWORD\fR to quote output names. 
.\"O The \fIWORD\fR should be one of the following:
出力されるファイル名をクォートするために、
\fIWORD\fR で指示されるスタイルを使用する。
\fIWORD\fR は次のいずれかでなければならない：
.RS
.TP
.B literal
.\"O Output names as\-is.  This is the default behaviour, 
.\"O although it may change to shell in future versions.
ファイル名をそのまま出力する。これがデフォルトの動作であるが、
将来のバージョンでは shell がデフォルトになるかもしれない。
.TP
.B shell
.\"O Quote names for the shell if they contain shell metacharacters or would
.\"O cause ambiguous output.
ファイル名がシェルのメタキャラクタを含む場合や、
シェルによくわからない出力を引き起こさせるかもしれない場合には、
ファイル名をクォートする。
.TP
.B shell\-always
.\"O Quote names for the shell, 
.\"O even if they would normally not require quoting.
通常はクォートを必要としないファイル名に対しても、クォートを行う。
.TP
.B c
.\"O Quote names as for a C language string; this is the same as \fB\-Q\fR or
.\"O \fB\-\-quote\-name\fR.
C 言語における文字列の形式でファイル名をクォートする。
\fB\-Q\fR と \fB\-\-quote\-name\fR に等しい。
.TP
.B escape
.\"O Quote as with \fBc\fR except omit the surrounding double-quote characters;
.\"O this is the same as \fB\-b\fR or \fB\-\-escape\fR.
\fBc\fR と同じであるが、ファイル名を囲むダブルクォート文字を省略する。
\fB\-b\fR と \fB\-\-escape\fR に等しい。
.TP
.B locale
.\"O Like \fBc\fR sytle but with appropiate locale specific quoting symbols \"like
.\"O this\".
\fBc\fR 形式と似ているが、
"このように" 適切なロケール固有のクォートシンボルを使う。
.TP
.B clocale
.\"O Like \fBc\fR sytle but with appropiate locale specific quoting symbols `like
.\"O this'.
\fBc\fR 形式と似ているが、
`このように' 適切なロケール固有のクォートシンボルを使う。
.PP
.\"O You can specify the default value of the \fB\-\-quoting-style\fR option
.\"O with the environment variable \fBQUOTING_STYLE\fR.
\fB\-\-quoting-style\fR オプションのデフォルトの値は
環境変数 \fBQUOTING_STYLE\fR で指定することができる。
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-show\-control\-chars
.\"O Print nongraphic characters as-is in file names.  This is the
.\"O default unless the output is a terminal and the program is \fBls\fR.
ファイル名の中の非表示文字をそのまま出力する。
出力が端末でないか、プログラムが \fBls\fR でない場合はデフォルトである。
.TP
.B "\-\-time=atime, \-\-time=access"
.\"O When used along with \fB\-\-sort=time\fR or \fB\-t\fR, 
.\"O this is equivalent to \fB\-u\fR (sort by atime).  
.\"O When used with options that normally print times, 
.\"O print each file's last access time, 
.\"O instead of it's last modification time.
\fB\-\-sort=time\fR または \fB\-t\fR と一緒に使われると、
\fB\-u\fR (atime でソートする) と等しくなる。
普通に時刻を表示するオプションと一緒に使われると、
各ファイルの最終修正時刻ではなく最終アクセス時刻を表示する。
.TP
.B \-\-time=ctime, \-\-time=status, \-\-time=use
.\"O When used along with \fB\-\-sort=time\fR or \fB\-t\fR, 
.\"O this is equivalent to \fB\-c\fR (sort by ctime).  
.\"O When used with options that normally print times, 
.\"O print each file's inode last change time, 
.\"O instead of it's last modification time.
\fB\-\-sort=time\fR または \fB\-t\fR と一緒に使われると、
\fB\-c\fR (ctime でソートする) と等しくなる。
普通に時刻を表示するオプションと一緒に使われると、
各ファイルの最終修正時刻ではなく inode の最終変更時刻を表示する。
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH GNU 標準オプション
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストの終りを示す。
.\"O .SH BLOCK SIZE
.SH ブロックサイズ
.\"O The default output file block size is 1024 bytes 
.\"O (or 512 if \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR).
.\"O You may change this value  by setting any of the following environment
.\"O variables, which are overriden 
.\"O if a \fB\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR is given.
デフォルトの出力ファイルブロックサイズは
1024 バイト (\fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR が設定されているときは 512 バイト) である。
この値は以下の環境変数のどれかを設定することで変更できる。
また、これらの環境変数の値は \fB\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR が
オプションに与えられると無視される。
.TP
.\"O In order of precedence:
優先順位:
.BR LS_BLOCK_SIZE ", " BLOCK_SIZE ", " POSIXLY_CORRECT .
.PP
.\"O The values for these variables can be either a number, 
.\"O \fBhuman\-readable\fR, or \fBsi\fR.  
.\"O Numbers may be followed by a size letter to specify a multiple of that
.\"O size, and a \fBB\fR to select normal bytes or a \fBD\fR to select
.\"O decimal "commercial" bytes.  For example `BLOCK_SIZE=1KB' is equal to
.\"O `BLOCK_SIZE=1024' and `BLOCK_SIZE=1KD' is equal to `BLOCK_SIZE=1000'
これらの変数の値は、数字でも \fBhuman\-readable\fR でも \fBsi\fR でもよい。
数字の後には、何倍であるかを指定するサイズ文字と、
通常のバイトを選択する \fBB\fR または
10 進の「商業用」バイトを選択する \fBD\fR を続けてもよい。
たとえば、`BLOCK_SIZE=1KB' は `BLOCK_SIZE=1024' に等しく、
`BLOCK_SIZE=1KD' は `BLOCK_SIZE=1000' に等しい。

.\"O The following letters are recognized (and used when printing with
.\"O \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR or \fB\-\-si\fR)
以下の文字が認識される 
(また \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR と 
\fB\-\-si\fR オプションで表示されるときに用いられる)
.TP
.B k
.\"O kilo: 2^10 = 1024 for \fB\-\-human-readable\fR, 
.\"O or 10^3 = 1000 for \fB\-\-si\fR
キロ: \fB\-\-human-readable\fR なら 2^10 = 1024、
\fB\-\-si\fR なら 10^3 = 1000 
.TP
.B M
.\"O Mega: 2^20 = 1,048,576 or 10^6 = 1,000,000
メガ: 2^20 = 1,048,576 または 10^6 = 1,000,000
.TP
.B G
.\"O Giga: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 or 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
ギガ: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 または 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
.TP
.B T
.\"O Tera: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 or 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
テラ: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 または 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B P
.\"O Peta: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 or 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
ペタ: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 または 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B E
.\"O Exa: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 or 10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
エクサ: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 または 
10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Z
.\"O Zetta: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 or 10^21 =
.\"O 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
ゼタ: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 または
10^21 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Y
.\"O Yotta: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 or 10^24 =
.\"O 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
ヨタ: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 または
10^24 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O The variables LS_BLOCK_SIZE, BLOCK_SIZE and POSIXLY_CORRECT determine the
.\"O choice of the output file block size.
.\"O The variable COLUMNS (when it contains the representation of a decimal
.\"O integer) determines the output column width (for use with the \-C option).
.\"O Filenames must not be truncated to make them fit a multi-column output.
.\"O The variable QUOTING_STYLE determines the quoting style for output.
.\"O The variable LS_COLORS is used to specify the colors used.
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES and LC_TIME
.\"O have the usual meaning.
.\"O The variable TZ gives the time zone for time strings written by
.\"O .BR ls .
変数 LS_BLOCK_SIZE, BLOCK_SIZE, POSIXLY_CORRECT は
出力ファイルブロックサイズの選択を決定する。
変数 COLUMNS は (10 進の整数表現を含んでいる場合)、
(\-C オプションで使われる) 出力の列の幅を決定する。
ファイル名は複数列での出力にあわせるために短くされたりはしない。
変数 QUOTING_STYLE は出力のクォートのスタイルを決定する。
変数 LS_COLORS は使用される色を指定するために使われる。
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES, LC_TIME 
が通常の意味を持つ。
変数 TZ は
.B ls
によって書き出される時刻の文字列のためのタイムゾーンを与える。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O On BSD systems, the
.\"O .B "\-s"
.\"O option reports sizes that are half the correct values for files that are
.\"O NFS-mounted from HP-UX systems. On HP-UX systems,
.\"O .B ls
.\"O reports sizes that
.\"O are twice the correct values for files that are NFS-mounted from BSD
.\"O systems. This is due to a flaw in HP-UX; it also affects the HP-UX
.\"O .B ls
.\"O program.
BSD システムでは、HP-UX システムから NFS マウントしたファイルに対して、
.B "\-s"
オプションでは正しい値の半分の値を表示してしまう。
HP-UX システムでは、BSD システムから NFS マウントしたファイルに対して、
.B ls 
は正しい値の 2 倍の値を表示してしまう。
これは HP-UX の欠陥によるもので、HP-UX の 
.B ls
プログラムにも影響を及ぼしている。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX 1003.2
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR dircolors (1)
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B ls
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページは fileutils-4.1 パッケージの
.B ls
コマンドについて説明したものである;
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛にメールで連絡してください。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
