.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU md5sum man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Mon 14 Apr 2003 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH MD5SUM 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBmd5sum\fR \- calculate and check MD5 hash checksums
.SH 名前
md5sum \- MD5 ハッシュチェックサムを計算・チェックする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B md5sum
.RB [ \-bctw ]
.RB [ \-\-binary ]
.RB [ \-\-check ]
.RB [ \-\-status ]
.RB [ \-\-text ]
.RB [ \-\-warn ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR md5sum " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B md5sum
.\"O computes and prints a 128-bit checksum (or "fingerprint" or
.\"O "message-digest") for each given
.\"O .IR FILE .
.\"O If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B md5sum
は 128 ビットのチェックサム (「指紋 (fingerprint)」
「メッセージダイジェスト」と呼ばれることもある) を
.I FILE
各々に対して計算して表示する。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O Output format when calculating checksums consists for each input \fIFILE\fR,
.\"O in a MD5 sum, a space, a file type character (`*' for binary, ` ' for text)
.\"O and a filename.  This is the format \fB\-\-check\fR expects.
チェックサムを計算したときの
各入力 \fIFILE\fR に対する出力フォーマットは、
MD5 sum 値・スペース・ファイルタイプを示す文字
(バイナリなら `*'、テキストなら ` ')・ファイル名、からなる。
.B \-\-check
は入力がこのフォーマットであるものとみなす。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-binary
.\"O Reads the input \fIFILE\fRs in binary mode. This option has no effect on Unix
.\"O systems, since they don't distinguish between binary and text files.  This is
.\"O the default on DOS platforms. 
各入力ファイル \fIFILE\fR を場異なるモードで読み込む。
Unix システムではバイナリファイルとテキストファイルの区別がないので、
このオプションは何の効果も無い。
これは DOS プラットフォームではデフォルトになっている。
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-check
.\"O Reads filenames and checksums from the given \fIFILE\fRs, and report wether
.\"O each file and the corresponding checksum are correct.  \fb\-\-check\fR
.\"O expects the same format \fBmd5sum\fR outputs.
指定された \fIFILE\fR それぞれからファイル名とチェックサムのペアを読み込み、
各ファイルに対応するチェックサムが正しいかどうかを報告する。
.B \-\-check
は入力に
.B md5sum
自身の出力と同じフォーマットを期待する。
.sp
.nf
.\" For example:
例えば:
md5sum *.txt > checksums.md5
md5sum \-\-check checksums.md5
.fi
.TP
.B \-\-text
.\"O Treat all input files as text files.
すべての入力ファイルをテキストファイルとして扱う。
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-warn
.\"O When verifying checksums, warn about improperly formatted MD5
.\"O checksum lines.  This option is useful only if all but a few lines
.\"O in the checked input are valid.	       
チェックサムを調べるとき、
正しくない書式の MD5 チェックサム行に対して警告を発する。
このオプションは、チェック入力の一部だけが有効なような、
特殊な場合以外はあまり役に立たない。
.TP
.B \-\-status
.\"O Silently exit with a status return code.  Warnings or checksum failures are
.\"O omitted, and errors from operations such as opening are reading are printed.
.\"O A successful exit code of 0 is only returned is everything is passed and no
.\"O errors have ocurred.  Otherwise a non-zero value is returned.
状態を示すリターンコードのみを返し、黙って終了する。
警告やチェックサムの間違いは出力されないが、
ファイルがオープンできない、読み込めない等の動作エラーは出力する。
成功した場合の終了コードは 0 で、
これはすべてがパスし、エラーが全くなかった場合にのみ返される。
それ以外の場合は 0 以外の値が返される。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.net>
が作成しました。
