.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999-2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Sat Oct 30 00:21:36 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Mar  2 14:47:25 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	mode		許可モード
.\"
.TH MKFIFO 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O mkfifo \- make FIFOs (named pipes)
.SH 名前
mkfifo \- FIFO (名前付きパイプ) を作る
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "mkfifo [" options "] " file...
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.BI "[\-m " mode ]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.BI "[\-m " mode "] [\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B mkfifo
.\"O creates FIFOs (also called "named pipes") with the
.\"O specified filenames.
.B mkfifo
は指定されたファイル名で、FIFO (「名前付きパイプ」とも呼ばれる) を作成する。
.PP
.\"O A "FIFO" is a special file type that permits independent processes
.\"O to communicate.  One process opens the FIFO file for writing, and
.\"O another for reading, after which data can flow as with the usual
.\"O anonymous pipe in shells or elsewhere.
"FIFO" は独立なプロセス間の通信を許可する特別なファイルタイプである。
あるプロセスが FIFO ファイルを書き込みのために開き、
他のプロセスが読み取りのために開く。
その後、シェルや他の場合における
普通の名前なしパイプと同様に、データを流すことができる。
.PP
.\"O By default, the mode of created FIFOs is 0666 (`a+rw') minus the bits in the
.\"O umask.
デフォルトでは、作成される FIFO の許可モードは 0666 (`a+rw') から
umask のビットを引いたものになる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI "\-m " mode ", \-\-mode=" mode
.\"O Set the mode of created FIFOs to
.\"O .IR mode ,
.\"O which is symbolic as in
.\"O .BR chmod (1)
.\"O and uses the default mode as the point of departure.
作成される FIFO の許可モードを
.I mode
に設定する。
この許可モードは
.BR chmod (1)
のシンボル表現で指定し、
デフォルトの許可モードに対する変更点として扱われる。
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストの終りを示す。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH "環境変数
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX 1003.2
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH "注意"
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B mkfifo
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページは fileutils-4.1 パッケージの
.B mkfifo
コマンドについて説明したものである;
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛にメールで連絡してください。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
