.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999-2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Wed Nov  3 17:04:31 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Mar  2 14:52:16 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH MV 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mv \- move (rename) files
mv \- ファイルを移動する (ファイル名を変更する)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "mv [" "option..." "] " "source target"
.br
.BI "mv [" "option..." "] " "source... target"
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B [\-fi]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.BI "[\-bfiuv] [\-S " suffix "] [\-V {numbered,existing,simple}] "
.B [\-\-strip\-trailing\-slashes]
.B [\-\-target\-directory]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B mv
.\"O moves or renames files or directories.
.B mv
はファイルやディレクトリの移動や名前変更を行なう。
.PP
.\"O If the last argument names an existing directory,
.\"O .B mv
.\"O moves each other given file into a file with the same name in that
.\"O directory. Otherwise, if only two files are given, it renames the
.\"O first as the second.  It is an error if the last argument is not a
.\"O directory and more than two files are given.
最後の引き数がすでに存在しているディレクトリならば、
.B mv
は指定したファイルを同じ名前でそのディレクトリに移動する。
一方、2 つのファイルしか指定されない場合、
1 番目のファイル名を 2 番目のファイル名に変更する。
最後の引数がディレクトリでなく、
3 つ以上のファイルが指定された場合はエラーとなる。
.PP
.\"O Thus, `mv /a/x/y /b' will rename the file /a/x/y into /b/y if /b
.\"O was an existing directory, and into /b otherwise.
したがって `mv /a/x/y /b' とすると、
ディレクトリ /b がすでに存在する場合は
/a/x/y を /b/y という名前に変更する。
/b が存在しない場合は /b という名前に変更する。
.PP
.\"O Let us call the file a given file is going to be moved into its
.\"O .IR destination .
.\"O If
.\"O .I destination
.\"O exists, and either the \-i option is given, or
.\"O .I destination
.\"O is unwritable, standard input is a terminal, and the
.\"O .B "\-f"
.\"O option is not given,
.\"O .B mv
.\"O prompts the user for whether to replace the file, writing a question
.\"O to stderr and reading an answer from stdin.  If the response
.\"O is not affirmative, the file is skipped.
指定されたファイルの移動先のファイルを
.I destination
とよぶことにする。
.RI 「 destination
がすでに存在する場合に \-i オプションが指定されている」
もしくは
.RI 「 destination
が書き込み不可で、標準入力が端末で、
.B "\-f"
オプションが指定されていない」のいずれかであれば、
.B mv
はユーザーにファイルを置き換えてよいかを問い合わせる。
問い合わせは標準エラーに書き出され、返答は標準入力から読み込まれる。
返答が置き換えを肯定するものでなければ、そのファイルは移動させない。
.PP
.\"O When both
.\"O .I source
.\"O and
.\"O .I destination
.\"O are on the same filesystem, they are the same file (just the name is
.\"O changed; owner, mode, timestamps remain unchanged).
.\"O When they are on different filesystems, the source file is copied
.\"O and then deleted.
.\"O .B mv
.\"O will copy modification time, access time, user and group ID, and mode
.\"O if possible. When copying user and/or group ID fails, the setuid and
.\"O setgid bits are cleared in the copy.
.I source
と
.I destination
が同じファイルシステム上にある場合、
その 2 つのファイルは同一のものである
(名前が変更されるだけあり、
所有者・許可モード・タイムスタンプは変更されない)。
2 つのファイルが異なるファイルシステム上にある場合、
元ファイルはコピーされた後で削除される。
可能であれば、
.B mv
は修正時刻・アクセス時刻・ユーザー ID・グループ ID・許可モードをコピーする。
ユーザー ID やグループ ID のコピーに失敗した場合は、
setuid ビットと setgid ビットをそれぞれクリアする。
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B "\-f"
.\"O Do not prompt for confirmation.
上書きの確認の問い合わせをしない。
.TP
.B "\-i"
.\"O Prompt for confirmation when
.\"O .I destination
.\"O exists.
.\"O (In case both \-f and \-i are given, the last one given takes effect.)
.I destination
がすでに存在する場合、上書きの確認の問い合わせをする。
(\-f と \-i が両方とも指定された場合、
後から指定された方のオプションが有効になる。)
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-force"
.\"O Remove existing destination files and never prompt the user.
移動先に存在する既存のファイルを削除する。
その際、ファイル削除の可否をユーザーに問い合わせない。
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-interactive"
.\"O Prompt whether to overwrite existing regular destination files. 
.\"O If the response does not begin with `y' or `Y', the file is skipped.
移動先に存在するファイルを上書きするかを問い合わせる。 
返答が `y' または `Y' で始まっていない場合、そのファイルを移動しない。
.TP
.B \-\-strip\-trailing\-slashes
.\"O Remove trailing slashes from all specified args.  This is useful in
.\"O scenarios like `mkdir a; ln -s a la; mv la/ b', in which mv would actually
.\"O move the `a' directory instead of `la' as mandated by POSIX.
指定された全ての引き数について、
後ろに付いているスラッシュを取り除く。
これは `mkdir a; ln -s a la; mv la/ b' のような場合に役立つ。
この場合 POSIX の要求により、
mv はシンボリックリンク `la' ではなく 
ディレクトリ `a' を実際に移動してしまう。
.TP
.BI "\-\-target\-directory=" DIR
.\"O Specify the the target directory with an option instead of as the last arg
.\"O in the command line.  This is useful with \fBxargs(1)\fR.
移動先ディレクトリを、コマンドラインの最後の引き数ではなく、
オプションで指定する。
\fBxargs(1)\fR と一緒に用いるのに役立つ。
.TP
.B "\-u, \-\-update"
.\"O Do not move a nondirectory that has an existing destination with
.\"O the same or newer modification time.
ディレクトリ以外のファイルの移動で、
移動先ファイルが既に存在し、
その修正時刻が移動元より新しい場合 (同じ場合を含む)、移動を行わない。
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-verbose"
.\"O Print the name of each file before moving it.
移動する前にそれぞれのファイル名を出力する。
.\"O .SH "GNU BACKUP OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU バックアップオプション"
.\"O The GNU versions of programs like
.\"O .BR cp ,
.\"O .BR mv ,
.\"O .BR ln ,
.\"O .B install
.\"O and
.\"O .B patch 
.\"O will make a backup of files about to be overwritten, changed or destroyed
.\"O if that is desired. That backup files are desired is indicated by
.\"O the \-b option. How they should be named is specified by the \-V option.
.\"O In case the name of the backup file is given by the name of the file
.\"O extended by a suffix, this suffix is specified by the \-S option.
GNU 版のプログラム
.BR cp ,
.BR mv ,
.BR ln ,
.BR install ,
.B patch
は、上書き・修正・削除といった場合に、指示すればファイルの
バックアップを作成する。
バックアップファイルを必要とする場合は \-b オプションで指定する。
どのような名前にするかは \-V オプションで指定する。
バックアップファイルの名前を、ファイル名に拡張子を追加する形で
与えるようにしたい場合、
この拡張子を \-S オプションで指示する。
.TP
.BI "\-b, \-\-backup[=" METHOD ]
.\"O Make backups of files that are about to be overwritten or removed.  Note
.\"O that \fB\-b\fR does not take args.
上書きもしくは削除の必要がある場合にはファイルのバックアップを作成する。
\fB\-b\fR が引き数をとらない点に注意すること。
.TP
.BI "\-S " SUFFIX ", \-\-suffix=" SUFFIX
.\"O Append
.\"O .I SUFFIX
.\"O to each backup file made.
.\"O If this option is not specified, the value of the
.\"O .B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O environment variable is used.  And if
.\"O .B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O is not set, the default is `~'.
.I SUFFIX
をバックアップファイルそれぞれに付け加える。
このオプションが指定されていない場合、環境変数
.B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
に設定されている値が使われる。
.B SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
が設定されていない場合のデフォルトは `~' である。
.TP
.BI "\-V " METHOD ", \-\-version\-control=" METHOD
.RS
.\"O Specify how backup files are named. The
.\"O .I METHOD
.\"O argument can be `numbered' (or `t'), `existing' (or `nil'), or `never' (or
.\"O `simple').
.\"O If this option is not specified, the value of the
.\"O .B VERSION_CONTROL
.\"O environment variable is used.  And if
.\"O .B VERSION_CONTROL
.\"O is not set, the default backup type is `existing'.
バックアップファイルの命名方法を指定する。
引き数
.I METHOD
には、`numbered' (または `t')、`existing' (または `nil')、
`never' (または `simple') を指定できる。
このオプションが指定されていない場合、環境変数
.B VERSION_CONTROL
の値が使われる。
.B VERSION_CONTROL
が設定されていない場合のデフォルトは `existing' である。
.PP
.\"O This option corresponds to the Emacs variable `version-control'.
.\"O The valid
.\"O .IR METHOD s
.\"O are (unique abbreviations are accepted):
このオプションは Emacs 変数の `version-control' に対応している。
有効な
.I METHOD
は以下の通り。
(他と重複しない範囲で短縮形を使うことができる):
.TP
.BR t ", " numbered
.\"O Always make numbered backups.
常に番号の拡張子を持つバックアップを作成する。
.TP
.BR nil ", " existing
.\"O Make numbered backups of files that already have them, simple
.\"O backups of the others.
番号の拡張子を持つバックアップがすでにある場合には
番号の拡張子を持つバックアップを、
そうでない場合には単純なバックアップを作成する。
.TP
.BR never ", " simple
.\"O Always make simple backups.
常に単純なバックアップを作成する。
.\"O .RE
.\"O This option is deprecated, use \fB\-\-backup=\fIMETHOD\fR instead.
.PP
このオプションは推奨されない。
代りに \fB\-\-backup=\fIMETHOD\fR を使うこと。
.RE
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストを終了する。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning. For the GNU version, the variables SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX
.\"O and VERSION_CONTROL control backup file naming, as described above.
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES は通常の意味を持つ。
GNU 版では、変数 SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX と VERSION_CONTROL により
バックアップファイルの命名法が制御される (上記参照)。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O POSIX 1003.2, except that directory hierarchies cannot be moved
.\"O across filesystems.
POSIX 1003.2 に準拠するが、ファイルシステムを越えて
ディレクトリ階層を移動することはできない。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B mv
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページは fileutils-4.1 パッケージの
.B mv
コマンドについて説明したものである。
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛にメールで連絡してください。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
