.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU nice man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH nice 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O nice \- run a program with modified scheduling priority
.SH 名前
nice \- スケジュール優先度を変更してプログラムを実行する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B nice
.BI "[\-n " adjustment "] [\-" adjustment "] [\-\-adjustment=" adjustment ]
.BI [ command " [" arg... ]]
.sp
.B nice [\-\-help] [\-\-version] 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B nice
.\"O prints the current scheduling priority, which it inherited if no
.\"O arguments are given.
.\"O Otherwise,
.\"O .B nice
.\"O runs the given
.\"O .I command
.\"O with its scheduling priority adjusted.
引数なしで実行すると、
.B nice
は自身が継承したスケジューリング優先度を表示する。
それ以外の場合には、
.B nice
はスケジューリング優先度を調整してから
与えられた
.I command
を実行する。
.P
.\"O If no
.\"O .I adjustment
.\"O is given, the priority of the
.\"O .I command 
.\"O is incremented by 10.  The priority can be
.\"O adjusted by
.\"O .B nice
.\"O over the range of -20 (the highest priority) to 19 (the lowest). You must
.\"O have appropiate privileges to specify a negative adjustment (usually be
.\"O the super-user).
.I adjustment
が与えられなかった場合には、
.I command
の優先度は 10 増加される。
.B nice
によって調整できる優先度の範囲は -20 (優先度最高) から 19 (優先度最低)
までである。負の
.I adjustment
を与えるには適切な特権 (通常はスーパーユーザー権限) が必要である。
.P
.\"O Because most shells have a built-in command by the same name, using
.\"O the unadorned command name may get you different functionality than that
.\"O described here. 
ほとんどのシェルには同名の組み込みコマンドがあるので、
単に `nice' として実行すると、
ここで記述されたものとは異なった機能のものが実行されるだろう。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI "\-n " adjustment ", \-" adjustment ", \-\-adjustment=" adjustment
.\"O Add
.\"O .I adjustment
.\"O instead of 10 to the 
.\"O .IR command 's
.\"O priority.
.I command
の優先度に加える値を、 10 ではなく
.I adjustment
にする。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
