.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU nl man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH NL 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBnl\fR \- number lines and write files
.SH 名前
nl \- 行番号を付けてファイルを出力する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B nl
.RB [ \-p "] [" "\-b \fISTYLE\fR" "] [" "\-d \fICD\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-f \fISTYLE\fR" "] [" "\-h \fISTYLE\fR" "] [" "\-i \fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-l \fINUMBER\fR" "] [" "\-n \fIFORMAT\fR" "] [" "\-s \fISTRING\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-v \fINUMBER\fR" "] [" "\-w \fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-body\-numbering=\fISTYLE\fR" ] 
.RB [ "\-\-footer\-numbering=\fISTYLE\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-header\-numbering=\fISTYLE\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-join\-blank\-lines=\fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-page\-increment=\fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-renumber ]
.RB [ "\-\-number\-format=\fIFORMAT\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-number\-separator=\fIFORMAT\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-number\-width=\fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-section\-delimiter=\fICD\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-starting\-line\-number=\fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR nl " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B nl
.\"O writes each 
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O to standard output, with line numbers added to some or all of the lines.  If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used.   
.B nl
は指定された
.I FILE
それぞれを標準出力に書く。
その際行番号を一部または全部の行に追加する。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O .B nl
.\"O decomposes its input into (logical) pages; by default, the line
.\"O number is reset to 1 at the top of each logical page.  
.\"O .B nl
.\"O treats all of the input files as a single document; it does not reset line
.\"O numbers or logical pages between files.
.B nl
は入力を論理ページ (logical page) に分解する。デフォルトでは、
行番号は各々の論理ページの先頭で 1 にリセットされる。
.B nl
は入力されたファイルすべてをまとめてひとつの文書とみなす。
したがってファイルの切れ目でも行番号や論理ページはリセットされない。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b \fISTYLE\fB, \-\-body\-numbering=\fISTYLE
.\"O Select the numbering style for lines in the body section of each
.\"O logical page.  When a line is not numbered, the current line number
.\"O is not incremented, but the line number separator character is
.\"O still prepended to the line.  The styles are:
各論理ページの本文セクションにおける行の番号付けの方式を選択する。
行に番号がつかないと、カレントの行番号は増加しないが、
行番号の区切る文字は行の前に置かれる。形式は以下の通り。
.RS
.TP
.B a
.\"O number all lines
全ての行に番号をふる。
.TP
.B t
.\"O number only nonempty lines (default for body)
空行でない行のみに番号をふる (本文セクションのデフォルト)
.TP
.B n
.\"O do not number lines (default for header and footer)
行番号をふらない (ヘッダ・フッタセクションのデフォルト)
.TP
.BI p REGEXP
.\"O number only lines that contain a match for
.\"O .IR REGEXP .
.I REGEXP
にマッチした行だけに番号をふる。
.RE
.TP
.B \-d \fICD\fB, \-\-section\-delimiter=\fICD
.\"O Set the section delimiter characters to \fICD\fR; default is `\e:'. If
.\"O only \fIC\fR is given, the second remains `:'.  (Remember to protect `\e'
.\"O or other metacharacters from shell expansion with quotes or extra
.\"O backslashes)
セクション区切りとなる二文字を
.I CD
にする (デフォルトは `e:')。
.I C
だけが与えられた場合は、2 文字めは `:' のままとなる。
('\e' 等のメタキャラクタを指定する場合には、シェルの展開から守るために
クォートするか、バックスラッシュを一つ余計に付けるのを忘れないように。)
.TP
.B \-f \fISTYLE\fB, \-\-footer\-numbering=\fISTYLE
.\"O Analogous to
.\"O .BR \-\-body\-numbering .
.B \-\-body\-numbering
を見よ。
.TP
.B \-h \fISTYLE\fB, \-\-header\-numbering=\fISTYLE
.\"O Analogous to
.\"O .BR \-\-body\-numbering .
.B \-\-body\-numbering
を見よ。
.TP
.B \-i \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-page\-increment=\fINUMBER
.\"O Increment line numbers by 
.\"O .I NUMBER
.\"O (default 1).
行番号の増分を
.I NUMBER
にする (デフォルトは 1)。
.TP
.B \-l \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-join\-blank\-lines=\fINUMBER
.\"O Consider 
.\"O .I NUMBER
.\"O (default 1) consecutive empty lines to be one logical line for numbering,
.\"O and only number the last one.  Where fewer than
.\"O .I NUMBER
.\"O consecutive empty lines occur, do not number them.  An empty line is one
.\"O that contains no characters, not even spaces or tabs.
.I NUMBER
だけ連続した空行を、
番号付けの際に 1 論理行とみなし、最後の空行にのみ番号を付ける
.RI ( NUMBER
のデフォルトは 1)。
空行の連続が
.I number
以下の場合には、番号付けを行わない。
空行とはスペースやタブも含め、文字を全く含まない行のこと。
.TP
.B \-n \fIFORMAT\fB, \-\-number\-format=\fIFORMAT
.\"O Select the line numbering format (default is `\fBrn\fR'):
行番号の出力フォーマットを指定する (デフォルトは `\fBrn\fR'):
.RS
.TP
.B ln
.\"O left justified, no leading zeros
左詰めにし、先頭の 0 埋めをしない。
.TP
.B rn
.\"O right justified, no leading zeros
右詰めにし、先頭の 0 埋めをしない。
.TP
.B rz
.\"O right justified, leading zeros
右詰めにし、先頭は 0 で埋める。
.RE
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-no\-renumber
.\"O Do not reset the line number at the start of a logical page.
論理ページの先頭で行番号をリセットしない。
.TP
.B \-s \fISTRING\fB, \-\-number\-separator=\fIFORMAT
.\"O Separate the line number from the text line in the output with
.\"O .I STRING
.\"O (default is <TAB>).
出力ファイルの行番号とテキスト行の間の区切りに
.I STRING
を用いる (デフォルトは <TAB>)。
.TP
.B \-v \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-starting\-line\-number=\fINUMBER
.\"O Set the initial line number on each logical page to
.\"O .I NUMBER
.\"O (default 1).
それぞれの論理ページの行番号を
.I NUMBER
から始める (デフォルトは 1)。
.TP
.B \-w \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-number\-width=\fINUMBER
.\"O Use
.\"O .I NUMBER
.\"O characters for line numbers (default 6).     
行番号表示に用いる文字数を
.I NUMBER
にする (デフォルトは 6)。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH LOGICAL PAGES
.SH 論理ページ
.\"O A logical page consists of three sections: header, body, and footer.
.\"O Any of the sections can be empty.  Each can be numbered in a different
.\"O style from the others.
論理ページは三つのセクションからなる。
ヘッダ (header)、本文 (body)、フッタ (footer) である。
セクションは空であってもよい。
また、それぞれを別な形式で番号付けすることもできる。

.\"O The beginnings of the sections of logical pages are indicated in the
.\"O input file by a line containing exactly one of these delimiter strings:
入力ファイル中に以下のデリミタ文字列 (delimiter string)
だけからなる行があると、論理ページのセクションの始まりとみなされる。
.TP
.B \e:\e:\e:
.\"O start of header
ヘッダの先頭
.TP
.B \e:\e:
.\"O start of body;
本文の先頭
.TP
.B \e:
.\"O start of footer.
フッタの先頭
.PP			
.\"O The two characters from which these strings are made can be changed
.\"O from 
.\"O .RB ` \e "' and `" : '
.\"O via options, but the pattern and length of each string cannot be
.\"O changed.  A section delimiter is replaced by an empty line on output.  Any
.\"O text that comes before the first section delimiter string in the input file
.\"O is considered to be part of a body section, so 
.\"O .B nl
.\"O treats a file that contains no section delimiters as a single body section.
これらの文字列を構成する二文字は、オプションによって
.RB ` \e "' と `" : '
以外にも変更できる。しかしパターンとそれぞれの文字列の長さは変更できない。
セクションのデリミタ文字列は出力では空行となる。
入力ファイルのうち、
最初のセクションデリミタ文字列の前に来るテキストは本文セクションとみなされる。
したがって
.B nl
は、セクションのデリミタ文字列を含まないファイルを
単一の本文セクションからなるものとみなす。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
