.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU nohup man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH nohup 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O nohup \- run a command immune to hangups
.SH 名前
nohup \- ハングアップに反応しないようにしてコマンドを実行する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI nohup " command " [ arg... ]
.sp
.B nohup [\-\-help] [-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B nohup
.\"O runs the given
.\"O .I command
.\"O with hangup signals ignored so that the command can continue running in
.\"O the background after you log out.
.B nohup
はハングアップシグナルを無視するかたちで
.I command
を実行する。こうすると
.I command
は、ログアウトした後もバックグランド実行を続けることができる。
.PP
.\"O The scheduling priority increased by 5, so it has a slightly smaller
.\"O chance to run. If the standard output is a terminal, it and the standard error
.\"O are redirected so that they are appended to the file `nohup.out'; if that
.\"O cannot be written to, they are appended to the file `$HOME/nohup.out'.
.\"O If that cannot be written to, the command is not run.
スケジューリング優先度は 5 増やされるので、
実行の割り当て時間はやや小さくなる。
標準出力が端末のときは、
標準出力と標準エラー出力は `nohup.out'
へ追加書き込みモードでリダイレクトされる。 `nohup.out'
へ書き込めない場合は `$HOME/nohup.out' へ追加書き込みする。
それでも書き込めない場合は、コマンドは実行されない。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .B nohup
.\"O creates the file `nohup.out' or `$HOME/nohup.out', it creates it with
.\"O `go-rwx' permissions.  It does not change the permissions of those files
.\"O if they already existed.
.B nohup
が 'nohup.out' もしくは '$HOME/nohup.out' を生成したときは、
そのファイルのパーミッションは `go-rwx' になる。
対象のファイルがすでに存在するときは、
ファイルのパーミッションの変更はしない。
.PP
.\"O .B nohup
.\"O does not automatically put the command it runs in the background; you
.\"O must do that explicitly, by ending the command line with an `&'.
.B nohup
は自動的にはコマンドをバックグランドに送らないので、
コマンドラインの末尾に `&' をつけて、
ユーザーが明示的にバックグラウンドへ送る指定をする必要がある。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O When GNU
.\"O .B nohup
.\"O is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are recognized:
GNU
.B nohup
が引数一つだけで起動された場合には、
以下のオプションが認識される:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
