.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU od man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 14:55:40 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH OD 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBod\fR \- write files in octal or other formats
.SH 名前
od \- ファイルを 8 進数 (または他の形式) で出力する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B od
.RB [ \-v "] [" "\-j \fIBYTES\fR" "] [" "\-s \fR[\fILENGTH\fR]]"
.RB [ "\-t \fITYPE\fR" "] [" "\-w \fIWIDTH\fR" "] [" "\-A \fIRADIX\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-N \fIBYTES\fR" "]
.RB [ "\-\-address\-radix=\fIRADIX\fR" ] 
.RB [ "\-\-format=\fITYPE\fR" ]
.RB [ \-\-output\-duplicates ]
.RB [ "\-\-read\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-skip\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-strings\fR[\fB=\fILENGTH\fR" ]]
.RB [ "\-\-width\fR[\fB=\fIWIDTH\fR" ]]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR od " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]

.\"O Non POSIX:
非 POSIX オプション:
.br
.B od
.RB [ \-abcdfhilox ]
.RI [ FILE... ]
.br
.IR "\fBod \-C\fR \fR[\fB\-\-traditional" "] [" FILE "] [[\fB+\fR]" OFFSET " [[\fB+\fR]" LABEL ]]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B od
.\"O writes an unambiguous representation of each
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O to standard output.  If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used.
.B od
は
.I FILE
それぞれの内容を明確な形式で標準出力に書き出す。
.I FILE
が 1 つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O Each line of output consists of the offset in the input, followed by
.\"O groups of data from the file. By default, 
.\"O .B od
.\"O prints the offset in octal, and each group of file data is two bytes of
.\"O input printed as a single octal number.
出力のそれぞれの行では、
まず最も左のカラムに入力ファイルでのオフセットが書かれ、
ファイルのデータのグループが続く。デフォルトでは
.B od
はオフセットを 8 進数で、ファイルのデータのグループは
2 バイトずつ 8 進数で表す。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-j \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-skip\-bytes=\fIBYTES
.\"O Skip \fIBYTES\fR input bytes before formatting and writing.  If \fIBYTES\fR
.\"O begins with 
.\"O .RB ` 0x '
.\"O or 
.\"O .RB ` 0X '
.\"O , it is interpreted in hexadecimal;
.\"O otherwise, if it begins with 
.\"O .RB ` 0 ',
.\"O in octal; otherwise, in decimal.  Appending 
.\"O .RB ` b '
.\"O multiplies \fIBYTES\fR by 512, 
.\"O .RB ` k '
.\"O by 1024, and 
.\"O .RB ` m '
.\"O by 1048576.
整形・表示する前に入力ファイルの
.I BYTES
分をスキップする。
.I BYTES
が
.RB ` 0x "' または `" 0X '
で始まる場合は 16 進数と解釈される。これ以外で先頭が
.RB ` 0 '
の場合は 8 進数、それ以外は 10 進数と解釈される。
.RB ` b '
を後置すると
.I BYTES
は 512 倍、
.RB ` k '
なら 1024 倍、
.RB ` m '
なら 1048576 倍される。
.TP
.B \-s \fR[\fILENGTH\fR]\fB, \-\-strings\fR[\fB=\fILENGTH\fR]
.\"O Instead of the normal output, output only "string constants": at
.\"O least \fILENGTH\fR (3 by default) consecutive ASCII graphic characters,
.\"O followed by a null (zero) byte.  Short form \fB\-s\fR is deprecated.
通常の出力の代わりに、入力の文字列定数 (string constants) のみを出力する。
文字列定数とは、最低
.I LENGTH
の連続した ASCII グラフィック (フォーマット) 文字で、
null (ゼロ) バイトによって終端されているものである。
.I LENGTH
が省略された場合のデフォルトは 3。
短縮形式 \fB\-s\fR は推奨されない。
.TP
.B \-t \fITYPE\fB, \-\-format=\fITYPE
.\"O Select the format in which to output the file data.  \fITYPE\fR is a
.\"O string of one or more of the below type indicator characters.  If
.\"O you include more than one type indicator character in a single \fITYPE\fR
.\"O string, or use this option more than once, \fBod\fR writes one copy of
.\"O each output line using each of the data types that you specified,
.\"O in the order that you specified.
ファイルデータの出力フォーマットを選択する。
.I TYPE
は文字列で、以下のタイプ指定文字からなる。1 つの
.I TYPE
文字列中に複数のタイプ指定文字を書いたり、このオプションを複数回用いると、
.B od
は指定文字 1 つにつき 1 行の出力行を書き出す。
行の出力順は指定文字の順番になる。

.\"O Adding a trailing
.\"O .RB ` z '
.\"O to any type specification appends a display
.\"O of the ASCII character representation of the printable characters
.\"O to the output line generated by the type specification.
.RB ` z '
を後置すると、どんな形式指定に対しても、
形式指定によって生成された行に
印刷可能文字での ASCII 文字表示を追加する。
.RS
.TP
.B a
.\"O named character
文字の名前
.TP
.B c
.\"O ASCII character or backslash escape	  
ASCII 文字かバックスラッシュ付きのエスケープ文字
.TP
.B d
.\"O signed decimal
符号付き 10 進数
.TP
.B f
.\"O floating point
浮動小数点数
.TP
.B o
.\"O octal
8 進数
.TP
.B u
.\"O unsigned decimal
符号無し 10 進数
.TP
.B x
.\"O hexadecimal
16 進数
.PP
.sp
.\"O The type 
.\"O .RB ` a '
.\"O outputs things like `sp' for space, `nl' for newline, and `nul' for a null
.\"O (zero) byte.  Type `c' outputs  ` ', \n', and  \0', respectively.
.RB ` a '
形式は空白文字に `sp', 改行文字に `nl', null (ゼロ) バイトに `nul'
等を出力する。`c' ではこれらはそれぞれ ` ', `\en', `\e0' となる。

.\"O Except for types 
.\"O .RB ` a "' and `" c ',
.\"O you can specify the number of bytes to use in interpreting each number in
.\"O the given data type by following the type indicator character with a decimal
.\"O integer.  Alternately, you can specify the size of one of the C compiler's
.\"O built-in data types by following the type indicator character with
.\"O one of the following characters.  
.RB ` a "' と `" c '
以外のタイプについては、入力データから何バイト分を使うかを指定できる。
これには形式表示文字の後に 10 進の整数を後置する。
または C コンパイラの組み込みデータ型によってもサイズを指定できる。
以下のうちのどれかをタイプ指定の後に指定する。

.\"O For integers (
.\"O .RB ` d "', `" o "', `" u "', `" x '):
整数
.RB "(`" d "', `" o "', `" u "', `" x ')
については以下のどれか：
.RS
.TP
.B C
char
.TP
.B S
short
.TP
.B I
int
.TP
.B L
long
.RE
.sp
.\"O For floating point (
.\"O .RB ` f '):
浮動小数点数
.RB (` f ')
については以下のどれか：
.RS
.TP
.B F
float
.TP
.B D
double
.TP
.B L
long double
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-output\-duplicates
.\"O Output consecutive lines that are identical.  By default, when two
.\"O or more consecutive output lines would be identical, \fBod\fR outputs
.\"O only the first line, and puts just an asterisk on the following
.\"O line to indicate the elision.
直前と同じ内容を持つ行も表示する。
デフォルトでは、連続する出力行が同じ内容である場合には、
.B od
は最初の行のみを表示し、続く行には省略した旨を伝えるアスタリスク (*)
のみを置く。
.TP
.B \-w\fR[\fIWIDTH\fR]\fB, \-\-width\fR[\fB=\fIWIDTH\fR]
.\"O Dump \fIWIDTH\fR input bytes per output line.  This must be a multiple of
.\"O the least common multiple of the sizes associated with the
.\"O specified output types.  If \fIWIDTH\fR is omitted, the default is 32.  If
.\"O this option is not given at all, the default is 16.  Short form \fB\-w\fR is
.\"O deprecated.
出力ファイルの 1 行あたり
.I WIDTH
バイトの入力を表示する。
これは出力タイプに指定した各サイズの公倍数でなければならない。
.I WIDTH
が省略された場合のデフォルトは 32。
このオプションが指定されなかった場合のデフォルトは 16。
短縮形式 \fB\-w\fR は推奨されない。
.TP
.B \-A \fIRADIX\fB, \-\-address\-radix=\fIRADIX
.\"O Selects the base in which file offsets are printed.  \fIRADIX\fR can be
.\"O one of the following:
表示されるオフセットの基数を選択する。
.I RADIX
として指定できるのは以下のうちのどれか:
.RS
.TP
.B d
.\"O decimal
10 進数
.TP
.B o
.\"O octal (default)
8 進数 (デフォルト)
.TP
.B x
.\"O hexadecimal
16 進数
.TP
.B n
.\"O none (do not print offsets)
なし (オフセットを表示しない)
.RE
.TP
.B \-N \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-read\-bytes=\fIBYTES
.\"O Output at most \fIBYTES\fR bytes of the input.  Prefixes and suffixes on
.\"O \fIBYTES\fR are interpreted as for the \fB\-j\fR option.
入力ファイルのうち
.I BYTES
に達するまでしか表示しない。
.I BYTES
で前置・後置される文字は
.B \-j
オプションと同様に解釈される。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NON-POSIX OPTIONS
.SH 非 POSIX オプション
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Output as named characters.  Equivalent to \fB\-ta\fR.
文字の名前を出力する。
.B \-ta
と等価。
.TP
.B \-b
.\"O Output as octal bytes.  Equivalent to \fB\-toC\fR.
8 進でバイトを出力する。
.B \-toC
と等価。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Output as ASCII characters or backslash escapes.  Equivalent to
.\"O \fB\-tc\fR.
ASCII 文字またはバックスラッシュ付きのエスケープ文字として出力する。
.B \-tc
と等価。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Output as unsigned decimal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-tu2\fR.
符号無し 10 進 short として出力する。
.B \-tu2
と等価。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Output as floats.  Equivalent to \fB\-tfF\fR.
float として出力する。
.B \-tfF
と等価。
.TP
.B \-h
.\"O Output as hexadecimal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-tx2\fR.
16 進 short として出力する。
.B \-tx2
と等価。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Output as decimal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-td2\fR.
10 進 short として出力する。
.B \-td2
と等価。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Output as decimal longs.  Equivalent to \fB\-td4\fR.
10 進 long として出力する。
.B \-td4
と等価。
.TP
.B \-o
.\"O Output as octal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-to2\fR.
8 進 short として出力する。
.B \-to2
と等価。
.TP
.B \-x
.\"O Output as hexadecimal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-tx2\fR.
16 進 short として出力する。
.B \-tx2
と等価。
.TP
.B \-C, \-\-traditional
.\"O Recognize the pre-POSIX non-option arguments that traditional \fBod\fR
.\"O accepted.
POSIX 以前の、オプション以外の引き数のうち、古いバージョンの
.B od
が受け付けたものを認識する。
.PP
.\"O The following syntax:
たとえば以下の書式:
.sp	  
.B od \-\-traditional
.RI [ FILE "] [[" \fB+\fR]\fIOFFSET\fR[\fB.\fR][\fBb\fR] 
.RI [[ \fB+\fR ] LABEL [\fB.\fR][\fBb\fR]]]
.sp		    
.\"O can be used to specify at most one file and optional arguments
.\"O specifying an offset and a pseudo-start address, \fILABEL\fR.  By default,
.\"O \fIOFFSET\fR is interpreted as an octal number specifying how
.\"O many input bytes to skip before formatting and writing.  The
.\"O optional trailing decimal point forces the interpretation of
.\"O \fIOFFSET\fR as a decimal number.  If no decimal is specified
.\"O and the offset begins with `\fB0x\fR' or `\fB0X\fR' it is interpreted as a
.\"O hexadecimal number.  If there is a trailing `\fBb\fR', the number of bytes
.\"O skipped will be \fIOFFSET\fR multiplied by 512.  The \fILABEL\fR argument is
.\"O interpreted just like \fIOFFSET\fR, but it specifies an initial
.\"O pseudo-address.  The pseudo-addresses are displayed in parentheses
.\"O following any normal address.
を使うと、最大 1 つのファイルと、オフセットおよび擬似スタートアドレス
\fILABEL\fP を指定できる。
デフォルトでは
.I OFFSET
は 8 進数と解釈され、
整形・出力する前にスキップする入力ファイルのバイト数を示す。
小数点を付加すると、
.I OFFSET
は 10 進数とみなされる。
10 進の指定がなく、
.I offset
が `\fB0x\fR' または `\fB0X\fR' で始まる場合は 16 進数と解釈される。
`\fBb\fR' が後置されると
.I offset
を 512 倍したバイト分がスキップされる。
.I LABEL
引き数も
.I OFFSET
のように解釈されるが、これはスタート地点の擬似アドレスを指定する。
擬似アドレスは通常のアドレスの後に括弧付きで表示される。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
