.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU paste man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PASTE 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBpaste\fR \- merge lines of files
.SH 名前
paste \- ファイルを行単位でマージする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B paste
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ "\-d \fIDELIM\-LIST" ]
.RB [ \-\-delimiters=\fIDELIM\-LIST ]
.RB [ \-\-serial ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR paste " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B paste
.\"O writes to standard output lines consisting of sequentially corresponding lines 
.\"O for each given
.\"O .IR FILE ,
.\"O separated by <TAB>.  If no
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is given or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B paste
は与えられたそれぞれの
.I FILE
から、同じ行番号の行を連結して標準出力に書き出す。
区切り文字には <TAB> が用いられる。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d \fIDELIM\-LIST\fB, delimiters=\fIDELIM\-LIST
.\"O Consecutively use the characters in \fIDELIM\-LIST\fR instead of <TAB> to
.\"O separate merged lines.  When \fIDELIM\-LIST\fR is exhausted, start again
.\"O at its beginning.	   
マージするファイル間のセパレータに、 <TAB> ではなく
.I DELIM\-LIST
を順番に用いる。
.I DELIM\-LIST
の文字を使い果たしたら、再び最初から用いはじめる。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-serial
.\"O Paste the lines of one file at a time rather than one line from each file.
各ファイルから 1 行づつ読み込むのではなく、
ファイル単位で 1 行にまとめていく。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
