.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU pathchk man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH pathchk 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O pathchk \- check file name portability
.SH 名前
pathchk \- ファイル名の可搬性 (portability) をチェックする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pathchk [-p] [\-\-portability]
.I filename...
.sp
.B patchk [\-\-help] [\-\-version] 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O For each
.\"O .IR filename ,
.\"O .B pathchk
.\"O prints a message if any of these conditions are true:
.B pathchk
は与えられたそれぞれの
.I filename
に対して、
以下の条件のいずれかが真の場合にメッセージを出力する。
.\"nakano add .IP's instead of .br's before \(bu
.\"O \(bu one of the existing directories in
.\"O .I filename
.\"O do not have search (execute) permission
.IP \(bu
.I filename
に含まれるディレクトリに検索 (実行) 権限がない。
.\"O .br
.\"O \(bu the length of
.\"O .I filename
.\"O is larger than its filesystem's maximum file name length
.IP \(bu
.I filename
の長さがファイルシステムで許されている最大値よりも大きい。
.\"O .br
.\"O \(bu the length of each component of
.\"O .I filename
.\"O corresponding to an existing directory name
.\"O is larger than its filesystem's maximum length for a file name component
.IP \(bu
.I filename
のディレクトリに対応する各部分の長さのどれかが
ファイルシステムで許されている最大値を越えている。
.PP
.\"O The exit status is:
.\"O .nf
.\"O 0 if all file names passed all of the tests,
.\"O 1 otherwise.
.\"O .fi
終了ステータスは以下の通り:
.nf
0 全てのファイル名が全てのテストをパスした
1 それ以外
.fi
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-p, \-\-portability"
.\"O Instead of performing length checks on the underlying filesystem, test
.\"O the length of each file name and its components against the POSIX.1
.\"O minimum limits for portability.  Also check that the file name contains
.\"O no characters not in the portable filename character set.
ファイル名と各部分の長さのチェックを、
ファイルの置かれているファイルシステムに対して行うのではなく、
POSIX.1 で可搬性を保証している最小値に対して行う。
またファイル名に可搬性の無い文字セットが含まれていないかどうかもチェックする。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
