.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU pinky man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH pinky 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O pinky \- local user information lookup program
.SH 名前
pinky \- ローカルユーザーの情報閲覧プログラム
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR "pinky " [ \-bfhilpqsw "] [" \fIUSER...\fR ]
.sp
.BR "pinky " [ \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B pinky
.\"O prints information of given local \fIUSER\fRs.  If none are
.\"O specified, it uses currently logged in users (read from /var/run/utmp)
.B pinky
は与えられたローカルユーザー
.I USER
の情報をそれぞれ表示する。ユーザーの指定がなければ、
現在ログインしているユーザーを (/var/run/utmp から読んで) 表示する。

.\"O In short format (this is the default) it prints user's login name, real
.\"O name, tty, idle time, login time and hostname, one user per line.  In long
.\"O format, it prints in multiple lines the user's login name, real name, home
.\"O directory, shell, project file and plan file.
短い書式 (デフォルト) では、ユーザーのログイン名・本当の名前・tty・
アイドル時間・ログイン時刻・ホスト名が、ユーザー一人につき一行で表示される。
長い書式では、複数行を使って、ユーザーのログイン名・本当の名前・
ホームディレクトリ・シェル・project ファイル・plan ファイルが表示される。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O .SS Short Format Options
.SS 短い書式のオプション
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Omit first line, with the column headers.
最初の行 (列ヘッダ) を省略する
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Omit user's full name and remote host.
ユーザーのフルネームとリモートホストを省略する
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Omit user's full name, remote host and idle time.
ユーザーのフルネーム・リモートホスト・アイドル時間を省略する
.TP
.B \-w
.\"O Omit user's full name
ユーザーのフルネームを省略する
.\"O .SS Long Format Options
.SS 長い書式のオプション
.TP
.B \-b
.\"O Omit user's home directory and shell.
ユーザーのホームディレクトリとシェルを省略する。
.TP
.B \-h
.\"O Omit user's project file.
ユーザーの project ファイルを省略する
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Omit user's plan file.
ユーザーの plan ファイルを省略する
.\"O .SS Regular Options
.SS 通常のオプション
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Use long format.
長い書式を使う
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Use short format (this is the default)
短い書式を使う (デフォルト)
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
