.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU pr man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"WORD:	truncate (lines)	(行の)(余分の)切り捨て
.\"WORD:	empty string		空文字列
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 15:43:44 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH PR 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBpr\fR \- paginate or columnate files for printing
.SH 名前
pr \- 印刷用にファイルのページづけ・段組みを行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pr
[\fB+\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR[\fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR]]
[\fB\-\fICOLUMN\fR] [\fB\-acdfmrtvFJT\fR]
[\fB\-e\fR[\fIIN-TABCHAR\fR[\fIIN\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
[\fB\-h \fIHEADER\fR]
[\fB\-i\fR[\fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR[\fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
[\fB\-l \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR]
[\fB\-n\fR[\fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR[\fIDIGITS\fR]]
[\fB\-o \fIMARGIN\fR]
[\fB\-s\fR[\fISEP\-CHAR\fR]]
[\fB\-w \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR]
[\fB\-D \fIDATEFORMAT\fR]
[\fB\-N \fILINE_NUMBER\fR]
[\fB\-S\fR[\fISEP\-STRING\fR]]
[\fB\-W \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR]
[\fB\-\-across\fR]
[\fB\-\-columns=\fICOLUMN\fR]
[\fB\-\-date=\fIDATEFORMAT\fR]
[\fB\-\-double\-\-space\fR]
[\fB\-\-expand\-tabs\fR[\fB=\fIIN-TABCHAR\fR[\fIIN\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
[\fB\-\-form\-feed\fR]
[\fB\-\-header \fIHEADER\fR]
[\fB\-\-indent=\fIMARGIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-length \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR]
[\fB\-\-merge\fR]
[\fB\-\-number\-lines\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR[\fIDIGITS\fR]]
[\fB\-\-no\-file\-warnings\fR]
[\fB\-\-output\-tabs\fR[\fB=\fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR[\fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
[\fB\-\-omit\-header\fR]
[\fB\-\-pages=\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR[\fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR]]
[\fB\-\-page_width=\fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR]
[\fB\-\-separator\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-CHAR\fR]]
[\fB\-\-sep\-string\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-STRING\fR]]
[\fB\-\-show\-control\-chars\fR]
[\fB\-\-show\-nonprinting\fR]
[\fB\-\-width=\fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR pr " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B pr
.\"O writes each 
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O to standard output paginating and optionally outputting in multicolumn format.
.\"O If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used.
.B pr
は
.I FILE
の内容にページを付けて標準出力に書き出す。
オプションで指定すれば段組みして出力することもできる。
.I FILE
が 1 つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O By default, a 5\-line header is printed at each page: two blank lines; a
.\"O line with the date, the file name, and the page count; and two more blank
.\"O lines.  A footer of five blank lines is also printed at each page.
デフォルトでは、それぞれのページに 5 行のヘッダがつく。
ヘッダは 2 行の空行、日付・ファイル名・ページ番号の行、2 行の空行からなる。
各ページの末尾には 5 行の空行からなるフッタも出力される。

.\"O The default \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR is 66 lines, and the text line of a header
.\"O takes up the full \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR (default is 72) in the form `yy-mm-dd
.\"O HH:MM String Page nnnn', where String is a centered string.
デフォルトでは
.I PAGE_LENGTH
は 66 行で、ヘッダのテキスト行は
.I PAGE_WIDTH
桁 (デフォルトは 72 桁) を幅いっぱいに用い、
`yy-mm-dd HH:MM String Page nnnn' という形式で出力される。
ここで String はまん中におかれる文字列である。

.\"O Form feeds in the input cause page breaks in the output.  Multiple
.\"O form feeds produce empty pages.
入力にフォームフィードがあると、そこで出力は改頁される。
フォームフィードが続くと空のページができる。

.\"O Columns have equal width, separated by a space by default.  Lines will
.\"O always be truncated to \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR, unless you use the \fB\-J\fR
.\"O option.  For single column output no line truncation occurs by default.
.\"O (use \fB\-W\fR for truncation).
段は、おのおの等しい幅を持ち、デフォルトではスペースで区切られる。
.B \-J
オプションが指定されない限り、行は常に
.I PAGE_WIDTH
で切り捨てられる。1 段の出力では、
行の切り捨てはデフォルトでは行われない
(切り捨てを行うには
.B \-W
オプションを使う)。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B +\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR[\fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR]\fB
.TP
.B \-\-pages=\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR[\fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR] 
.\"O Begin printing with page \fIFIRST_PAGE\fR and stop with \fILAST_PAGE\fR.
.\"O Missing \fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR implies end of file.  While estimating the
.\"O number of skipped pages each form feed in the input file results
.\"O in a new page.  Page and line numbering with and without \fB+\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR
.\"O is identical as it starts counting at the first page of input file (not
.\"O first page printed); page numbering, however, may be altered by \fB\-N\fR. 
.IR FIRST_PAGE " から " LAST_PAGE
までを出力する。
.I LAST_PAGE
を省略するとファイル末尾までを出力する。
スキップするページ数を評価するとき、入力ファイルにある
フォームフィードは改ページとみなされる。
.BI + FIRST_PAGE
があってもなくても、出力のページ番号と行番号は同じで、
入力の最初のページからカウントが開始される (出力ページの最初からではない)。
しかしページ番号の振り方は
.B \-N
によって変更することもできる。
.TP
.B \-\fICOLUMN\fB
.TP
.B \-\-columns=\fICOLUMN
.\"O With each single \fIFILE\fR produce \fICOLUMN\fR\ columns of output (default
.\"O is 1) and print columns down.  The column width is automatically calculated
.\"O from \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR, and the number of lines in the columns on each page
.\"O is balanced.  Lines that don't fit in a column are truncated.
.\"O \fB-\-columns\fR may not be used with \fB\-m\fR.
.I FILE
それぞれが
.I COLUMN
段の出力になる (デフォルトは 1)。
段の幅は
.I PAGE_WIDTH
から自動的に計算され、
それぞれのページにおける各段の行数は調整される。
段に入りきらない行は切り捨てられる。
.BR \-\-columns " は " \-m
と同時には指定できない。
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-across
.\"O With each single \fIFILE\fR, print columns across rather than down.
.\"O \fICOLUMN\fR must be greater than one.  Lines that don't fit in a column are
.\"O truncated.
それぞれの
.I FILE
で、段組みの行の進行方向を縦でなく横にする。
.I COLUMN
は 2 以上でなければならない。
段に収まらない行の余計な分は切り捨てられる。
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-show\-control\-chars
.\"O Print control characters using hat notation (e.g., `^G'); print
.\"O other unprintable characters in octal backslash notation.  By
.\"O default, unprintable characters are not changed.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-double\-space
.\"O Double space the output.
行間に空行を挿入する (ダブルスペース表示)。
.TP
.B \-e\fR[\fIIN-TABCHAR\fR[\fIIN\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
.TP
.B \-\-expand\-tabs\fR[\fB=\fIIN-TABCHAR\fR[\fIIN\-TABWIDTH\fR]],
.\"O Expand tabs to spaces on input.  Optional argument \fIIN-TABCHAR\fR is
.\"O the input tab character (default is <TAB>).  Second optional argument
.\"O \fIIN-TABWIDTH\fR is the input tab character's width (default is 8).
入力のタブをスペースに展開する。
.I IN\-TABCHAR
は入力のタブ文字を指定する (省略可: デフォルトは <TAB>)。
.I IN\-TABWIDTH
はタブの幅を指定する (省略可: デフォルトは 8)。
.TP
.B \-f, \-F, \-\-form\-feed
.\"O Use a form feed instead of newlines to separate output pages, and print only
.\"O a 3\-line header (the two leading blank lines and footer are omitted).
.\"O Default page length of 66 lines is not altered, but the default number of
.\"O lines of text per page changes from 56 to 63 lines. 
改ページに複数の改行ではなくフォームフィード (^L) を使用し、
ヘッダは 3 行形式にする (最初の空行 2 つとフッタは省略される)。
1 ページあたり 66 行というデフォルトの設定は変更されないが、
1 ページあたりのテキスト行はデフォルトの 56 行から
63 行に変更される。
.TP
.B \-h \fIHEADER\fB, \-\-header=\fIHEADER
.\"O Replace the name of \fIFILE\fR in the header with the centered string
.\"O \fIHEADER\fR.  Left-hand-side truncation (marked by a `*') may occur if
.\"O the total header line `yy-mm-dd HH:MM \fIHEADER\fR Page nnnn' becomes
.\"O larger than \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR. `\fB\-h ""\fR' prints a blank line
.\"O header.
ヘッダに表示される
.I FILE
の名前を文字列
.I HEADER
に置き換える。
`yy-mm-dd HH:MM \fIHEADER\fR Page nnnn' が
.I PAGE_WIDTH
より長くなると、左側で行の切り捨て (`*' マークされる) が
行われる。`\fB\-h ""\fR' とするとヘッダ行は空になる。
.TP
.B \-i\fR[\fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR[\fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
.TP
.B \-\-output\-tabs\fR[\fB=\fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR[\fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
.\"O Collapse spaces with tabs on output.  Optional argument \fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR
.\"O is the output tab character (default is <TAB>).  Second optional
.\"O argument \fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR is the output tab character's width (default is
.\"O 8).
出力のスペースをタブに圧縮する。
.I OUT\-TABCHAR
は出力のタブ文字を指定する (省略可: デフォルトは <TAB>)。
.I OUT\-TABWIDTH
はタブの幅を指定する (省略可: デフォルトは 8)。
.TP
.B \-J, \-\-join\-lines
.\"O Merge lines of full length. Used together with the column options
.\"O \fB\-\fICOLUMN\fR, `\fB\-a \-\fICOLUMN\fR' or \fB\-m\fR, it turns off
.\"O \fB\-W\fR and \fB\-w\fR line truncation;  no column alignment is used.  It
.\"O changes the column separator to <TAB>, unless overriden by \fB\-S\fR.
行の内容すべてをマージする。段組みオプション
\fB\-\fICOLUMN\fR,  `\fB\-a \-\fICOLUMN\fR', \fB\-m\fR
とともに指定すると、
.BR \-W " や " \-w
の行切り捨てを無効にする。段の揃えは行わない。
段の区切り文字は <TAB> に変更される。
ただし \fB\-S\fR による上書きは可能である。
.TP
.B \-l \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fB, \-\-length=\fIPAGE_LENGTH
.\"O Set the page length (including header and footer) to \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR
.\"O (default is 66) lines.  If \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR is <= 10 (and <= 3 with
.\"O \fB\-F\fR), the headers and footers are omitted and all form feeds set in
.\"O input files are eliminated as if the \fB\-T\fR option had been given.
(ヘッダとフッタを含めた) ページ長を
.I PAGE_LENGTH
行に設定する。デフォルトは 66 行。
.I PAGE_LENGTH
が 10 行以下の場合 (および
.B \-F
も指定された場合は 3 行以下の場合) は、
\fIpage-length\fP が 10 以下の場合には、
.B \-T
オプションが指定されたかのように、
ヘッダとフッタが省略され、入力ファイルのフォームフィードは無視される。
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-merge
.\"O Merge and print all \fIFILE\fRs in parallel, one in each
.\"O column resulting.  If a line is too long to fit in a column, it is truncated.
.\"O Empty pages in \fIFILE\fRs (form feeds set) produce empty columns, still
.\"O marked by \fISEPARATOR\fR (but completely empty common pages show no
.\"O separators or line numbers)  The default header becomes `yy-mm-dd HH:MM
.\"O <blanks> Page nnnn'; may be used with \fB\-h \fIHEADER\fR to fill up the
.\"O middle part, and with \fB\-S\fR[\fISEP\-CHAR\fR].
全てのファイルを並べて出力する。1 ファイルが 1 段となる。
行の長さが段に収まらない場合、はみ出た分は切り捨てられる。
.I FILE
に空のページが (フォームフィードによって) 存在すると、
空の段が出力される。ただし
.I SEPARATOR
によるマークはされる。(しかし全ての段が空となるページでは、
区切り文字も行番号も表示されない。)
デフォルトのヘッダは `yy-mm-dd HH:MM <blanks> Page nnnn' となるが、
\fB\-h \fIHEADER\fR を同時に指定すれば、まん中の部分を記述するようにできる。
\fB\-S\fR[\fISEP\-CHAR\fR] も同時に指定できる。
.TP
.B \-n\fR[\fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR[\fIDIGITS\fR]]
.TP
.B \-\-number\-lines\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR[\fIDIGITS\fR]]
.\"O Precede each column with a line number; with parallel \fIFILE\fRs
.\"O (\fB\-m\fR), precede only each line with a line number.  Default line
.\"O number counting starts with first line of the input file (not with the first
.\"O line printed, see \fB\-N\fR and \fB\-\fIPAGES\fR).
各段の前に行番号をふる。複数ファイルの並列表示 (\fB\-m\fR)
の場合は、行の先頭だけに番号をふる。
行番号の開始は、デフォルトでは入力ファイルの最初の行である
(印刷された最初の行ではない。
\fB\-N\fR と \fB\-\fIPAGES\fR を見よ)。

.\"O Optional argument \fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR is the character to print after
.\"O each number;  the default is a space, which are automagically collapsed to a
.\"O <TAB> if it won't change the width .  Optional argument \fIDIGITS\fR is the
.\"O number of digits per line number (default is 5).
.I NUMBER-SEPARATOR
は行番号とテキストの間に入る文字を指定する。
デフォルトはスペース。桁数が変わらない場合は <TAB> に圧縮される。
.I DIGITS
は行番号の桁数を指定する (省略可: デフォルトは 5)。
.TP
.B \-o \fIMARGIN\fB, \-\-indent=\fIMARGIN
.\"O Indent each line with \fIMARGIN\fR spaces wide (default is 0), i.e., set
.\"O the left margin.  The total page width is \fIMARGIN\fR plus
.\"O \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR.  Overflow may happen with numbered column output.
各行を
.I MARGINP
文字分のスペースでインデントする (デフォルトは 0)。
つまり左マージンを設定する。
総ページ幅は
.IR MARGIN " + " PAGE_WIDTH
になる。行番号つきの段組み出力では溢れることがあるかもしれない。
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-no\-file\-warnings
.\"O Do not print a warning message when an argument \fIFILE\fR cannot be
.\"O opened.  (The exit status will still be nonzero, however.)
コマンドラインで与えられた
.I FILE
がオープンできない場合でも、警告メッセージを表示しない。
(しかしファイルのオープンに失敗した場合に
0 以外の終了ステータスを返す動作は変らない。)
.TP
.B \-s\fR[\fISEP\-CHAR\fR]\fB, \-\-separator\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-CHAR\fR]
.\"O Separate columns with a \fISEP\-CHAR\fR character.  The default for
.\"O \fISEP\-CHAR\fR is an empty string if \fB\-s\fR is combined with \fB\-w\fR,
.\"O and <TAB> if it is not.  A second effect of the \fB\-w\fR combination is
.\"O that column truncation is turned off.
段組のセパレータを
.I SEP\-CHAR
文字にする。
.I SEP\-CHAR
のデフォルトは、
.BR \-s " と同時に " \-w
を指定した場合は空文字列、それ以外の場合は <TAB>。
.B \-w
と組み合わせた場合には、段の行切り捨てが行われないという副作用がある。
.TP
.B \-S\fR[\fISEP\-STRING\fR]\fB, \-\-sep\-string\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-STRING\fR]
.\"O Separate columns with a \fISEP\-STRING\fR string (default is an empty string).
段組みのセパレータを
.I SEP\-STRING
にする (デフォルトは空文字列)。
.\"O Short option form \fB\-S\fR is deprecated.
短縮形式 \fB\-S\fR は推奨されない。
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-omit\-header
.\"O Do not print the header (and footer) on each page, and do
.\"O not fill out the bottom of pages (with blank lines or a form
.\"O feed).  No page structure is produced, but retain form feeds set in
.\"O the input files (therefore the predefined pagination is not changed)
.\"O \fB\-t\fR  or \fB\-T\fR may be useful together with other options; e.g.:
.\"O `\fB\-t \-e4\fR', expand <TAB> in the input file to 4 spaces but do not do
.\"O any other changes.  Use of \fB\-t\fR overrides \fB\-h\fR.
各ページのヘッダ (とフッタ) を印字しない。
また改ページ処理も行わない (ページ末に空行やフォームフィードを入れない)。
ページ構造は生成されないが、入力ファイルのフォームフィードは残る
(つまりあらかじめ定義されたページ区切りは変更されない)。
.BR \-t " や " \-T
は他のオプションと組み合わせると便利である。
例えば `\fB\-t \-e4\fR' は入力の <TAB> を 4 つのスペースに変換する以外は
何も変更しない。\fB\-t\fR は \fB\-h\fR を無効にする。
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-show\-nonprinting
.\"O Print unprintable characters in octal backslash notation.
印字できない文字を、バックスラッシュ表記の 8 進数で出力する。
.TP
.B \-w \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fB, \-\-width=\fIPAGE_WIDTH
.\"O For multiple column output only, set the page width to \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR (default
.\"O is 72) characters and truncate lines..
複数段の出力に限り、ページは場を
.I PAGE_WIDTH
文字に設定し (デフォルトは 72)、行の余分を切り捨てる。
.TP
.B \-D \fIDATEFORMAT\fB, \-\-date=\fIDATEFORMAT
.\"O Use \fIDATEFORMAT\fR as the date format for headers, or to specify a date.
.\"O See \fBdate\fR(1) for details.
\fIDATEFORMAT\fR をヘッダの日付書式として使用する。
または日付を指定するために使用する。
詳細は \fBdate\fR(1) を見よ。
.TP
.B \-N \fILINE_NUMBER\fB, \-\-first\-line\-number=\fILINE_NUMBER
.\"O Start counting line counting with \fILINE_NUMBER\fR at the first line of the
.\"O first page printed.
印刷された最初のページの最初の行を
.I LINE_NUMBER
行とし、そこから行カウントを開始する。
.TP
.B \-S \fR[\fISEP\-STRING\fR]\fB, \-\-sep\-string\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-STRING\fR]
.\"O Separate output columns with the string \fISEP\-STRING\fR.
出力の段組みの区切りを文字列
.I SEP\-STRING
にする。
.TP
.B \-T
.\"O Do not print header (and footer).  In addition eliminate all form
.\"O feeds set in the input files.
ヘッダ (とフッタ) を出力しない。
さらに入力にあるフォームフィードをすべて無効にする。
.TP
.B \-W \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fB, \-\-page_width=\fIPAGE_WIDTH
.\"O For both single and multiple column output, set the page width to
.\"O \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR (default is 72) characters and truncate lines.  If neither
.\"O \fB\-W\fR or any of the column options is used no truncation is done (except
.\"O on the header line, which is always truncated).
段組みが 1 段の場合でも複数の場合でも、ページの幅を
.I PAGE_WIDTH
文字にして (デフォルトは 72)、行の余分を切り捨てる。
.B \-W
の指定も段組みのオプションも指定されなければ、
行の余分の切り捨ては行われない
(ヘッダは例外で、常に切り捨てが行われる)。
.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH POSIX NOTES
.SH POSIX 向けの注意
.\"O Uppercase single letter options dominate over lowercase ones, being the
.\"O latter redefined to be more \fBPOSIX\fR compilant.  Also, arguments to some single
.\"O letter options can't be separated from the preceding option as specified in
.\"O the \fBPOSIX\fR specification (for example `\fB\-s\fR a' should be `\fB\-sa\fR' instead)
大文字 1 文字のオプションは小文字のオプションより優先される。
しかし後の方に再定義するほうが \fBPOSIX\fR には準拠している。
また、1 文字のオプションへの引数は、
\fBPOSIX\fR の規定ではオプションの文字と分離できない
(例えば `\fB\-s\fR a' は `\fB\-s\fRa' と書かなければならない)。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
