.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU printf man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 16:08:24 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" 
.TH printf 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O printf \- format and print data
.SH 名前
printf \- データを整形して表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI printf " format " [ argument... ]
.sp
.B printf [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B printf
.\"O prints the
.\"O .I format
.\"O string, interpreting `%' directives and `\e' escapes in the same way
.\"O as the C 
.\"O .BR printf (3)
.\"O function.  The
.\"O .I format
.\"O argument is re-used as many times as necessary to convert all of the
.\"O given 
.\"O .IR argument s.
.B printf
は文字列
.I format
を表示する。その際 `%' は書式指定子として、
また `\e' はエスケープ文字として解釈される。
解釈のしかたは C の
.BR printf (3)
関数と同じである。
引き数
.I format
は与えられた
.I argument
すべてをコンバートするのに必要な回数分再利用される。
.P
.\"O .B printf
.\"O recognizes the following escapes to specify the number of the charcter to
.\"O print
.B printf
は表示する文字の番号を指定するために、以下のエスケープを認識する。
.IP \e0ooo
.\"O Octal number (`ooo' is 0 to 3 digits)
8 進数 (`ooo' の部分は 0 桁から 3 桁まで)
.IP \exhhh
.\"O Hexadecimal number (`hhh' is 1 to 3 digits) 
16 進数 (`hhh' の部分は 1 桁から 3 桁まで)
.IP \euNNNN 
.\"O Unicode 16-bit code
Unicode 16 ビットコード
.IP \eUNNNNNNNN
.\"O Unicode 32-bit code
Unicode 32 ビットコード
.PP
.\"O Unicode is printed according to the LC_CTYPE environment variable, and
.\"O requires \fBiconv\fR.
Unicode は環境変数 LC_CTYPE に基づいて表示され、\fBiconv\fR を必要とする。
.\"O \fBprintf\fR It has an additional escape, `\ec', which causes
.\"O it to produce no further output, and an additional directive, `%b',
.\"O which prints its argument string with `\e' escapes interpreted the way
.\"O they are in the
.\"O .I format
.\"O string.
.B printf
には `\ec' というエスケープが追加されており、
表示をその位置で停止させる。また `%b' という書式指定子が追加されている。
これは引き数で指定された文字列中の `\e' を
.I format
内部で指定された `\e' と同じように取り扱う。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O When GNU
.\"O .B printf
.\"O is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are recognized:
GNU
.B printf
が引き数 1 つだけで起動された場合には、
以下のオプションが認識される:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
