.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Nov  3 17:04:31 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH RM 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O rm \- remove files or directories
rm \- ファイルやディレクトリを削除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .BI "rm [" options "] " file...
.BI "rm [" オプション "] " file...
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B [\-fiRr]
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-dfirvR]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B rm
.\"O removes each given
.\"O .IR file .
.\"O By default, it does not remove directories.
.\"O But when the \-r or \-R option is given, the entire directory tree
.\"O below the specified directory is removed (and there are no limitations
.\"O on the depth of directory trees that can be removed by `rm -r').
.\"O It is an error when the last path component of
.\"O .I file
.\"O is either . or ..
.\"O (so as to avoid unpleasant surprises with `rm -r .*' or so).
.B rm
は指定された
.I file
を削除する。
デフォルトではディレクトリの削除を行わない。
しかし \-r や \-R オプションで指示されると、指定されたディレクトリ以下の
全ディレクトリツリーが削除される
(`rm -r' で削除されるディレクトリツリーの深さに制限はない)。
.I file
のパス構成要素の最後が . もしくは .. の場合はエラーになる
(`rm -r .*' などとやったあとで驚かないようにするためである)。
.PP
.\"O If the \-i option is given, or
.\"O if a file is unwritable, standard input is a terminal, and the
.\"O .B "\-f"
.\"O option is not given,
.\"O .B rm
.\"O prompts the user for whether to remove the file, writing a question
.\"O to stderr and reading an answer from stdin.  If the response
.\"O is not affirmative, the file is skipped.
\-i オプションが与えられた場合、
またはファイルが書き込み不可で、標準入力が端末であり、かつ
.B "\-f"
が指定されていない場合、
.B rm
はユーザーにファイルを削除してよいかを問い合わせる。
問い合わせは標準エラーに書き出され、返答は標準入力から読み込まれる。
返答が削除を肯定していないものなら、そのファイルは削除されない。
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B "\-f"
.\"O Do not prompt for confirmation. Do not write diagnostic messages.
.\"O Do not produce an error return status if the only errors were
.\"O nonexisting files.
削除の確認の問い合わせをしない。対話メッセージを出力しない。
単に存在しないファイルによるエラーなら、
エラー状態を返さない。
.TP
.B "\-i"
.\"O Prompt for confirmation.
.\"O (In case both \-f and \-i are given, the last one given takes effect.)
削除の確認の問い合わせをする。
(\-f と \-i が両方とも指定された場合、
後から指定された方のオプションが有効になる。)
.TP
.BR "\-r" " または " "\-R"
.\"O Recursively remove directory trees.
再帰的にディレクトリツリーを削除する
.\"O .SH "SVID DETAILS"
.\"O The System V Interface Definition forbids removal of the
.\"O last link to an executable binary file that is being executed.
.SH "SVID 詳細"
System V インターフェース定義では、現在実行されている
実行可能バイナリファイルへの最後のリンクを削除することが禁止されている。
.\"O .SH "GNU DETAILS"
.\"O The GNU implementation (in fileutils-3.16) is broken in the sense
.\"O that there is an upper limit to the depth of hierarchies that can be
.\"O removed. (If necessary, a utility `deltree' can be used to remove
.\"O very deep trees.)
.SH "GNU 詳細"
削除できるディレクトリ階層の深さに上限があるという点で
(fileutils-3.16 における) GNU 版の実装は間違っている。
(必要ならば、とても深いツリーを削除するのに
`deltree' というユーティリティが使える。)
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-d, \-\-directory"
.\"O Remove directories with
.\"O .BR unlink (2)
.\"O instead of 
.\"O .BR rmdir (2),
.\"O and don't
.\"O require a directory to be empty before trying to unlink it.  Only
.\"O works if you have appropriate privileges.  Because unlinking a
.\"O directory causes any files in the deleted directory to become
.\"O unreferenced, it is wise to 
.\"O .BR fsck (8)
.\"O the filesystem after doing this.
.BR rmdir (2)
ではなく
.BR unlink (2)
によりディレクトリを削除する。
アンリンクする前にディレクトリを空にする必要はない。
このオプションは適切な権限を持っている場合にのみ機能する。
アンリンクすると、削除されたディレクトリにある多くのファイルが
参照されなくなるので、ファイルシステムに
.BR fsck (8)
を適用するのが賢明である。
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-force"
.\"O Ignore nonexistent files and never prompt the user.
存在しないファイルを無視する。ユーザーに削除の問い合わせをしない。
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-interactive"
.\"O Prompt whether to remove each file.  
.\"O If the response does not begin with `y' or `Y', the file is skipped.  
.\"O Ignore previous \fB\-\-force\fR options.
それぞれのファイルについて、削除の問い合わせをする。
返答が `y' または `Y' で始まっていない場合、そのファイルは削除しない。
前にある \fB\-\-force\fR オプションを無視する。
.TP
.B "\-r, \-R, \-\-recursive"
.\"O Remove the contents of directories recursively.
ディレクトリの中身を再帰的に削除する。
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-verbose"
.\"O Print the name of each file before removing it.
削除する前にそれぞれのファイル名を出力する。
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストを終了する。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
.SH 環境変数
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.\"O POSIX 1003.2, except for the limitation on file hierarchy depth.
.SH 準拠
POSIX 1003.2 に準拠するが、削除できるディレクトリ階層の深さに制限がある。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B rm
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@macula.net .
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
.SH 注意
このページでは fileutils-4.1 パッケージでの
.B rm
コマンドについて説明している。
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛にメイルしてください。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
