.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Aug 22 12:42 JST 1999
.\"         by Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 17 13:13:07 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.\"WORD: options	オプション
.\"WORD: shortest form	簡略形式
.\"
.TH RMDIR 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH "名前"
.\"O rmdir \- remove empty directories
rmdir \- 空のディレクトリを削除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH "書式"
.BI "rmdir [" options "] " directory...
.sp
.\"O POSIX options:
POSIX オプション:
.B "[\-p]"
.sp
.\"O GNU options (shortest form):
GNU オプション (簡略形式):
.B [\-pv] [\-\-ignore\-fail\-on\-non\-empty]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH "説明"
.\"O .B rmdir
.\"O removes empty directories.
.B rmdir
コマンドは空のディレクトリを削除する。
.PP
.\"O If any
.\"O .I directory
.\"O argument does not refer to an existing empty directory, it is an error.
引き数に指定した
.I directory
が存在する空のディレクトリでない場合にはエラーになる。
.\"O .SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B "\-p"
.\"O If
.\"O .I directory
.\"O includes more than one pathname component, remove it, then strip
.\"O the last component and remove the resulting directory, etc., until
.\"O all components have been removed. Thus, `rmdir -p a/b/c' is
.\"O equivalent to `rmdir a/b/c; rmdir a/b; rmdir a'.
指定した
.I directory
がパス名に複数の階層を持っている場合、それを削除し、
最終のディレクトリ名を省略し、その結果のディレクトリを削除し、
というふうにすべての階層が削除されるまで繰り返す。
つまり、`rmdir -p a/b/c' は `rmdir a/b/c; rmdir a/b; rmdir a' と同じである。
.\"O .SH GNU OPTIONS
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B \-\-ignore\-fail\-on\-non\-empty
.\"O Ignore failures becaused by directories not being empty.
ディレクトリが空でない場合のエラーを無視する。
.TP
.B "\-p, \-\-parents"
.\"O As POSIX.
POSIX と同じ。
.TP
.B "\-v, -\-verbose"
.\"O Print each directory removed.
削除したディレクトリごとにメッセージを表示する。
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストを終了する。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH "環境変数"
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH "準拠"
POSIX 1003.2
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH "注意"
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B rmdir
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページでは fileutils-4.1 パッケージでの
.B rmdir
コマンドについて説明している。
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛てにメールで連絡してほしい。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してほしい。
