.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU sdiff man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 17:28:45 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated Wed Aug 10 15:51:58 JST 2011
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@kc5.so-net.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	gutter		のど
.\"
.TH SDIFF 1 "October 2002" "GNU diff Utilities 2.8.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBsdiff\fR \- find differences between two files and merge interactively
.SH 名前
sdiff \- 2 つのファイルの違いを見つけ、対話的にマージを行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B sdiff
[\fB\-abdilstBEHW\fR] [\fB\-o \fIOUTFILE\fR] [\fB\-w \fICOLUMNS\fR]
[\fB\-I \fIREGEXP\fR] [\fB\-\-diff\-program=\fIPROGRAM\fR]
[\fB\-\-expand-tabs\fR] [\fB\-ignore\-all\-space\fR]
[\fB\-ignore\-blank\-lines\fR] [\fB\-\-ignore\-case\fR]
[\fB\-\-ignore\-matching\-lines=\fIREGEXP\fR]
[\fB\-\-ignore\-space\-change\fR]
[\fB\-\-ignore\-tab\-expansion\fR]
[\fB\-\-left\-column\fR] [\fB\-\-minimal\fR]
[\fB\-\-output=\fIOUTFILE\fR] 
[\fB\-\-speed\-large\-files\fR]
[\fB\-\-strip\-trailing\-cr\fR]
[\fB\-\-supress\-common\-lines\fR] 
[\fB\-\-text\fR] [\fB\-\-width=\fICOLUMNS\fR]
.I FROMFILE TOFILE

.B sdiff
[\fB-v\fR] [\fB\-\-help\fR] [\fB\-\-version\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B sdiff
.\"O merges two files and interactively outputs the
.\"O results, to
.\"O .I OUTFILE
.\"O if \fB\-o\fR is specified, or producing a side-by-side difference if it's
.\"O not.
.B sdiff
は 2 つのファイルをマージする。
.B \-o
が指定されている場合は対話的にマージした結果を
.I OUTFILE
に出力する。それ以外の場合は side-by-side 形式で違いを表示するだけである。

.\"O If
.\"O .I FROMFILE
.\"O is a directory and
.\"O .I TOFILE
.\"O is not,
.\"O .B sdiff
.\"O compares the file in
.\"O .I FROMFILE
.\"O whose file name is that of
.\"O .IR TOFILE ,
.\"O and vice versa.
.\"O .I FROMFILE
.\"O and
.\"O .I TOFILE
.\"O may not both be
.\"O directories.
.\"O You may not use
.\"O .RB ` \- '
.\"O as an input file.
.I FROMFILE
がディレクトリで
.I TOFILE
がディレクトリでない場合、
.B sdiff
は
.I FROMFILE
にある、ファイル名が
.I TOFILE
と同じものを比較の対象にする (逆も同じ)。
.IR FROMFILE " と " TOFILE
の両方にディレクトリを指定することはできない。
入力ファイルに
.RB ` \- '
を用いることはできない。
[訳注: 多くのコマンドでは
.RB ` \- '
は標準入力の意味になる]

.\"O Normally \fBsdiff\fP invokes \fBdiff\fP(1) to do its work, but you can
.\"O change the program by setting the \fBDIFF\fP environment variable to the
.\"O name of other program. You may also change the editor, setting the
.\"O \fBEDITOR\fR environment variable.
通常
.B sdiff
は
.B diff 
を呼び出して処理を行う。
しかし
.B DIFF
環境変数を他のプログラムに設定すれば、そのプログラムを使うように変更できる。
また
.B EDITOR
環境変数を設定すると、使用するエディタも変更できる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-text
.\"O Treat all files as text and compare them line-by-line, even if they
.\"O do not appear to be text.
テキストのように見えないファイルがあっても、
全てのファイルをテキストとみなして 1 行ずつ比較していく。
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-ignore\-space\-change
.\"O Ignore changes in amount of white space.
空白の数の違いを無視する。
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-minimal
.\"O Change the algorithm to perhaps find a smaller set of changes.  This
.\"O makes
.\"O .B sdiff
.\"O slower (sometimes much slower).
アルゴリズムを変更する (おそらく小さな違いも見付かるようになる)。
これを用いると
.B sdiff
は遅くなる (時には非常に遅くなる)。
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-ignore\-case
.\"O Ignore changes in case; consider upper- and lower-case to be the same.
英大文字と小文字の違いを無視する。
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-left\-column
.\"O Print only the left column of two common lines.
共通の行に対しては、左側の列だけを表示する。
.TP
.BI "\-o " OUTFILE ", \-\-output=" OUTFILE
.\"O Put merged output into
.\"O .IR  OUTFILE .
.\"O This option is required for merging.
マージされた出力を
.I OUTFILE
に書き込む。マージを行うためにはこのオプションが必要である。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-suppress\-common\-lines
.\"O Do not print common lines.
共通な行を表示しない。
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-expand\-tabs
.\"O Expand tabs to spaces in the output, to preserve the alignment of tabs
.\"O in the input files.
出力でタブ文字をスペースに変換する。
入力ファイルでのタブ文字による桁揃えが保存される。
.TP
.BI "\-w " COLUMNS ", \-\-width=" COLUMNS
.\"O Use an output width of
.\"O .IR COLUMNS .
.\"O Note that for historical reasons, this option is
.\"O .B \-W
.\"O in
.\"O .BR diff (1).
出力の幅を
.I COLUMNS
桁にする。
歴史的な理由から、
.BR diff (1)
ではこのオプションは
.B \-W
になっていることに注意。
.TP
.B \-B, \-\-ignore\-blank\-lines
.\"O Ignore changes that just insert or delete blank lines.
空行を挿入・削除するだけの違いは無視する。
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-ignore\-tab\-expansion
.\"O Ignores changes in whitespace due to tab expansion.
タブ展開によるスペースの変更を無視する。
.TP
.B \-H, \-\-speed\-large\-files
.\"O Use heuristics to speed handling of large files that have numerous
.\"O scattered small changes.
小さな変更が大量にあるような大きなファイルを高速に扱うために、
発見的推測手法を用いる。
.TP
.BI "\-I " REGEXP ", \-\-ignore\-matching\-lines=" REGEXP
.\"O Ignore changes that just insert or delete lines that match
.\"O .IR REGEXP .
正規表現
.I REGEXP
にマッチした行を挿入・削除するだけの違いは無視する。
.TP
.B \-W
.\"O Ignore horizontal white space when comparing lines.
.\"O Note that for historical reasons, this option is
.\"O .B \-w
.\"O in
.\"O .BR diff (1).
行の比較の際に空白を無視する。
歴史的な理由から、
.BR diff (1)
ではこのオプションは
.B \-w
になっていることに注意。
.TP
.B \-\-diff\-program= \fIPROGRAM
.\"O Use an external \fIPROGRAM\fR, compatible with \fBdiff\fR, to compare files.
ファイルの比較するために \fBdiff\fR と互換性のある
外部プログラム \fIPROGRAM\fR を用いる。
.TP
.B \-\-strip\-trailing\-cr
.\"O Strips trailing CRs.  Useful when processing output from systems that use
.\"O CRLF as end of line markers. 
行末の CR を取り除く。
行末のマーカとして CRLF を使うシステムの出力を処理するときに役立つ。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
.\"O Output the version number of
.\"O .BR diff3 .
.B sdiff
のバージョン番号を出力する。
.\"O .SH MERGING
.SH マージ
.\"O Groups of common lines, with a blank gutter, are copied from the
.\"O first file to the output.  After each group of differing lines, \fBsdiff\fP
.\"O prompts with 
.\"O .RB ` % '
.\"O and pauses, waiting for one of the following commands.
共通行のブロック (空白の「のど (gutter)」を挟んで左右に表示される) は、
1 番目のファイルから出力にコピーされる。
差異のある行ブロックのあとでは、
.B sdiff
は
.RB ` % '
をプロンプトとして出して一時停止し、
以下のコマンドのどれか 1 つが入力されるのを待つ。
.IP "[訳注]:" 8
「のど (gutter)」とは、印刷用語で左右のページの間にある部分 (すなわち、
折り目になるところ) を指す。このマニュアルでは、対応する行の中間にある、
区切り記号を置く場所を意味している。詳細については、
.BR diff (1)
の「side-by-side 形式」を参照すること。
.TP
.B e
.\"O Discard both versions.  Invoke a text editor on an empty temporary
.\"O file, then copy the resulting file to the output.
両方のバージョンとも捨てる。内容が空の一時ファイルをテキストエディタで開き、
エディタ終了後のファイルの内容を出力にコピーする。
.TP 
.B eb
.\"O Concatenate the two versions, edit the result in a temporary file,
.\"O then copy the edited result to the output.
両方のバージョンを結合した結果をエディタで編集し、
終了後の内容を出力にコピーする。
.TP
.B ed
.\"O Like 
.\"O .RB ` eb ',
.\"O except precede each version with a header
.\"O that shows what file and lines the version came from.
.RB ` eb ',
と似ているが、各バージョンのブロックの前にヘッダを置き、
どのファイルのどの行のものかがわかるようにする。
.TP     
.B el
.\"O Edit a copy of the left version, then copy the result to the output.
左側のバージョンをエディタで編集し、
終了後の内容を出力にコピーする。
.TP
.B er
.\"O Edit a copy of the right version, then copy the result to the output.
右側のバージョンをエディタで編集し、
終了後の内容を出力にコピーする。
.TP
.B l
.\"O Copy the left version to the output.
左側のバージョンを出力にコピーする。
.TP
.B q
.\"O Quit.
終了する。
.TP
.\":tati:↓は p でなく r
.\"O .B p
.B r
.\"O Copy the right version to the output.
右側のバージョンを出力にコピーする。
.TP
.B s
.\"O Silently copy common lines.
共通な行を表示せずにコピーする。
.TP
.B v
.\"O Verbosely copy common lines.  This is the default.
共通な行を表示しながらコピーする。デフォルト。
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O .B diff3
.\"O exits with one of the following values:
.B sdiff
は以下のどれかの値で終了する:
.TP
.B 0
.\"O \fBsdiff\fR was successful, no differences found.
.B sdiff
は成功し、差異は存在しなかった。
.TP
.B 1
.\"O Some differences were found.
差異が見付かった。
.TP
.B 2
.\"O Some error occurred.
何らかのエラーが起こった。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O cmp(1), comm(1), diff(1), diff3(1).
.BR cmp (1),
.BR comm (1),
.BR diff (1),
.BR diff3 (1)
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
