.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU seq man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 24 02:44:40 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	floating point number	浮動小数点数
.\"
.TH seq 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O seq \- print a monotonical sequence of numbers
seq \- 単調増加 (減少) する数値列を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B seq [\-w] [\-f \fIFORMAT\fB] [\-s \fISEP\fB] [\-\-equal\-width] [\-\-format=\fIFORMAT\fB] [\-\-separator=\fISEP\fB]
.\"O .BI < LAST " | " "FIRST LAST" " | " "FIRST LAST INCR" >
.BI < LAST " | " "FIRST LAST" " | " "FIRST INCR LAST" >
.\"O sato: LAST と INCR が逆だと思われる。

.B seq [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B seq
.\"O prints numbers from \fIFIRST\fR to \fILAST\fR in \fIINCR\fR increments.  If
.\"O .I LAST
.\"O or
.\"O .I INC
.\"O are omitted, they default to 1.  All the numbers are interpreted as floats.
.B seq
は \fIFIRST\fR から \fILAST\fR まで、\fIINCR\fR ずつ加えた数値を表示する。
.I LAST
または
.I INCR
が省略された場合、デフォルトは 1 になる。
すべての数値は浮動小数点数として解釈される。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-f \fIFORMAT\fB, \-\-format=\fIFORMAT"
.\"O Use \fBprintf(3)\fR \fIFORMAT\fR formatting. (Default: %g)
\fBprintf(3)\fR のフォーマットに \fIFORMAT\fR を用いる。(デフォルト: %g)
.TP
.B "\-s \fISEP\fB, \-\-separator=\fISEP"
.\"O Separate numbers with \fISEP\fR. (Default: `\n')
数値を \fISEP\fR で区切る。(デフォルト: `\\n')
.TP
.\"O .B "\w, \-\-equal\-width"
.B "\-w, \-\-equal\-width"
.\"O Pad numbers with zeros to make them the same length.
桁数を揃えるために (先頭を) 0 で埋める。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
使用法のメッセージを標準出力に表示し、正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示し、正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
バグは bug-sh-utils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
このページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が更新した。
