.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU nl man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Apr 27 17:53:08 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH NL 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O \fBsha1sum\fR \- calculate and check SHA1 hash checksums
\fBsha1sum\fR \- SHA1 ハッシュチェックサムの計算と検証を行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B sha1sum
.RB [ \-bctw ]
.RB [ \-\-binary ]
.RB [ \-\-check ]
.RB [ \-\-status ]
.RB [ \-\-text ]
.RB [ \-\-warn ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR sha1sum " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B sha1sum
.\"O outputs or checks the SHA1 checkum of
.\"O .I FILE s according to FIPS-180-1.  If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used.   
.B sha1sum
は
.I FILE
の SHA1 チェックサムの出力と検証を
.I FIPS-180-1
に基づいて行う。
.I FILE
が省略された場合、または 
.RB ` \- '
が指定された場合は、標準入力が使われる。
.PP
.\"O Output format when calculating checksums consists for each input \fIFILE\fR,
.\"O in a SHA1 sum, a space, a file type character (`*' for binary, ` ' for text)
.\"O and a filename.  This is the format \fB\-\-check\fR expects.
計算したチェックサムを出力するときのフォーマットは、
各入力ファイル \fIFILE\fR について「SHA1 チェックサム・スペース・
ファイルタイプ文字 (バイナリは `*'、テキストは ` ')・
ファイル名」となっている。
これは \fB\-\-check\fR が想定するフォーマットである。
.PP
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-binary
.\"O Reads the input \fIFILE\fRs in binary mode. This option has no effect on Unix
.\"O systems, since they don't distinguish between binary and text files.  This is
.\"O the default on DOS platforms. 
入力ファイル \fIFILE\fR をバイナリモードで読み込む。
Unix システムではバイナリファイルとテキストファイルを区別しないので、
このオプションは何も影響を及ぼさない。
DOS プラットフォーム上では、これがデフォルトである。
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-check
.\"O Reads filenames and checksums from the given \fIFILE\fRs, and report wether
.\"O each file and the corresponding checksum are correct.  \fb\-\-check\fR
.\"O expects the same format \fBsha1sum\fR outputs.
指定された \fIFILE\fR からファイル名とチェックサムを読み込み、
各ファイルと対応するチェックサムが正しいかを報告する。
\fb\-\-check\fR は \fBsha1sum\fR の出力と同じフォーマットを想定する。
.sp
.nf
.\"O For example:
例:
sha1sum *.sha1 > checksums.sha1
sha1sum \-\-check checksums.sha1
.fi
.TP
.B \-\t, \-\-text
.\"O Reads the input \fIFILE\fRs in text mode.
入力ファイル \fIFILE\fR をテキストモードで読み込む。
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-warn
.\"O Warn about badly formatted entries.  Only makes sense with \fB\-\-check\fR.
フォーマットが間違っているエントリに警告を出す。
\fB\-\-check\fR とともに使うときにのみ機能する。
.TP
.B \-\-status
.\"O Silently exit with a status return code.  Warnings or checksum failures are
.\"O omitted, and errors from operations such as opening are reading are printed.
表示を抑制し、ステータスコードを返して終了する。
警告とチェックサムの不一致は省略されるが、
ファイルのオープンや読み込みといった操作におけるエラーは表示される。
.\"O A successful exit code of 0 is only returned is everything is passed and no
.\"O errors have ocurred.  Otherwise a non-zero value is returned.
正常終了コード 0 は、
全てのチェックを通過してエラーが起らなかった場合にのみ返される。
それ以外の場合は、0 以外の値が返される。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
バグは bug-textutils@gnu.org へ報告してください。
.br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
この man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が書いた。
