.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU sort man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated MOn 14 Apr 2003 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	collate sequence	照合順序
.\"WORD:	significant digits	有効桁数
.\"
.TH SORT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBsort\fR \- sort text files
.SH 名前
sort \- テキストファイルをソートする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B sort
.RB [ \-cm ]
.RB [ \-bdfginruzM ]
.RB [ "\+\fIPOS1\fR[\fB\-\fIPOS2" ]
.RB [ "\-o \fIOUTFILE" ]
.RB [ "\-t \fISEPARATOR" ]
.RB [ "\-k \fIPOS1\fR[\fB,\fIPOS2" ]
.RB [ "\-K \fIPOS1\fR[\fB,\fIPOS2" ]
.RB [ "\-S \fISIZE\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-T \fITEMPDIR" ]
.RB [ \-\-reverse ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR sort " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B sort
.\"O sorts, merges, or compares all the lines from any given
.\"O .IR FILE s.
.\"O concatenating the result and writing it to standard output
.\"O If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B sort
は与えられた各
.I FILE
をソート・マージ・比較する。結果は結合されて標準出力に書き出される。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O GNU \fBsort\fR (as specified for all GNU utilities) has no limits on
.\"O input line length or restrictions on bytes allowed within lines.  In
.\"O addition, if the final byte of an input file is not a newline,
.\"O \fBsort\fR silently supplies one.
GNU
.B sort
は (他の GNU ユーティリティと同じく)
入力ファイルの行の長さや、行あたりのバイト数に制限はない。
また入力ファイルの最後が改行でなければ、
.B sort
は黙って改行を一つ追加する。

.\"O Upon any error, \fBsort\fR exits with a status of 2'.
エラーが起こると、
.B sort
はステータス 2 で終了する。
      
.\"O If the environment variable \fBTMPDIR\fR is set, \fBsort\fR uses its value
.\"O as the directory for temporary files instead of `/tmp'.  The `\fB\-T
.\"O \fITEMPDIR\fR' option in turn overrides the environment variable.
環境変数
.B TMPDIR
が設定されていると、
.B sort
は一時ファイルの置き場所として、デフォルトの /tmp の代わりにそのディレ
クトリを用いる。オプション
.BI \-T " TEMPDIR"
でも一時ファイルを置くディレクトリを指定できる。
オプションは環境変数より優先される。

.\"O A position in a sort field specified with the \fB\-k\fR or \fB+\fR option
.\"O has the form \fIF\fB.\fIC\fR, where \fIF\fR is the number of the field to
.\"O use and \fIC\fR is the number of the first character from the beginning of
.\"O the field (for \fB+\fIPOS\fR) or from the end of the previous field (for
.\"O \fB\-\fIPOS\fR).  If the \fB.\fIC\fR is omitted, it is taken to be the first
.\"O character in the field.  If the \fB\-b\fR option was specified, the
.\"O \fB.\fIC\fR part of a field specification is counted from the first nonblank
.\"O character of the field (for \fB+\fIPOS\fR) or from the first nonblank
.\"O character following the previous field (for \fB\-\fIPOS\fR).
.BR \-k " や " +
オプションでのソートフィールドの場所指定は、
.IB F . C
という形式で行う。ここで \fIF\fP は用いるフィールドの番号で、
\fIC\fP は先頭の文字の番号を、そのフィールドの先頭 (\fB+\fIPOS\fR の場合)
あるいは直前のフィールドの末尾 (\fB\-\fIPOS\fR の場合) から数えた数字である。
\fB.\fIC\fR が省略された場合は、フィールドの先頭文字になる。
.B \-b
オプションが指定されると、フィールド指定の \fB.\fIC\fR の部分は、
そのフィールドの空白でない最初の文字 (\fB+\fIPOS\fR の場合)
あるいは直前のフィールドの末尾以降の空白でない最初の文字
(\fB\-\fIPOS\fR の場合) から数えられる。

.\"O A sort key option may also have any of the output ordering options
.\"O appended to it, in which case the global ordering options are not used
.\"O for that particular field.  The \fB\-b\fR option may be independently
.\"O attached to either or both of the \fB+\fIPOS\fR and \fB\-\fIPOS\fR parts of
.\"O a field specification, and if it is inherited from the global options it
.\"O will be attached to both.  Keys may span multiple fields.
ソートキーのオプションには、
出力順序オプション (output ordering option) を含めることもでき、
その場合はグローバルな順序オプションはそのフィールドには用いられない。
.B \-b
オプションはフィールド指定の \fB+\fIPOS\fR と \fB\-\fIPOS\fR の
どちらか片方にも、あるいは両方にも、独立に効力を及ぼすことができる。
.B \-b
がグローバルなオプションから継承されたものである場合は、
両方に影響する。キーは複数のフィールドにまたがってもかまわない。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O .SS Behaviour
.SS 動作モード
.\"O The default behaviour for \fBsort\fR is to sort.  You may change this
.\"O behaviour with:
.B sort
のデフォルトの動作はソート動作である。
これは以下のオプションによって変更できる。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Check whether the given files are already sorted: if they are not
.\"O all sorted, print an error message and exit with a status of 1.
.\"O Otherwise, exit successfully.	      
与えられたファイルがすでにソートされているかどうかをチェックする。
ソートされていないものがあった場合は、
エラーメッセージを表示してステータス 1 で終了する。
それ以外の場合は正常終了する。
.TP
.B \-m
.\"O Merge the given files by sorting them as a group.  Each input file
.\"O must always be individually sorted.  It always works to sort
.\"O instead of merge; merging is provided because it is faster, in the
.\"O case where it works.
与えられたファイル群をまとめてソートしてマージする。
入力ファイルは事前にそれぞれソートされていなければならない。
マージ動作ではなく、ソート動作を複数ファイルにまとめて行うこともできる。
マージ動作が提供されているのは、
(これでよい場合は) こちらの方が高速だからである。
.PP
.\"O A pair of lines is compared as follows: if any key fields have been
.\"O specified, \fBsort\fR compares each pair of fields, in the order specified
.\"O on the command line, according to the associated ordering options,
.\"O until a difference is found or no fields are left.
行のペアは以下のように比較される。
キーフィールドが指定されている場合は、
.B sort
は順序オプションによって
コマンドラインから指定された順に、
それぞれの行からの各フィールドを比較する。
比較動作は違いを発見するか全てのフィールドを尽くすまで継続される。

.\"O If any of the global options `\fB\-bdfinrM\fR' are given but no key fields
.\"O are specified, \fBsort\fR compares the entire lines according to the global
.\"O options.
グローバルオプションの `\fB\-bdfinrM\fR' のいずれかが指定されており、
キーフィールドが一つも指定されていない場合は、
.B sort
は行全体をグローバルオプションに従って比較する。

.\"O Finally, as a last resort when all keys compare equal (or if no
.\"O ordering options were specified at all), \fNsort\fR compares the lines byte
.\"O by byte in machine collating sequence instead of \fBLC_COLLATE\fR.  The last
.\"O resort comparison honors the \fB\-r\fR global option.  The \fB\-s\fR
.\"O (stable) option disables this last-resort comparison so that lines in which
.\"O all fields compare equal are left in their original relative order.
.\"O \fB\-s\fR has no effect if no fields or global options are specified.
最後に、全てのキーが等しい (あるいは順序オプションが
まったく指定されなかった) 場合には、
.B sort
は最終手段として、行を \fBLC_COLLATE\fR ではなくマシンの
照合順序にしたがって 1 バイトずつ比較する。
この最終手段の比較は
.B \-r
オプションに従う。
.B \-s
オプション (stable オプション) は、この最終手段比較を無効にし、
全てのフィールドの比較結果が同じだった行の順序を、入力の順序のままにする。
フィールドやグローバルオプションがまったく指定されなかった場合は、
.B \-s
オプションは無視される。
.\"O .SS Output Ordering Options
.SS 出力順序オプション
.\"O The following options affect how \fBsort\fR orders output lines.  They may
.\"O be specified globally or as part of a specific key field.  If no key
.\"O fields are specified, global options apply to comparison of entire
.\"O lines; otherwise the global options are inherited by key fields that do
.\"O not specify any special options of their own.
以下のオプションは、
.B sort
が行を出力する順序に影響する。これらはグローバルにも、
あるいは特定のキーフィールドの一部としても指定できる。
キーフィールドが指定されなければ、
グローバルオプションで行全体が比較される。
キーフィールド指定がされた場合、
順序オプションが特に指定されなかったフィールドには、
グローバルオプションが継承される。
.TP
.B \-b
.\"O Ignore leading blanks when finding sort keys in each line.
各行の比較の際に、行頭の空白を無視する。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Sort in "phone directory" order: ignore all characters except
.\"O letters, digits and blanks when sorting.
「電話帳」順でソートする。
アルファベット、数字、空白以外のキャラクタをすべて無視してソートする。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Fold lowercase characters into the equivalent uppercase characters
.\"O when sorting so that, for example, `b' and `B' sort as equal.
ソートの際に、小文字を対応する大文字と同じに扱う。
例えば `b' は `B' と同じとみなされる。
.TP
.B \-g
.\"O Sort numerically using \fBstrtod\fR(3) to arrive at the numeric
.\"O values.  This allows floating point numbers to be specified in
.\"O scientific notation, like `1.0e-34' and `10e100'.  Use this option
.\"O only if there is no alternative;  it is much slower than \fB\-n\fR and
.\"O numbers with too many significant digits will be compared as if
.\"O they had been truncated.  In addition, numbers outside the range
.\"O of representable double precision floating point numbers are
.\"O treated as if they were zeroes; overflows, underflows and conversion
.\"O errors are not reported.
.BR strtod (3)
を用いて数値に変換した後、その数値順にソートする。
これを用いると、浮動小数点の理工学的な記法 (`1.0e-34' や `10e100' など)
を扱うことができる。このオプションは、他に手段がない場合に限って用いること。
これは
.B \-n
よりずっと遅いし、有効桁数が多すぎると、
丸めたかたちで比較されてしまう。
さらに、倍精度浮動小数点の範囲で扱えない数値は
0 であるかのように処理される。
またオーバーフロー・アンダーフロー・変換エラーは報告されない。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Ignore unprintable characters.
印字可能でない文字を無視する。
.\" [旧訳] ASCII コードの範囲である 040 以上 0176 以下 (8 進数)
.\" に含まれない文字を無視する。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Sort numerically: the number begins each line; specifically, it
.\"O consists of optional whitespace, an optional `-' sign, and zero or
.\"O more digits, optionally followed by a decimal point and zero or
.\"O more digits.
数値順に評価する。行先頭の文字列
(空白が前置されていても良い) を数値文字列として比較する。
数値文字列は、先頭の \- 符号 (なくても良い)、 0 桁以上の数字、
そして小数点と 0 桁以上の数字 (なくても良い) からなる。
.sp
.\"O \fBsort \-n\fR uses what might be considered an unconventional method
.\"O to compare strings representing floating point numbers.  Rather than first
.\"O converting each string to the C \fBdouble\fR type and then comparing those
.\"O values, sort aligns the radix points in the two strings and compares the
.\"O strings a character at a time.  One benefit of using this approach is its
.\"O speed.  In practice this is much more efficient than performing the two
.\"O corresponding string-to-double (or even string-to-integer) conversions and
.\"O then comparing doubles.  In addition, there is no corresponding loss of
.\"O precision.  Converting each string to \fBdouble\fR before comparison
.\"O would limit precision to about 16 digits on most systems.
.B sort
は浮動小数点表記文字列を、あまり普通でない方法で比較する。
まず各文字を C の \fBdouble\fR 方に変換してからそれらの値を比較するのではなく、
2つの文字の基数点 (radix point) を揃えて、1 文字づつ比較するのである。
この方法の利点は速度である。実際この方法は、
2つのそれぞれの文字列を double に変換してから比較するよりずっと速い
(あるいは integer 変換に比べてすらずっと速い)。
また精度の問題も生じない。多くのシステムでは、
文字列を double に変換してから比較する方法では、
精度は 16 桁に制限されてしまう。
  
.\"O Neither a leading `+' nor exponential notation is recognized.  To
.\"O compare such strings numerically, use \fB\-g\fR.
先頭の `+' や指数表記は認識できない。
このような文字列を数値的に比較するには
.B \-g
を用いること。
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-reverse
.\"O Reverse the result of comparison, so that lines with greater key
.\"O values appear earlier in the output instead of later.
比較の結果を逆順にする。より大きなキー値を持つ行が、
より早く現われるようになる。
.TP
.B \-M
.\"O An initial string, consisting of any amount of whitespace, followed
.\"O by three letters abbreviating a month name, is folded to upper
.\"O case and compared in the order `JAN' < `FEB' < ... < `DEC'.
.\"O Invalid names compare low to valid names.
行頭の空白文字をすべて無視して最初に現われた 3 文字を、
月の名称の省略形とみなして `JAN' < `FEB' < ... < `DEC' の順でソートする。
小文字は大文字と同じに扱われる。
月の名称にない文字列は、より低位であるとみなされる。
.\"O .SS Other Options
.SS その他のオプション
.TP
.B +\fIPOS1\fR[\fB-\fIPOS2\fR]
.\"O The obsolete, traditional option for specifying a sort field.  The
.\"O field consists of the line between \fIPOS1\fR and up to but \fBnot
.\"O including\fR \fIPOS2\fR (or the end of the line if \fIPOS2\fR is omitted).
.\"O Fields and character positions are numbered starting with 0.
ソートフィールド指定の obosolete な古い形式。行の
.IR POS1 " から " POS2
の直前までのフィールドを指定する。
\fIPOS2\fR は\fB含まない\fR。
\fIPOS2\fR が省略されたら行末まで。
フィールドと文字位置はそれぞれ 0 から数えはじめる。
.TP
.B \-k \fIPOS1\fR[\fB,\fIPOS2\fR]
.B \-K \fIPOS1\fR[\fB,\fIPOS2\fR]
.\"O The recommended, POSIX, option for specifying a sort field.  The
.\"O field consists of the line between \fIPOS1\fR and \fIPOS2\fR (or the end of
.\"O the line, if \fIPOS2\fR is omitted), \fBinclusive\fR.  Fields and character
.\"O positions are numbered starting with 1.
ソートフィールド指定の POSIX 形式。今後はこちらが推奨される。行の
.IR POS1 " から " POS2
までのフィールドを指定する。
\fIPOS2\fR を\fB含む\fP。
\fIPOS2\fR が省略されたら行末まで。
フィールドと文字位置はそれぞれ 0 から数えはじめる。
.TP
.B \-o \fIOUTFILE
.\"O Write output to OUTFILE instead of standard output.  If \fIOUTFILE\fR is one
.\"O of the input files, \fBsort\fR copies it to a temporary file before sorting
.\"O and writing the output to \fIOUTFILE\fR
出力先を標準出力から
.I OUTFILE
に変更する。
.I OUTFILE
が入力ファイルのどれかひとつだった場合、
.B sort
はその入力ファイルを一時ファイルにコピーしてから、ソートと
.I OUTFILE
への出力を行う。
.TP
.B \-t \fISEPARATOR
.\"O Use character \fISEPARATOR\fR as the field separator when finding the
.\"O sort keys in each line.  By default, fields are separated by the
.\"O empty string between a non-whitespace character and a whitespace
.\"O character.  That is, given the input line `foo bar', \fBsort\fR
.\"O breaks it into fields  `foo' and  `bar'.  The field separator is
.\"O not considered to be part of either the field preceding or the
.\"O field following.
各行からソートキーを検索する際、文字
.I SEPARATOR
をフィールドのセパレーターにする。
デフォルトでは、
フィールドは空白以外の文字と空白文字の間の空文字列
(empty string) によって分離される。
例えば入力行として ` foo bar' が与えられた場合、
.B sort
はこの行をフィールド ` foo' と ` bar' に分離する。
フィールドセパレーターは、
その前後のフィールドには含まれないものとされる。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O For the default case or the \fB\-m\fR option, only output the first of
.\"O a sequence of lines that compare equal.  For the \fB\-c\fR option,
.\"O check that no pair of consecutive lines compares equal.
デフォルトの動作と
.I \-m
オプションの動作では、等しいとされた行のうちの最初のものだけを表示する。
.I \-c
オプションの動作では、
連続した行で等しいものがないかどうかをチェックする。
.TP
.B \-z
.\"O Treat the input as a set of lines, each terminated by a <NUL>
.\"O (zero byte character) instead of a <LF> (Line Feed)
.\"O This option can be useful in conjunction with `perl \-0' or find \-print0'
.\"O and `xargs \-0' which do the same in order to reliably 
.\"O handle arbitrary pathnames (even those which contain Line Feed characters)
入力における行の末尾が、<LF> (ラインフィード) ではなく
<NUL> (ゼロバイト文字) で終了するとみなす。
このオプションは `perl \-0' や `find \-print0'
や `xargs \-0' などと組み合わせて使うと便利で、
これらは任意のパス名を扱う際に信頼性を上げる効果を持つ
(ラインフィード文字が含まれるパス名も正しく扱える)。
.TP
.B -S \fISIZE\fB
.\"O Use a buffer of \fISIZE\fB KB.  Different units may be specified by
.\"O specifying multiplier suffix (see below).
\fISIZE\fB KB のバッファを使う。
単位指定文字 (後述) を用いれば、単位を変更できる。
.TP
.B \-T \fITEMPDIR
.\"O Use \fITEMPDIR\fR as the directory for temporary files. This option
.\"O overrides the \fBTMPDIR\fR environment variable.  If multiple \fB\-T\fR
.\"O options are specified, each directory is used and may improve performance on
.\"O huge sorts/merges.
.I TEMPDIR
を一時ファイルを置くディレクトリにする。
このオプションは環境変数
.B TMPDIR
より優先される。\fB\-T\fR オプションが複数回指定されると、
それぞれのディレクトリが用いられ、
巨大なソートやマージの際には性能が上がるかもしれない。
.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR Sort in descending (reverse) numeric order.
\fB\(bu\fR 数値的に降順 (逆順) にソートする。
.sp
.RS
.nf
sort \-nr
.fi
.RE	     
.sp
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR Sort alphabetically, omitting the first and second fields.  This
.\"O uses a single key composed of the characters beginning at the start of field
.\"O three and extending to the end of each line.
\fB\(bu\fR アルファベット順にソートし、第 1・第 2 フィールドは無視する。
キーに開始フィールドとなる 3 だけを指定すれば、各行末までが比較される。
.\"nakano: 意訳すぎ？
.sp
.RS
.nf
sort \-k3
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR Sort numerically on the second field and resolve ties by sorting
.\"O alphabetically on the third and fourth characters of
.\"O field five.  Use `:' as the field delimiter.
\fB\(bu\fR 第 2 フィールドで数値的にソートし、
同じになったものを第 5 フィールドの第 3〜第 4 文字で更にソートする。
フィールドの区切りとして `:' を用いる。
.sp
.RS
.nf
sort \-t : -k 2,2n \-k 5.3,5.4
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O Note that if you had written `\-k 2' instead of `-k 2,2' \fBsort\fR
.\"O would have used all characters beginning in the second field and extending
.\"O to the end of the line as the primary \fBnumeric\fR key.  For the large
.\"O majority of applications, treating keys spanning more than one field as
.\"O numeric will not do what you expect.
`\-k 2,2' の代わりに `\-k 2' と指定すると、
.B sort
は第 2 フィールドから行末までの全ての文字を、
プライマリな「数値」キーとして扱ってしまう。
通常の用途では、1 つ以上のフィールドにまたがったキーを
数値的に扱うと、望む結果は得られないだろう。

.\"O Also note that the `n' modifier was applied to the field-end
.\"O specifier for the first key.  It would have been equivalent to
.\"O specify `\-k 2n,2' or `\-k 2n,2n'.  All modifiers except `b' apply
.\"O to the associated \fBfield\fR, regardless of whether the modifier
.\"O character is attached to the field-start and/or the field-end part
.\"O of the key specifier.
`n' の指定が最初のキーの末尾で行われている点にも注意してほしい。
これは `\-k 2n,2' や `\-k 2n,2n' としても効果は同じである。
`b' 以外の全てのオプション指定は、開始フィールドに置いても
キー指定全体の末尾に置いても、指定全体に効果を及ぼす。

.\"O \fB\(bu\fR Sort the password file on the fifth field and ignore any leading
.\"O white space.  Sort lines with equal values in field five on the
.\"O numeric user ID in field three.
\fB\(bu\fR パスワードファイルを第 5 フィールドでソートし、
先頭の空白文字は無視する。第 5 フィールドが同じ値を持つ行は、
第 3 フィールドのユーザー ID で数値的にソートする。
.sp
.RS
.nf
sort \-t : \-k 5b,5 \-k 3,3n /etc/passwd
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O An alternative is to use the global numeric modifier \fB\-n\fR.
数値比較オプション \fB\-n\fR はグローバルに用いても結果は同じ。
.sp
.RS
.nf
sort \-t : \-n \-k 5b,5 \-k 3,3 /etc/passwd
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR Generate a tags file in case insensitive sorted order.
\fB\(bu\fR 英大文字小文字の違いを無視してソートされた tags ファイルを生成する。
.sp
.RS
.nf
find src \-type f \-print0 | sort \-t / \-z \-f |
xargs \-0 etags \-\-append
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O The use of `\-print0', `\-z', and `\-0' in this case mean that
.\"O pathnames that contain Line Feed characters will not get broken up
.\"O by the sort operation.
この `\-print0', `\-z', `\-0' は、改行 (line feed) 文字を含む
パス名がソート操作によって壊れないようにするためのものである。

.\"O Finally, to ignore both leading and trailing white space, you
.\"O could have applied the `b' modifier to the field-end specifier for
.\"O the first key,
\fB\(bu\fR 最後の例。フィールドの先頭・末尾の空白群を無視するには、
第 1 キーの末尾フィールド指定もして、 `b' オプションを使えばよい。
.sp
.RS
.nf
sort \-t : \-n \-k 5b,5b \-k 3,3 /etc/passwd
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O or by using the global \fB\-b\fR modifier instead of \fB\-n\fR and an
.\"O explicit `n' with the second key specifier.
あるいはグローバルな指定を \fB\-n\fR の代わりに \fB\-b\fR
にして、第 2 キーのオプションに `n' を追加するかたちでもよい。
.sp
.RS
.nf
sort \-t : -b \-k 5,5 \-k 3,3n /etc/passwd
.fi
.RE
.\"O .SH MULTIPLIERS
.SH 乗数
.\"O Numbers may be followed by a size letter to specify a multiple of that
.\"O size, and a \fBB\fR to select normal bytes or a \fBD\fR to select
.\"O decimal "commercial" bytes.  For example `1KB' is equal to `1024' and
.\"O `1KD' is equal to `1000'.  Exceptions are \fBb\fR (512 bytes), \fBc\fR (1
.\"O byte), and \fBw\fR (which should never be used - it means 2 in System V and
.\"O 4 in 4.2BSD), which can't be followed by a \fBB\fR or \fBD\fR.
数値の後には、倍数を指定するサイズ指定文字と、
通常のバイトを意味する \fBB\fR または
10 進の「商業用」バイトを意味する \fBD\fR を
続けて置くことができる。
たとえば `1KB' は `1024' と等しく、`1KD' は `1000' と等しい。
この例外は \fBb\fR (512 バイト)、\fBc\fR (1 バイト)、
\fBw\fR (使うべきでない - System V では 2 を意味し、
4.2BSD では 4 を意味する) の 3 つで、
これらの後に \fBB\fR や \fBD\fR をおくことはできない。

.TP
.B k
.\"O kilo: 2^10 = 1024 for normal bytes, or 10^3 = 1000 for decimal bytes
キロ: 通常バイト指定なら 2^10 = 1024、10 進バイト指定なら 10^3 = 1000
.TP
.B M
.\"O Mega: 2^20 = 1,048,576 or 10^6 = 1,000,000
メガ: 2^20 = 1,048,576 または 10^6 = 1,000,000
.TP
.B G
.\"O Giga: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 or 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
ギガ: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 または 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
.TP
.B T
.\"O Tera: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 or 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
テラ: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 または 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B P
.\"O Peta: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 or 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
ペタ: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 
または 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B E
.\"O Exa: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 or 10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
エクサ: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 
または 10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Z
.\"O Zetta: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 or 10^21 =
.\"O 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
ゼタ: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424
または 10^21 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Y
.\"O Yotta: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 or 10^24 =
.\"O 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
ヨタ: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 
または 10^24 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.\"O .SH COMPATIBILITY
.SH 移植性
.\"O Historical (BSD and System V) implementations of \fBsort\fR have
.\"O differed in their interpretation of some options, particularly 
.\"O .BR \-b ", " \-f ", and " \-n .
.\"O GNU sort follows the POSIX behavior, which is usually (but not always!) like
.\"O the System V behavior.  According to POSIX, \fB\-n\fR no longer implies
.\"O \fB-b\fR.  For consistency, \fB\-M\fR has been changed in the same way.
.\"O This may affect the meaning of character positions in field specifications
.\"O in obscure cases.  The only fix is to add an explicit \fB\-b\fR.
.B sort
の歴史的な (BSD と System V の) 実装では、
いくつかのオプション (特に
.BR \-b ", " \-f ", " \-n )
の解釈が異なる。 POSIX に従えば、\fB\-n\fR はもはや
\fB-b\fR を暗黙のうちに指定することはない。
このあたりを首尾一貫させるため、 \fB\-M\fR も同様に変更されている。
これによって、曖昧な指定では
フィールド内の文字位置の指定の意味が変わってしまうかもしれない。
唯一の解決法は、 \fB\-b\fR を明示的に指定することである。
.\"O .SH LOCALES
.SH ロケール
.TP
.B LC_COLLATE
.\"O Specifies the character collating sequence used to realize all
.\"O comparisions, unless specified otherwise.
(特に他の指定がない限り) 全ての比較で用いられる
文字の照合順序を指定する。
.TP
.B LC_CTYPE
.\"O Modifies the behaviour of the
.\"O .BR \-b ", " \-d ", " \-f " and "\-i
.\"O output ordering options.
.BR \-b ", " \-d ", " \-f ", "\-i
といった出力順序オプションの動作に影響する。
.TP
.B LC_NUMERIC
.\"O Specifies the radix character as well as the thousands separator.
基数文字と桁区切り文字 (, など) を指定する。
.TP
.B LC_TIME
.\"O Determines the month spellings, affecting \fB\-M\fR.
月名のスペルを決める。 \fB\-M\fR に影響する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.net>
が作成しました。
