.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU split man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 18:43:50 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH SPLIT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBsplit\fR \- split a file into fixed-size pieces
.SH 名前
split \- ファイルを決まった大きさに分割する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B split
[\fB\-\fILINES\fR] [\fB-a \fILENGTH\fR] [\fB\-b \fIBYTES\fR] [\fB\-l \fILINES\fR]
[\fB\-C \fIBYTES\fR] [\fB\-\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR] [\fB\-\-lines=\fILINES\fR]
[\fB\-\-line\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR] [\fB\-\-verbose\fR] [\fIFILE\fR]

.BR split " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B split
.\"O creates output files containing consecutive sections of \fIFILE\fR. If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B split
は
.I FILE
の各セクションの内容を持つファイルを次々に作成して出力する。
.I FILE
が与えられなかったり
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O By default, \fBsplit\fR puts 1000 lines of \fIFILE\fR (or whatever is left
.\"O over for the last section), into each output file.
デフォルトでは、
.B split
は
.I FILE
のうちの 1000 行ずつ (1000 行に満たない場合は残り全部)
を各出力ファイルに書き込む。

.\"O The output files' names consist of \fIPREFIX\fR (`\fBx\fR' by default) followed
.\"O by a group of letters `aa', `ab', and so on, such that concatenating
.\"O the output files in sorted order by file name produces the original
.\"O input file.  (If more than 676 output files are required, \fBsplit\fR uses
.\"O `zaa', `zab', etc.)  The length of this group can be changed by
.\"O \fB\-\-suffix\-length\fR).
出力ファイルの名前は
.I PREFIX
(デフォルトは `\fBx\fR') に `aa' や `ab' などの文字列集合を付加したものになる。
出力ファイルをファイル名でソートして結合すると
元のファイルになるように、付加する文字列が選ばれる。
(676 よりも多くの出力ファイルが必要になる場合は、
.B split
は `zaa', `zab' などを用いる。)
このグループの長さは \fB\-\-suffix\-length\fR で変更できる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-\fILINES\fB, \-l \fILINES\fB, \-\-lines=\fILINES
.\"O Put \fILINES\fR lines of \fIFILE\fR into each output file, instead of the
.\"O default 1000 lines.  Short option form \fB\-\fILINES\fR is deprecated.
.I FILE
の
.I LINES
行分ずつ (デフォルトは 1000 行) を各出力ファイルに書き込む。
短いオプション形式 \fB\-\fILINES\fR は推奨されない。
.TP
.B \-a \fILENGTH\fB, \-\-suffix\-length=\fILENGTH
.\"O Use suffixes of \fILENGTH\fR characters.  (Default: 2)
\fILENGTH\fR 文字のサフィックスを使う (デフォルトは 2 である)。
.TP
.B \-b \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-bytes=\fIBYTES
.\"O Put the first \fIBYTES\fR bytes of \fIFILE\fR into each output file.
.\"O Appending 
.\"O .RB ` b '
.\"O multiplies \fIBYTES\fR by 512,
.\"O .RB ` k '
.\"O by 1024, and
.\"O .RB ` m '
.\"O by 1048576.
.I FILE
の
.I BYTES
バイトずつを各出力ファイルに書きこむ。
.RB ` b '
を付加すると \fIBYTES\fR は 512 倍、
.RB ` k '
なら 1024 倍、
.RB ` m '
なら 1048576 倍される。
.TP
.B \-C \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-line\-bytes=\fIBYTES
.\"O Put into each output file as many complete lines of \fIFILE\fR as
.\"O possible without exceeding \fIBYTES\fR bytes.  For lines longer than
.\"O \fIBYTES\fR bytes, put \fIBYTES\fR bytes into each output file until less than
.\"O \fIBYTES\fR bytes of the line are left, then continue normally.  \fIBYTES\fR
.\"O has the same format as for the \fB\-\-bytes\fR option.
.I FILE
の行を
.I BYTES
バイトを越えない範囲で、できるだけたくさん各出力ファイルに書き込む。
.I BYTES
バイトよりも長い行があった場合には、その行の残りが
.I BYTES
バイト未満になるまで
.I BYTES
バイト毎を出力ファイルに書き込み、後は通常に動作を続ける。
.I BYTES
は
.B \-\-bytes
オプションと同様の形式で指定できる。
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
.\"O Always print file name headers.
常にファイル名のヘッダを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
