.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU stty man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH stty 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O stty \- change and print terminal line settings
.SH 名前
stty \- 端末ラインの設定を変更・表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .BI "stty [" SETTING... "] [\-agF] [-\-all] [\-\-file=\fIDEVICE\fB] [\-\-save]"
.\"O .sp
.\"O .B stty [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O If given no \fISETTING\fR arguments,
.\"O .B stty
.\"O prints the baud rate, line discipline number (on systems that support
.\"O it), and line settings that have been changed from the values set by
.\"O `stty sane'.  Mode reading and setting are performed on the tty line
.\"O connected to the standard input by default (but see \fB\-\-file\fR)
引き数無しで実行された場合、
.B stty
は転送レート (baud rate)、ライン制御番号
(line discipline number: サポートされているシステムの場合)、
および `stty sane' の設定から変更された行設定 (line settings) を表示する。
デフォルトでは、
モードの取得と設定は標準入力に接続されている端末に対して行われる
(しかし \fB\-\-file\fR も見よ)。
.PP
.\"O .B stty
.\"O accepts the following non-option arguments that change aspects of the
.\"O terminal line operation.  A
.\"O .RB [ \- ]
.\"O before a capability means that it can be turned off by preceding it with a 
.\"O .RB ` \- '.
.\"O Some arguments are not available on all systems, since they use non-POSIX
.\"O extensions. Such arguments are marked below with `(np)'
.B stty
は以下をオプション以外の引き数とみなし、対応する端末制御を変更する。
機能の前の
.RB [ \- ]
は、
.RB ` \- '
を前置することによってその機能を無効にできることを意味している。
一部の引き数は POSIX 準拠でない拡張機能を利用しているので、
すべてのシステムで有効とは限らない。このような引き数には `(np)'
という印を付けてある。
.\"O .SS Control settings
.SS コントロールの設定
.IP [\fB\-\fP]parenb
.\"O Generate parity bit in output and expect parity bit in input.
出力にパリティビット (parity bit) を付加し、
入力にもパリティビットがあるものとする。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]parodd
.\"O Set odd parity (even with a \fB-\fP).
奇数パリティに設定する (\fB\-\fP がつくと偶数)。
.IP "cs5 cs6 cs7 cs8"
.\"O Set character size to 5, 6, 7, or 8 bits.
文字のサイズをそれぞれ 5, 6, 7, 8 ビットに設定する。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]hupcl [\fB\-\fP]hup"
.\"O Send a hangup signal when the last process closes the tty.
tty の最後のプロセスが終了したら hangup シグナルを送る。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]cstopb
.\"O Use two stop bits per character (one with \fB-\fP).
文字あたり二つのストップビットを用いる (`\-' がつくと一つ)。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]cread
.\"O Allow input to be received.
入力の受信を許可する。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]clocal
.\"O Disable modem control signals.
モデムのコントロール信号を無効にする。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]crtscts (np)"
.\"O Enable RTS/CTS handshaking.
RTS/CTS によるハンドシェークを有効にする。
.\"O .SS Input settings
.SS 入力の設定
.IP [\fB\-\fP]ignbrk
.\"O Ignore break characters.
ブレーク (break) 文字を無視する。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]brkint
.\"O Breaks cause an interrupt signal.
ブレークによって割り込みシグナルを発生する。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]ignpar
.\"O Ignore characters with parity errors.
パリティエラーの起こった文字を無視する。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]parmrk
.\"O Mark parity errors (with a 255-0-character sequence).
パリティエラーをマークする (255-0 の文字配列を用いる)。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]inpck
.\"O Enable input parity checking.
入力のパリティチェック機能を有効にする。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]istrip
.\"O Clear high (8th) bit of input characters.
入力文字の高位ビット (8 番目のビット) をクリアする。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]inlcr
.\"O Translate newline to carriage return.
改行 (newline) 文字を復帰 (carriage return) 文字に変換する。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]igncr
.\"O Ignore carriage return.
復帰文字を無視する
.IP [\fB\-\fP]icrnl
.\"O Translate carriage return to newline.
復帰文字を改行文字に変換する
.IP [\fB\-\fP]ixon
.\"O Enable XON/XOFF flow control.
XON/XOFF によるフローコントロールを有効にする。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]ixoff [\fB\-\fP]tandem"
.\"O Enable sending of stop character when the system input buffer is
.\"O almost full, and start character when it becomes almost empty again.
システムの入力バッファが一杯になりかけたとき stop 文字を送り、
再び空になりかけたときに start 文字を送る機能を有効にする。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]iuclc (np)"
.\"O Translate uppercase characters to lowercase.
大文字を小文字に変換する。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]ixany (np)"
.\"O Allow any character to restart output (only the start character with `\fB\-\fP').
どの文字でも出力を再開できるようにする
(`\-ixany' で start 文字のみになる)
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]imaxbel (np)"
.\"O Enable beeping and not flushing input buffer if a character arrives
.\"O when the input buffer is full.
入力バッファが一杯なのに文字が入力されたときには、
ビープ音を発生して入力バッファをフラッシュしないようにする。
.\"O .SS Output settings
.SS 出力の設定
.IP [\fB\-\fP]opost
.\"O Postprocess output.
プロセス終了後に出力。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]olcuc (np)"
.\"O Translate lowercase characters to uppercase.
小文字を大文字に変換。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]ocrnl (np)"
.\"O Translate carriage return to newline.
復帰文字 (carriage return) を改行 (newline) 文字に変換。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]onlcr (np)"
.\"O Translate newline to carriage return-newline.
改行を復帰+改行に変換。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]onocr (np)"
.\"O Do not print carriage returns in the first column.
最初の桁の改行文字を出力しない。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]onlret (np)"
.\"O Newline performs a carriage return.
改行文字によって復帰動作を行う。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]ofill (np)"
.\"O Use fill (padding) characters instead of timing for delays.
遅延のタイミング動作に fill (文字埋め) 文字を用いる。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]ofdel (np)"
.\"O Use delete characters for fill instead of null characters.
fill 動作にヌル文字でなく delete 文字を用いる。
.IP "nl1 nl0 (np)"
.\"O Newline delay style.
改行の遅延形式。
.IP "cr3 cr2 cr1 cr0 (np)"
.\"O Carriage return delay style.
復帰の遅延形式。
.IP "tab3 tab2 tab1 tab0 (np)"
.\"O Horizontal tab delay style.
水平タブの遅延形式。
.IP "bs1 bs0 (np)"
.\"O Backspace delay style.
バックスペースの遅延形式。
.IP "vt1 vt0 (np)"
.\"O Vertical tab delay style.
垂直タブの遅延形式。
.IP "ff1 ff0 (np)"
.\"O Form feed delay style.
改ページ (form feed) の遅延形式。
.\"O .SS Local settings
.SS ローカルな設定
.IP [\fB\-\fP]isig
.\"O Enable interrupt, quit, and suspend special characters.
interrupt, quit, suspend 各特殊文字を有効にする。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]icanon
.\"O Enable erase, kill, werase, and rprnt special characters.
erase, kill, werase, rprnt 各特殊文字を有効にする。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]iexten
.\"O Enable non-POSIX special characters.
POSIX 準拠でない特殊文字を有効にする。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]echo
.\"O Echo input characters.
入力文字をエコーする。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]echoe, [\fB\-\fP]crterase"
.\"O Echo erase characters as backspace-space-backspace.
erase 文字をバックスペース+空白+バックスペースとしてエコーする。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]echok
.\"O Echo a newline after a kill character.
kill 文字の後に newline 文字をエコーする。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]echonl
.\"O Echo newline even if not echoing other characters.
他の文字がエコーされない場合でも newline だけをエコーする。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]noflsh
.\"O Disable flushing after interrupt and quit special characters.
interrupt および quit 特殊文字の後にフラッシュを行わない。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]xcase (np)"
.\"O Enable input and output of uppercase characters by preceding their
.\"O lowercase equivalents with `\e', when icanon is set.
icanon が設定されている場合、
入出力の大文字を対応する小文字に `\e' を前置して表示可能にする。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]tostop (np)"
.\"O Stop background jobs that try to write to the terminal.
端末に出力しようとしたバックグラウンドジョブを停止する。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]echoprt [\fB\-\fP]prterase (np)"
.\"O Echo erased characters backward, between `\e' and '/'.
消去された文字を '\e' と `/' に挟んで後方にエコーする。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]echoctl [\fB\-\fP]ctlecho (np)"
.\"O Echo control characters in hat notation (`^c') instead of literally.
コントロール文字を文字どおりに出力する代わりに
ハット表示 (`^c') する。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]echoke [\fB\-\fP]crtkill (np)"
.\"O Echo the kill special character by erasing each character on the line
.\"O as indicated by the echoprt and echoe settings, instead of by the
.\"O echoctl and echok settings.
kill 文字のエコーを、(echoctl と echok 設定の代わりに)  echoprt と
echoe 設定で指定された方法でラインを消去することによって行う。
.\"O .SS Combination settings
.SS 設定の組み合わせ
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]evenp [\fB\-\fP]parity"
.\"O Same as parenb \-parodd cs7.  With `\fB\-\fP', same as \-parenb cs8.
\-parodd cs7 と同じ。 `\fB\-\fP' が付いた場合は \-parenb cs8 と同じ。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]oddp
.\"O Same as parenb parodd cs7.  With `\fB\-\fP', same as \-parenb cs8.
\-icrnl \-onlcr と同じ。 `\fB\-\fP' が付いた場合は
\-inlcr \-igncr onlcr \-ocrnl \-onlret と同じ。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]nl
.\"O Same as \-icrnl \-onlcr.  With `\fB\-\fP', same as icrnl \-inlcr \-igncr
.\"O onlcr \-ocrnl \-onlret.
\-icrnl \-onlcr と同じ。 `\fB\-\fP' が付いた場合は
\-inlcr \-igncr onlcr \-ocrnl \-onlret と同じ。
.\"O .IP ek
.\"O Reset the erase and kill special characters to their default values.
erase と kill の特殊文字をデフォルトの値に戻す。
.IP sane
.\"O Same as cread \-ignbrk brkint \-inlcr \-igncr icrnl \-ixoff
.\"O \-iuclc \-ixany imaxbel opost \-olcuc \-ocrnl onlcr \-onocr \-onlret
.\"O \-ofill \-ofdel nl0 cr0 tab0 bs0 vt0 ff0 isig icanon iexten echo echoe echok
.\"O \-echonl \-noflsh \-xcase \-tostop \-echoprt echoctl echoke, and also
.\"O sets all special characters to their default values.
cread \-ignbrk brkint \-inlcr \-igncr icrnl \-ixoff
\-iuclc \-ixany imaxbel opost \-olcuc \-ocrnl onlcr \-onocr \-onlret
\-ofill \-ofdel nl0 cr0 tab0 bs0 vt0 ff0 isig icanon iexten echo echoe echok
\-echonl \-noflsh \-xcase \-tostop \-echoprt echoctl echoke と同じ。
また同時にすべての特殊文字をデフォルトの値に戻す。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]cooked
.\"O Same as brkint ignpar istrip icrnl ixon opost isig icanon, plus sets
.\"O the eof and eol characters to their default values if they are the
.\"O same as the min and time characters.  With `\fB\-\fP', same as raw.
brkint ignpar istrip icrnl ixon opost isig icanon に加え、
eof と eol 文字が min および time 文字と同じになっている場
合はこれらをデフォルトの値に戻す。 `\fB\-\fP' が付いた場合は raw と同じ。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]raw
.\"O Same as \-ignbrk \-brkint \-ignpar \-parmrk \-inpck \-istrip \-inlcr
.\"O \-igncr \-icrnl \-ixon \-ixoff \-iuclc \-ixany \-imaxbel
.\"O \-opost \-isig \-icanon \-xcase min 1 time 0.
.\"O With `\fB\-\fP', same as cooked.
\-ignbrk \-brkint \-ignpar \-parmrk \-inpck \-istrip \-inlcr
\-igncr \-icrnl \-ixon \-ixoff \-iuclc \-ixany \-imaxbel
\-opost \-isig \-icanon \-xcase min 1 time 0 と同じ。
`\fB\-\fP' が付いた場合は cooked と同じ。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]cbreak
.\"O Same as \-icanon.
\-icanon と同じ。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]pass8
.\"O Same as \-parenb \-istrip cs8.  With `\fB\-\fP', same as parenb istrip cs7.
\-parenb \-istrip cs8 と同じ。
`\fB-\fP' が付いた場合は parenb istrip cs7 と同じ。
.IP [\fB\-\fP]litout
.\"O Same as \-parenb \-istrip \-opost cs8.  With `\fB\-\fP', same as parenb
.\"O istrip opost cs7.
\-parenb \-istrip \-opost cs8 と同じ。
`\fB-\fP' が付いた場合は parenb istrip opost cs7 と同じ。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]decctlq (np)"
.\"O Same as \-ixany.
\-ixany と同じ。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]tabs (np)"
.\"O Same as tab0.  With `\fB\-\fP', same as tab3.
tab0 と同じ。 `\fB-\fP' が付いた場合は tab3 と同じ。
.IP "[\fB\-\fP]lcase [\fB\-\fP]LCASE (np)"
.\"O Same as xcase iuclc olcuc.
xcase iuclc olcuc と同じ。
.IP crt
.\"O Same as echoe echoctl echoke.
echoe echoctl echoke と同じ。
.IP dec
.\"O Same as echoe echoctl echoke \-ixany, and also sets the interrupt
.\"O special character to Ctrl-C, erase to Del, and kill to Ctrl-U.
echoe echoctl echoke \-ixany に加え、 interrupt 特殊文字を
Ctrl-C に、 erase を Del に、 kill を Ctrl-U に設定する。
.\"O .SS Special characters
.SS 特殊文字
.\"O The special characters' default values vary from system to system.
.\"O They are set with the syntax `name value', where the names are listed
.\"O below and the value can be given either literally, in hat notation
.\"O (`^c'), or as an integer which may start with `0x' to indicate
.\"O hexadecimal, `0' to indicate octal, or any other digit to indicate
.\"O decimal.  Giving a value of `^\-' or `undef' disables that special
.\"O character.
特殊文字のデフォルト値はシステムによってまったく異なる。
これらは `name value' といった書式で指定される。
name には以下のリストのどれかを指定する。
value には、文字そのまま、ハット表示 (`^c')、
あるいは数値 (`0x' ではじまる場合は 16 進、`0' は 8 進、その他は 10 進)
による指定ができる。 `^\-' または `undef' を value に与えた場合には、
その特殊文字は無効になる。

.IP intr
.\"O Send an interrupt signal.
割り込み (interrupt) シグナルを送る。
.IP quit
.\"O Send a quit signal.
終了 (quit) シグナルを送る。
.IP erase
.\"O Erase the last character typed.
最後にタイプされた文字を消去する。
.IP kill
.\"O Erase the current line.
現在の行を消去する。
.IP eof
.\"O Send an end of file (terminate the input).
ファイル終了 (end of file) を知らせる (入力を終了する)。
.IP eol
.\"O End the line.
行末 (end of the line)。
.IP "eol2 (np)"
.\"O Alternate character to end the line.
行末を表す別の文字
.IP "swtch (np)"
.\"O Switch to a different shell layer.
別のシェル層 (shell layer) にスイッチする。
.IP start
.\"O Restart the output after stopping it.
停止している出力を再開する。
.IP stop
.\"O Stop the output.
出力を停止する。
.IP susp
.\"O Send a terminal stop signal.
端末に停止 (stop) シグナルを送る。
.IP "dsusp (np)"
.\"O Send a terminal stop signal after flushing the input.
入力をフラッシュしてから端末に停止 (stop) シグナルを送る。
.IP "rprnt (np)"
.\"O Redraw the current line.
現在の行を再表示する。
.IP "werase (np)"
.\"O Erase the last word typed.
最後にタイプされた単語 (word) を消去する。
.IP "lnext (np)"
.\"O Enter the next character typed literally, even if it is a special
.\"O character.
次にタイプされる文字を (特殊文字であっても) そのままの文字
として受け取る。
.\"O .SS Special settings
.SS 特殊な設定
.\"O .IP "min N"
.\"O Set the minimum number of characters that will satisfy a read until
.\"O the time value has expired, when \-icanon is set.
\-icanon が設定されているとき、
制限時間中で読み込み成功とみなされる文字数の最小値を設定する。
.IP "time N"
.\"O Set the number of tenths of a second before reads time out if the min
.\"O number of characters have not been read, when \-icanon is set.
\-icanon が設定されているとき、
最小文字数が読み込まれなかった場合に読み込みが時間切れになるまでの時間を
10 秒単位で設定する。
.IP "ispeed N"
.\"O Set the input speed to N.
入力の速度を N  に設定する。
.IP "ospeed N"
.\"O Set the output speed to N.
出力の速度を N に設定する。
.IP "rows N (np)"
.\"O Tell the kernel that the terminal has N rows.
カーネルに端末が N 行であることを伝える。
.IP "cols N columns N (np)"
.\"O Tell the kernel that the terminal has N columns.
カーネルに端末が N 桁であることを伝える。
.IP "size (np)"
.\"O Print the number of rows and columns that the kernel thinks the
.\"O terminal has.  (Systems that don't support rows and cols in the
.\"O kernel typically use the environment variables
.\"O .B LINES
.\"O and
.\"O .B COLUMNS
.\"O instead; however, GNU
.\"O .B stty
.\"O does not know anything about them.)
カーネルが保持している端末の行数および桁数を表示する
(行・桁をカーネルでサポートしていないシステムでは、代わりに
.B LINES
および
.B COLUMNS
環境変数が良く用いられる。しかし GNU
.B stty
はこれらを全く参照しない)。
.IP "line N (np)"
.\"O Use line discipline N.
ライン制御番号 (line discipline) の N を用いる。
.IP "speed"
.\"O Print the terminal speed.
端末の速度を表示する。
.IP N
.\"O Set the input and output speeds to N.  N can be one of: 0 50 75 110
.\"O 134 134.5 150 200 300 600 1200 1800 2400 4800 9600 19200 38400 exta
.\"O extb.  exta is the same as 19200; extb is the same as 38400.  0 hangs
.\"O up the line if \-clocal is set.
入出力の速度を N に設定する。
N は以下の数値のうちのどれか: 0 50 75 110 134 134.5 150 200 300 600 1200
1800 2400 4800 9600 19200 38400 exta extb。
exta は 19200 と同じ。 extb は 38400 と同じ。
0 は \-clocal が設定されている場合には回線を切断する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
.\"O Print all current settings in human-readable form.  This option can't be
.\"O used in combination with any setting.
現在のすべての設定を人間に読める形式で出力する。
このオプションは設定指示と組み合わせて使うことはできない。
.TP
.B "\-g, \-\-save"
.\"O Print all current settings in a form that can be used as an argument
.\"O to another
.\"O .B stty
.\"O command to restore the current settings.  This option can't be used in
.\"O combination with any setting.
現在のすべての設定を、別の
.B stty
に引き数として渡せる形式で出力する。これは現在の設定を保存して再利用す
るために用いる。
.TP
.B \-F \fIDEVICE\fB, \-\-file=\fIDEVICE\fR
.\"O Mode readings and settings are performed on \fIDEVICE\fR instead of the
.\"O device connected to standard input.
モードの読み込みや設定を、標準入力に接続されている端末でなく
.I DEVICE
に対して行う。

.\"O If \fBclocal\fR on the device isn't set and the shell tries to open that
.\"O device (as in stty < /dev/ttyS1), \fBPOSIX\fR behaviour requires that it
.\"O blocks until \fBclocal\fR is set again.  This is because shells, unlike \fBstty
.\"O \-\-file\fR, don't open devices \fBO_NONBLOCK\fR.
デバイスで
.B clocal
が設定されていないときにシェルがそのデバイスを
(< /dev/ttyS1 のように) オープンしようとしたときには、
.B clocal
が再設定されるまでその操作はブロックされるように
.B POSIX
では要求している。なぜかというと、シェルは
.B stty \-\-file
とは異なり、デバイスを
.B O_NONBLOCK
で開くことはできないからである。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
