.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU sum man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SUM 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBsum\fR \- print checksum and block counts
.SH 名前
sum \- チェックサムとブロック数を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B sum
.RB [ \-rs ]
.RB [ \-\-sysv ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR sum " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B sum
.\"O computes and prints a 16 bit checksum for each given
.\"O .IR FILE .
.\"O If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B sum
は引数に与えられた各
.I FILE
の 16 ビットチェックサムを計算して表示する。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O .B sum
.\"O prints the checksum for each \fIFILE\fR followed by the number of
.\"O blocks in the file (rounded up).  By default if more than one \fIFILE\fR is
.\"O given, file names are also printed.
.B sum
は
.I FILE
それぞれのチェックサムとブロック数 (切り上げ) を表示する。
デフォルトでは、2 つ以上の
.I FILE
が引数に指定されると、ファイル名も表示する。

.\"O By default, GNU \fBsum\fR computes checksums using an algorithm
.\"O compatible with BSD \fBsum\fR and prints file sizes in units of 1024-byte
.\"O blocks.
GNUの
.B sum
は、デフォルトで BSD
.B sum
と互換性のあるアルゴリズムでチェックサムを計算し、
1024 バイトのブロック単位でファイルのサイズを表示する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Use the default (BSD compatible) algorithm.  This option is
.\"O included for compatibility with the System V sum.  Unless \fB-s\fR
.\"O is also given, it has no effect.
デフォルトの (BSD 互換の) アルゴリズムをチェックサムの計算に使う。
このオプションは System V の
.B sum
との互換性のためにある。
.I \-s
オプションを同時に指定しない限り、何も起きない。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-sysv
.\"O Compute checksums using an algorithm compatible with System V
.\"O sum's default, and print file sizes in units of 512-byte blocks.
チェックサムの計算に System V の
.B sum
と互換のアルゴリズムを用い、
512 バイトのブロック単位でファイルのサイズを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
