.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU tac man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	separator string	セパレータ文字列
.\"
.TH TAC 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBtac\fR \- concatenate and write files in reverse
.SH 名前
tac \- ファイルを結合して逆順に表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B tac
.RB [ \-br "] [" "\-s \fISEPARATOR\fR" "] [" \-\-before "] [" \-\-regex ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR tac " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B tac
.\"O writes each 
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O to standard output, reversing the records (lines by default).  If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used.
.B tac
は指定されたファイルの内容を標準出力に書き込む。
その際、レコードを逆順にする (レコードのデフォルトは行単位)。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O Records are separated by instances of a string (newline by default).  By
.\"O default, this separator string is attached to the end of the record that
.\"O it follows in the file.
レコードはセパレータ文字列によって分離される (デフォルトは改行文字)。
デフォルトでは、セパレータ文字列は
(入力ファイル中で後置されていた)
レコードの最後に付加されて出力される。

.\"O Under DOS platforms \fBtac\fR reads files in binary mode.  See \fBcat\fR(1)
.\"O for more details.
DOS プラットフォームでは、
.B tac
はファイルをバイナリモードで読み込む。詳細は
.BR cat (1)
を見よ。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-before
.\"O The separator is attached to the beginning of the record that it
.\"O precedes in the file.
セパレータ文字列を (入力ファイル中で前置されていた)
レコードの先頭に付加する。
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-regex
.\"O Treat the separator string as a regular expression.
セパレータ文字列を正規表現として取り扱う。
.TP
.BI "\-s " SEPARATOR ", \-\-separator=" SEPARATOR
.\"O Use
.\"O .I SEPARATOR
.\"O as the record separator, instead of a newline.
改行文字の代わりに、
.I STRING
をレコードのセパレータに用いる
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
