.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU tail man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 21:07:42 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	inode		i-ノード
.\"
.TH TAIL 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBtail\fR \- output the last part of files
.SH 名前
tail \- ファイルの末尾の部分を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B tail
[<\fB\-\fR|\fB+\fR>\fICOUNTOPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-fqvF\fR] [\fB\-c \fIBYTES\fR]
[\fB\-n \fILINES\fR] [\fB\-\-follow\fR] [\fB\-\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR]
[\fB\-\-lines=\fILINES\fR]
[\fB\-\-follow\fR[\fB=\fIHOW\fR]]
[\fB\-\-max\-consecutive\-size\-changes=\fINUMBER\fR]
[\fB\-\-max\-unchanged\-stats=\fINUMBER\fR]
[\fB\-\-pid=\fIPID\fR]
[\fB\-\-retry\fR]
[\fB\-\-sleep\-interval=\fISECS\fR]
.RB [ \-\-quiet "] [" \-\-silent "] [" \-\-verbose ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR tail " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B tail
.\"O writes to standard output the last part (10 lines by default) of each
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O argument.  If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B tail
は引数に与えられた
.I FILE
それぞれの末尾の部分 (デフォルトでは 10 行) を表示する。
.I FILE
が 1 つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O If more than one \fIFILE\fR is specified, \fBtail\fR prints a one-line header
.\"O consisting of
2 つ以上の
.I FILE
が指定されると、
.B tail
は以下のような 1 行のヘッダを各出力
.I FILE
の前に表示する:
.sp
.nf
     ==> \fIFILENAME\fR <==
.fi
.\"nakano: commented next .sp because of the trailing blank line.
.\".sp
.\"O before the output for each \fIFILE\fR.

.\"O \fBtail\fR accepts two option formats: the new one, in which numbers are
.\"O arguments to the options (`\fB\-n 1\fR'), and the old one, in which the
.\"O number precedes any option letters (`fB\-1\fR' or `\fB+1\fR').
.B tail
は 2 つのオプション形式を受付ける。新しい形式は、
数値をオプションの引数として与える (`\fB\-n 1\fP') ものであり、
古い形式はあらゆる文字オプションの前に数値を指定する
(`\fB\-1\fP' や `\fB+1\fR') ものである。

.\"O If any option-argument is a number \fIN\fR starting with a `\fB+\fR',
.\"O \fBtail\fR begins printing with the \fIN\fRth item from the start of each file,
.\"O instead of from the end.  This syntax is deprecated.
オプション引数に数値 \fIN\fR が `\fB+\fR' を前置して指定された場合は、
.B tail
は各ファイルの先頭から \fIN\fR 番目の項目以降を表示する。
通常の動作では末尾から数える。
この構文は推奨されない。

.\"O If the \fIFILE\fR is truncated, \fBtail\fR will detect that it has shrinked,
.\"O move to the new end of file and start reading from the new end of file.
.I FILE
が切り詰められた場合は、
.B tail
はファイルが短くなったことを検知し、新たなファイル末尾に移動し、
そこから読み込みを始める。

.\"O .B tail
.\"O can output any amount of data (some other non-GNU versions of
.\"O \fBtail\fR cannot).  It also has no \fB\-r\fR option (print in reverse), since
.\"O reversing a file is really a different job from printing the end of a
.\"O file; BSD \fBtail\fR (which is the one with \fB\-r\fR) can only reverse files
.\"O that are at most as large as its buffer, which is typically 32k.  A
.\"O more reliable and versatile way to reverse files is the GNU \fBtac\fR(1)
.\"O command.
.B tail
では出力の大きさの指定に制限が無い (GNU 版以外の
.B tail
にはそうでないものもある)。
また
.I \-r
オプション (逆順表示) は無い。
ファイルを逆順に表示するのは、
ファイルの末尾を表示するのとは本質的に異なるからである。
BSD 版
.B tail
(\fB\-r\fR オプションを持っている) はバッファ
(通常 32k) よりも小さいファイルを逆順表示できるに過ぎない。
この目的には GNU 版の
.B tac
コマンドを用いる方が、信頼性も融通性も高い。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \fR<\fB-\fR|\fB+\fR>\fICOUNTOPTIONS
.\"O This option is only recognized if it is specified first.  \fICOUNT\fR is
.\"O a decimal number optionally followed by a size letter
.\"O .RB (` b "', `" k "', `" m ')
.\"O as in `\fB\-c\fR', or `\fBl\fR' to mean count by lines, or other option
.\"O letters (`\fBcfqv\fR').  The \fB\-\fR and \fB+\fR short option forms are
.\"O deprecated. 
このオプションは最初に指定した場合に限って認識される。
.I COUNT
は 10 進数の数値。
単位を表す文字
.RB (` b "', `" k "', `" m ')
を後置したり (それぞれの意味は `\fB\-c\fP' のものと同じ)、
行単位のカウントを指定する `\fBl\fP' を後置したり、
他のオプション文字 (`\fBcqv\fR') を後置したりできる。
.\"nakano: 訳注 :-p
何も文字が後置されなかった場合は `\fBl\fP' が指定されたのと同じことになる。
短いオプション形式 \fB\-\fR と \fB+\fR は推奨されない。
.TP
.B \-c \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-bytes=\fIBYTES
.\"O Print the last \fIBYTES\fR bytes, instead of final last lines.  Appending
.\"O .RB ` b '
.\"O multiplies \fIBYTES\fB by 512,
.\"O .RB ` k '
.\"O by 1024, and
.\"O .RB ` m '
.\"O by 1048576.
行単位ではなく、末尾の
.I BYTES
バイトを表示する。
.RB ` b '
を追加すると \fIBYTES\fR の 512 倍、
.RB ` k '
は 1024 倍、
.RB ` m '
は 1048576 倍を指定したことになる。
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-follow\fR[\fB=\fIHOW\fR]
.\"O Loop forever trying to read more characters at the end of the file,
.\"O presumably because the file is growing.  Ignored if reading from a
.\"O pipe.  If more than one file is given, \fBtail\fR prints a header
.\"O whenever it gets output from a different file, to indicate which
.\"O file that output is from.  You may specify how to track a file:
ファイルの内容がどんどん増え続けているものと仮定し、
ファイルの最終部分の文字を読み続けようと無限にループする。
パイプから読み込んでいる場合は無視される。
2 つ以上のファイルが指定された場合は、
.B tail
は異なったファイルの追加分を受け付けるごとにヘッダを表示し、
出力がどのファイルに由来するものかがわかるようにする。
ファイルの追跡方法を指定することもできる。
.RS
.TP
.B descriptor
.\"O Track the end of the file after it has been unlinked or renamed;  that is,
.\"O forever.
ファイル末尾の追跡を、ファイルが unlink されたり
rename されたりした後に行う。つまり永遠に行う。
.TP
.B name
.\"O Track the end of the file after it has been removed.  Once \fBtail\fR finds
.\"O out that the \fRFILE\fR no longer exists (because it has been unlinked or
.\"O renamed), it will trying to open it again.
ファイル末尾の追跡を、ファイルが remove された後に行う。
.B tail
は
.I FILE
が (unlink や rename によって) もう存在しないことを確認すると、
もう一度オープンしようと試みる。
.RE
.TP
.B \-n \fILINES\fB, \-\-lines=\fILINES
.\"O Output the last \fILINES\fR lines.
末尾の
.I LINES
行を表示する。
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent
.\"O Never print file name headers.
ファイル名のヘッダを出力しない。
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
.\"O Always print file name headers.
常にファイル名のヘッダを出力する。
.TP
.B \-F
.\"O Equivalent to \fB\-\-follow=name \-\-retry.
\fB\-\-follow=name \-\-retry と等価である。
.TP
.B \-\-max\-consecutive\-size\-changes=\fINUMBER
.\"O When following by name, follow a file until NUMBER of consecutive size
.\"O changes have been detected (even if it has been renamed or removed);  then
.\"O check if the filename is still associated with the same device/inode pair as
.\"O before by opening and fstating the file.  Default is 200.
名前で追跡するとき、連続
.I NUMBER
回のサイズ変更が検知されるまで (rename や remove されても) 追跡する。
検知されたらファイル名がまだ以前と同じ「デバイス / i-ノード」
の組み合わせに対応しているかどうかを、
ファイルをオープンして fstat することによって調べる。デフォルトは 200。
.TP
.B \-\-max\-unchanged\-stats=\fINUMBER
.\"O When following by name, after NUMBER of consecutive iterations on which size
.\"O has remained consant, check if the filename is still associated with the
.\"O same device/inode pair as before by opening and fstating the file.  Default is 5.
名前で追跡するとき、
連続
.I NUMBER
回サイズが変わらなかったら、ファイル名がまだ以前と同じ「デバイス / i-ノード」
の組み合わせに対応しているかどうかを、
ファイルをオープンして fstat することによって調べる。デフォルトは 5。
.TP
.B \-\-pid=\fIPID
.\"O When following a file \fBtail\fR will terminate when process with pid
.\"O \fIPID\fR does too.  If such process doesn't exist, it will terminate after
.\"O one iteration.
ファイルを追跡するとき、
.B tail
は pid が
.I PID
のプロセスが終了したら終了する。そのようなプロセスがなければ、
1 回分のループを行って終了する。
.TP
.B \-\-retry
.\"O When \fBtail\fR is following a file by name and detects that it is gone,
.\"O retry until it succeeds opening it again.  Otherwise it will just report the
.\"O file no longer exists and never check again.
.B tail
がファイルを名前で追跡していて、ファイルがなくなったことを検知したら、
再オープンを成功するまで繰り返す。
このオプションを指定しなければ、
.\"nakano: だと思うんだけど... > otherwise
.B tail
は単にファイルが存在しないことを報告して以降のチェックを行わない。
.TP
.B \-\-sleep\-interval=\fISECS\fR
.\"O Check tracked files every \fISECS\fR seconds (default is 1)
追跡しているファイルのチェックを
.I SECS
秒ごとに行う (デフォルトは 1 秒)。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
