.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU tee man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH tee 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O tee \- read from standard input and write to standard output and files
.SH 名前
tee \- 標準入力から読んだ内容を標準出力とファイルとに書き出す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B tee [\-ai] [\-\-append] [\-\-ignore-interrupts]
.BI [ file... ]
.sp
.B tee [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B tee
.\"O copies the standard input to the standard output and any
.\"O files given as arguments. It is useful when you want not only to send
.\"O some data down a pipe, but also to save a copy.
.B tee
コマンドは標準入力を、
標準出力と引数で与えられた全てのファイルとにコピーする。
何らかのデータをパイプに送るとき、
同時にそのコピーを保存しておきたいときに便利だろう。
.P
.\"O If a file being written to does not already exist, it is created.  If
.\"O a file being written to already exists, the data it previously
.\"O contained is overwritten unless the
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option is used.
存在しないファイルに書き出そうとすると、このファイルは作成される。
もしすでに存在しているファイルに書き出そうとすると、
.I \-a
オプションを使わない限り、以前の内容は上書きされる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-append"
.\"O Append the standard input to the given files rather than overwriting them.
ファイル内容を上書きせずに、標準入力をファイルに追加する。
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-ignore-interrupts"
.\"O Ignore interrupt signals.
割り込みシグナルを無視する。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
