.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU test man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH test 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O test \- check file types and compare values
.SH 名前
test \- ファイル形式のチェックや値の比較を行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "test [" expr ]
.sp
.B test [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B test
.\"O returns a status of 0 (true) or 1 (false) depending on
.\"O the evaluation of
.\"O the conditional expression
.\"O .IR "expr" .
.B test
は条件式
.IR expr
を評価した結果によって、 0 (真) または 1 (偽)
を終了ステータスとして返す。
.PP
.\"O Each part of the expression must be a separate argument. Expressions may
.\"O be unary or binary. 
.\"O .B test
.\"O has file status checks, string operators, and numeric comparison
.\"O operators.
式の各部分はそれぞれ分離された引数でなければならない。
式は単項式あるいは二項式である。
.B test
はファイルのステータス調査、文字列操作、数値の比較演算を行うことができる。
.PP
.\"O Because most shells have a built-in command by the same name, using
.\"O the unadorned command name may get you different functionality than that
.\"O described here. 
ほとんどのシェルには同名の組み込みコマンドがあるので、
単に `test' として実行すると、
ここで記述されたものとは異なった機能のものが実行されるだろう。
.\"O .SS File type tests
.SS ファイル形式のテスト
.\"O .BR
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-b \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a block special device.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、ブロックスペシャルファイルであれば真。
.TP
.B \-c \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a character special device.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、キャラクタスペシャルファイルであれば真。
.TP
.B \-d \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a directory.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、ディレクトリであれば真。
.TP
.B \-f \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a regular file.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、通常ファイル (regular file) であれば真。
.TP
.B \-h \fIfile\fP
.TP
.B \-L \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a symbolic link.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、シンボリックリンクであれば真。
.TP
.B \-p \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a named pipe.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、名前付きパイプ (named pipe) であれば真。
.TP
.B \-S \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a socket.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、ソケットであれば真。
.TP
.B \-t [\fIfd\fP]
.\"O True if
.\"O .I fd
.\"O is opened on a terminal.  If
.\"O .I fd
.\"O is omitted, it defaults to 1 (standard output).
.I fd
が端末でオープンされていれば真。
.I fd
が省略された場合のデフォルト値は 1 (標準出力)。

.\"O .SS File permission tests
.SS ファイルのパーミッションのテスト
.\"O .BR
.TP
.B \-g \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and has its set-group-id bit set.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、set GID されていれば真。
.TP
.B \-k \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP has its ``sticky'' bit set.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、 sticky ビットが立っていれば真。
.TP
.B \-r \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is readable.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、読み取り可能であれば真。
.TP
.B \-u \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and has its set-user-id bit set.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、 set SUID されていれば真。
.TP
.B \-w \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is writable.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、書き込み可能であれば真。
.TP
.B \-x \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is executable.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、実行可能であれば真。
.TP
.B \-O \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is owned by the current effective user id.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、現在の実効ユーザー id による所有であれば真。
.TP
.B \-G \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is owned by the current effective group id.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、現在の実効グループ id による所有であれば真。

.\"O .SS File characteristics tests
.SS ファイル特性のテスト
.\"O .BR
.TP
.B \-e \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists
\fIfile\fP が存在すれば真。
.TP
.B \-s \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and has a size greater than zero.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、サイズが 0 より大きければ真。
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \-\fBnt\fP \fIfile2\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile1\fP is newer (according to
.\"O modification date) than \fIfile2\fP.
\fIfile1\fP が \fIfile2\fP より (修正時刻で比較して) 新しければ真。
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \-\fBot\fP \fIfile2\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile1\fP is older than file2.
\fIfile1\fP が \fIfile2\fP より古ければ真。
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \fB\-ef\fP \fIfile2\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile1\fP and \fIfile2\fP have the same device and
.\"O inode numbers.
\fIfile1\fP と \fIfile2\fP のデバイス番号と
i-ノード番号が共に等しければ真。

.\"O .SS String tests
.SS 文字列のテスト
.\"O .BR
.TP
.B \fIstring\fP
.TP
.B \-n \fIstring\fP
.\"O True if the length of
.\"O .I string
.\"O is non-zero.
.I string
の長さが 0 より大きければ真。
.TP
.B \-z \fIstring\fP
.\"O True if the length of \fIstring\fP is zero.
\fIstring\fP の長さが 0 であれば真。
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB=\fP \fIstring2\fP
.\"O True if the strings are equal.
二つの文字列が等しければ真。
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB!=\fP \fIstring2\fP
.\"O True if the strings are not equal.
二つの文字列が等しくなければ真。

.\"O .SS Numeric tests
.SS 数値のテスト
.\"O .BR
.TP
.I arg1 \fBOP\fP arg2
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B OP
.\"O is one of
.\"O .BR \-eq ,
.\"O .BR \-ne ,
.\"O .BR \-lt ,
.\"O .BR \-le ,
.\"O .BR \-gt ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR \-ge .
.SM
.B OP
は
.BR \-eq ,
.BR \-ne ,
.BR \-lt ,
.BR \-le ,
.BR \-gt ,
.BR \-ge
のいずれか。
.\"O These arithmetic binary operators return true if \fIarg1\fP
.\"O is equal, not-equal, less-than, less-than-or-equal,
.\"O greater-than, or greater-than-or-equal than \fIarg2\fP,
.\"O respectively.
.\"O .I arg1
.\"O and
.\"O .I arg2
.\"O may be positive integers, negative integers, or the special
.\"O expression \fB\-l\fP \fIstring\fP, which evaluates to the
.\"O length of 
.\"O .IR string .
これらの代数二項演算子は、
それぞれ \fIarg1\fP が \fIarg2\fP (に等しい、に等しくない、より小さい、
より小さいか等しい、より大きい、より大きいか等しい) 条件を満たせば真。
.I arg1
および
.I arg2
は正の整数、負の整数をとることができる。
また \fB\-l\fP \fIstring\fP という特殊な式を指定することもでき、
この場合は
.I string
の長さとなる。

.\"O .SS Connectives for test
.SS テストの論理結合
.\"O .BR
.TP
.B ! \fIexpr\fP
.\"O True if
.\"O .I expr
.\"O is false.
.I expr
が偽であれば真。
.TP
\fIexpr1\fP \-\fBa\fP \fIexpr2\fP
.\"O True if both
.\"O .I expr1
.\"O and
.\"O .I expr2
.\"O are true.
.I expr1
と
.I expr2
の両方が真であれば真。
.TP
\fIexpr1\fP \-\fBo\fP \fIexpr2\fP
.\"O True if either
.\"O .I expr1
.\"O or
.\"O .I expr2
.\"O is true.
.I expr1
か
.I expr2
のどちらかが真であれば真。
.PD 1
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O When GNU
.\"O .B test
.\"O is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are
.\"O recognized:
GNU
.B test
が引数一つだけで起動された場合には、
以下のオプションが認識される:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
