.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Aug 22 12:42 JST 1999
.\"         by Kazuyuki Tanisako
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 17 15:13:21 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\" 
.\"WORD: timestamps		時刻(アクセス時刻と修正時刻)
.\"WORD: access time		アクセス時刻
.\"WORD: modification time	修正時刻
.\"WORD: timezones		タイムゾーン
.\"
.TH TOUCH 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH "名前"
.\"O touch \- change file timestamps
touch \- ファイルのアクセス時刻と修正時刻を変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH "書式"
.B touch
.BI "[\-acm][\-r " ref_file "|\-t " time "] " file...
.sp
.\"O Obsolescent version:
今後使われなくなる書式:
.br
.B touch
.BI "[\-acm][" ugly_time "] " file...
.sp
.\"O GNU version:
GNU 版:
.br
.B touch
.BI "[\-acfm] [\-r " file "] [\-t " time "]"
.BI "[\-d " time "] [\-\-time={atime,access,use,mtime,modify}] "
.BI "[\-\-date=" time "] [\-\-reference=" file "]"
.BI "[\-\-no-create] [\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-] " file...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH "説明"
.\"O .B touch
.\"O changes the access and/or modification timestamps of each
.\"O specified
.\"O .IR file .
.B touch
コマンドは指定したそれぞれの
.I file
のアクセス時刻、修正時刻またはいずれかを変更する。

.\"O These timestamps are changed to the current time, unless
.\"O the \-r option is specified, in which case they are changed
.\"O to the corresponding timestamps of the file
.\"O .IR ref_file ,
.\"O or the \-t option is specified, in which case they are changed
.\"O to the specified
.\"O .IR time .
特に指定がない場合は現在時刻に変更する。
\-r オプションを使った場合、
.I ref_file
の時刻を使い変更し、\-t オプションを使った場合には
.I time
で指定した時刻に変更する。

.\"O Both times are changed when neither or both of the \-a and \-m
.\"O options are given. Only the access or only the modification time
.\"O is changed when one of the options \-a and \-m is given.
\-a と \-m オプションのいずれも指定しないか、
同時に指定すると両方の時刻 (訳注：アクセス時刻と修正時刻) を変更する。
\-a と \-m オプションのいずれか 1 つを指定すると、
アクセス時刻もしくは修正時刻のいずれかのみを変更する。
.\"O If the file did not exist yet, it is created (as an empty file
.\"O with mode 0666, modified by the umask), unless the \-c option is given.
ファイルがまだ存在しない場合は、\-c オプションが指定されていない限り、
(モード 0666 を umask で修正したアクセス権にして、空のファイルを) 作成する。
.SH "POSIX オプション"
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Change the access time of
.\"O .IR file .
.I file
のアクセス時刻のみを変更する。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Do not create
.\"O .IR file .
.I file
を作成しない。
.TP
.B \-m
.\"O Change the modification time of
.\"O .IR file .
.I file
の修正時刻を変更する。
.TP
.BI "\-r " ref_file
.\"O Use the corresponding timestamp of
.\"O .I ref_file
.\"O as the new value for the changed timestamp(s).
.I ref_file
で指定したファイルの時刻を使い変更する。
.TP
.BI "\-t " time
.\"O Use the specified time as the new value for the changed timestamp(s).
.\"O The argument is a decimal number of the form
time で指定した時刻を使い変更する。
引き数は次のような明確な意味を持つ 10 進数の形式で指定する。
.br
.nf
    [[CC]YY]MMDDhhmm[.SS]
.br
.fi
.\"O with the obvious meaning. If CC is not specified, the year CCYY
.\"O is taken to be in the range 1969-2068. If YY is not specified, the current
.\"O year is taken.
CC を指定しない場合、年 CCYY は 1969-2068 の範囲となる
(訳注: YY=69-99 の場合 CC=19、YY=00-68 の場合 CC=20 と見做される)。
YY を指定しない場合には、現在の年が使われる。
.\"O If SS is not specified, it is taken to be 0. It may be specified
.\"O in the range 0-61 so that it is possible to refer to leap seconds.
.\"O The resulting time is taken as a time for the time zone specified by
.\"O the environment variable TZ. It is an error if the resulting time
.\"O precedes 1 January 1970.
SS を指定しない場合、0 として見做される。
うるう秒を参照できるように 0-61 の範囲で指定できる。
結果の時刻は環境変数 TZ により指定されたタイムゾーンでの時刻となる。
結果の時刻が 1970 年 1 月 1 日以前になった場合、エラーとなる。
.\"O .SH "POSIX DETAILS"
.SH "POSIX 詳細"
.\"O The second form of invocation has the disadvantage that there is
.\"O some ambiguity as to whether
.\"O .I ugly_time
.\"O is a time or a file argument. It is taken to be a time when
.\"O no \-r or \-t option is present, there are at least two arguments,
.\"O and the first argument is an eight- or ten-digit decimal integer.
2 つ目の形式では
.I ugly_time
が時刻なのかファイルを指定する引き数なのかはっきりしないという不利な面がある。
\-r もしくは \-t オプションを指定せず、少なくても 2 つの引き数を指定し、
最初の引き数が 8 桁もしくは 10 桁の 10 進数である場合には時刻として見做す。
.\"O The format of
.\"O .I ugly_time
.\"O is MMDDhhmm[yy], where an yy in the range 69-99 denotes a year
.\"O in the range 1969-1999, and an unspecified yy denotes the current year.
.I ugly_time
の書式は MMDDhhmm[yy] で、
yy は 69-99 の範囲で指定し 1969 年から 1999 年 を表す。
yy が指定されない場合は現在の年を表す。

.\"O This form is obsolete, and \fBtouch\fR now recognizes a lone arg of 8 or 10
.\"O digits as a filename instead of a date in 'MMDDhhmm[YY]' format.
この書式は今後使われない。
現在では \fBtouch\fR は、オプションのない 8 桁または 10 桁の数字の引き数を、
\&'MMDDhhmm[YY]' という書式の日付ではなく、ファイル名として認識する。
.\"O .SH "GNU DETAILS"
.SH "GNU 詳細"
.\"O If the first
.\"O .I file
.\"O would be a valid argument to the
.\"O .B "\-t"
.\"O option and no timestamp is given with any of the
.\"O .BR "\-d" ,
.\"O .BR "\-r"
.\"O or
.\"O .B "\-t"
.\"O options and the `--' argument is not given, that argument is
.\"O interpreted as the time for the other files instead of as a file name.
最初の
.I file
が
.B "\-t"
に対する有効な引き数で、かつ
.BR "\-d" ,
.B "\-r"
オプションで時刻を指定していない場合、
または
.B "\-t"
オプションと `--' オプションが指定されていない場合、
その引き数はファイル名としてではなく、その他のファイルの時刻として解釈される。
.PP
.\"O If changing both the access and modification times to the current
.\"O time,
.\"O .B touch
.\"O can change the timestamps for files that the user running it does
.\"O not own but has write permission for.  Otherwise, the user must
.\"O own the files.
.B touch
コマンドでファイルのアクセス時間や修正時間を現在時刻に変更する場合、
実行するユーザーはファイルの所有者でなくても、
そのファイルに対する書き込みアクセス権があれば良い。
そうでない場合には、そのファイルの所有者である必要がある。
.\"O .SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU オプション"
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-time=atime, \-\-time=access, \-\-time=use"
.\"O Change the access time only.
アクセス時刻のみ変更する。
.TP
.B "\-c, \-\-no\-create"
.\"O Do not create files that do not exist.
指定したファイルが存在しない場合、作成しない。
.TP
.BI "\-d, \-\-date=" time
.\"O Use
.\"O .I time
.\"O instead of the current time.  It can contain month names,
.\"O timezones, `am' and `pm', etc.
現在時刻の代わりに、
.I time
で指定した時刻を使う。
月の名前や、タイムゾーン、`am' や `pm'、等を含めることができる。
.TP
.B "\-f"
.\"O Ignored; for compatibility with BSD versions of 
.\"O .BR touch (1).
無視される; BSD 版の
.BR touch (1)
との互換性のために用意されている。
.TP
.B "\-m, \-\-time=mtime, \-\-time=modify"
.\"O Change the modification time only.
修正時刻のみを変更する。
.TP
.BI "\-r " file ", \-\-reference=" file
.\"O Use the times of the reference
.\"O .I file
.\"O instead of the current time.
現在時刻の代わりに、参照用に指定した
.I file
の時刻を使う。
.\"O .SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.SH "GNU 標準オプション"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-"
.\"O Terminate option list.
オプションリストを終了する。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH "環境変数"
.\"O The variable TZ is used to interpret explicitly given times.
.\"O The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
.\"O usual meaning.
変数 TZ が明示的に与えられた時刻を解釈するのに使われる。
変数 LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES が通常の意味を持つ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH "準拠"
.\"O POSIX 1003.2 describes a syntax for the argument of the \-t option
.\"O that differs from that used by the GNU implementation.
POSIX 1003.2 では \-t オプションの引き数の書式が
GNU での実装で使われているものとは違っている。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH "注意"
.\"O This page describes
.\"O .B touch
.\"O as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
.\"O other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
.\"O aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
.\"O Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
このページでは fileutils-4.1 パッケージでの
.B touch
コマンドについて説明している。
その他のバージョンでは少し違いがあるかもしれない。
修正や追加は aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi, ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
宛てにメールで連絡してほしい。
プログラムのバグについては bug-fileutils@gnu.org へ報告してほしい。
