.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU tr man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH TR 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBtr\fR \- translate, squeeze, and/or delete characters
.SH 名前
tr \- 文字の変換・削除や、連続する文字の圧縮を行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B tr
.RB [ \-cdst\ ]
.RB [ \-\-complement ]
.RB [ \-\-delete ]
.RB [ \-\-squeeze\-repeats ]
.RB [ \-\-truncate\-set1 ]
.\"nakano error!
.\" .IR FILE1 " [" FILE2 ]
.IR SET1 " [" SET2 ]

.BR tr " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B tr
.\"O copies standard input to standard output, performing one of the
.\"O following operations:
.B tr
は標準入力を標準出力にコピーし、その際に以下のうちのいずれかを行う。
.\"O .IP
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR translate, and optionally squeeze repeated characters in the result
.IP \(bu 2
文字を変換し、オプションで指定すればさらに連続する文字を圧縮
(squeeze) する。
.\"O .IP
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR squeeze repeated characters
.IP \(bu
連続する文字を圧縮する。
.\"O .IP
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR delete characters
.IP \(bu
文字を削除する。
.\"O .IP
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR delete characters, then squeeze repeated characters from the result
.IP \(bu
文字を削除してから、連続する文字を圧縮する。
.PP
.\"O The \fISET1\fR and (if given) \fISET2\fR arguments define ordered sets of
.\"O characters, referred to below as \fISET1\fR and \fISET2\fR.  These sets are
.\"O the characters of the input that \fBtr\fR operates on.  The \fB\-c\fR option
.\"O replaces \fISET1\fR with its complement (all of the characters that are not
.\"O in \fISET1\fR).
\fISET1\fP および (与えられていれば) \fISET2\fP 引き数は、
文字の順序付きセットを定義する。
.\"nakano: 意味なし(^^;
.\" 以下の説明ではこれを \fISET1\fP および \fISET2\fP と呼ぶ。
これらの文字セットが入力に存在すると、
.B tr
はその文字に対して動作を行う。
.\"nakano: 以下は冗長な気が...
.\" .I \-c
.\" オプションは \fISET\fP をその補集合
.\" (\fISET1\fP に含まれない文字すべて) に置換する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-complement
.\"O Replace \fISET1\fR with its complement (that is, all the characters that are
.\"O not in \fISET1\fR.
\fISET1\fR を、 \fISET1\fR 自身の補集合
(\fISET1\fR に含まれない文字すべて) で置き換える。
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-delete
.\"O Delete any input characters that are in \fISET1\fR, do not translate.
\fISET1\fP にある入力文字を削除する。変換しない。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-squeeze\-repeats
.\"O Replace sequence of characters with one; this is done after translating or
.\"O deleting. It replaces each input sequence of a repated character that is in
.\"O \fISET1\fR with a single occurrence of that character.
同じ文字の繰り返しを 1 文字に置き換える。
この操作は変換や削除のあとに行われる。
\fISET1\fP にある文字の繰り返しを、その文字 1 文字に置き換える。
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-truncate\-set1
.\"O Before doing any translations, first truncate \fISET1\fR to length of
.\"O \fISET2\fR.
変換を行う前に、まず \fISET1\fP を \fISET2\fP の長さに切り詰める。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH SPECIFYING SETS
.SH 文字セットの指定
.\"O The format of the \fISET1\fR and \fISET2\fR arguments resembles the format of
.\"O regular expressions; however, they are not regular expressions, only
.\"O lists of characters.  Most characters simply represent themselves in
.\"O these strings, but the strings can contain the shorthands listed below,
.\"O for convenience.  Some of them can be used only in \fISET1\fR or \fISET2\fR,
.\"O as noted below.
\fISET1\fP および \fISET2\fP 引き数のフォーマットは
正規表現と似たものになっている。しかし正規表現そのものではなく、
実は文字の並びに過ぎない。
これらの文字列の中に記された文字は、ほとんどの場合はその文字自身を指す。
文字列には便宜上以下のような短縮形を用いることもできる。
ただし \fISET1\fP または \fISET2\fP のいずれかにしか
用いることのできないものもある (このようなものには注記がされている)。
.\"O .SS Backslash Escapes
.SS バックスラッシュを用いたエスケープ
.RS
.TP
.B \ea
Control\-G
.TP
.B \eb
Control\-H
.TP
.B \ef
Control\-L
.TP
.B \en
Control\-J
.TP
.B \er
Control\-M
.TP
.B \et
Control\-I
.TP
.B \ev
Control\-K
.TP
.B \e\fIOOO
.\"O The character with the value given by \fIOOO\fR, which is 1 to 3 octal digits
\fIOOO\fP (1〜3 桁の 8 進数) によって指定される文字
.TP
.B \e\e
.\"O A backslash
バックスラッシュ文字
.PP
.\"O .SS Ranges
.SS 範囲指定
.\"O The notation `\fIM\fR\-\fIN\fR' expands to all of the characters from 
.\"O \fiM\fR through \fIN\fR, in ascending order.  \fIM\fR should collate before
.\"O \fIN\fR; if it doesn't, an error results.  As an example, `0\-9' is the same as
.\"O `0123456789'.  Although GNU \fBtr\fR does not support the System V
.\"O syntax that uses square brackets to enclose ranges, translations
.\"O specified in that format will still work as long as the brackets
.\"O in \fISTRING1\fR correspond to identical brackets in \fISTRING2\fR.
`\fIM\fR\-\fIN\fR' といった表記は、
\fIM\fP から \fIN\fP までのすべての文字を昇順に展開した文字列になる。
\fIM\fP は照合順序中で \fIN\fP の前になければならず、
これに反した場合はエラーとなる。
例えば `0\-9' は`0123456789' を指定したのと同じことになる。
System V 版の
.B tr
では範囲を指定する際に角括弧 `[]' を用いるが、
GNU 版
.BR tr
ではこの形式はサポートしていない。
ただしこの形式における変換指定は
\fISET1\fP と \fISET2\fP の間で角括弧が対応していればちゃんと動作する。
.\"O .SS Repeated Characters
.SS 繰り返し文字
.\"O The notation `\fB[\fIC\fB*\fIN\fB]\fR' in \fISET2\fR expands to \fIN\fR
.\"O copies of character \fIC\fR.  Thus, `[y*6]' is the same as `yyyyyy'.  The
.\"O notation `[C*]' in \fISTRING2\fR expands to as many copies of C as are
.\"O needed to make \fISET2\fR as long as \fISET1\fR.  If \fIN\fR begins with
.\"O `0', it is interpreted in octal, otherwise in decimal.
\fISET2\fP における `\fB[\fIC\fP*\fIN\fB]\fR' といった表記は
\fIN\fP 個の文字 \fIC\fP に展開される。
したがって `[y*6]' は `yyyyyy' になる。
\fISET2\fP における `[\fIC\fP*]' は \fISET2\fP を \fISET1\fP
と同じ長さにするために必要な個数の文字 \fIC\fP に展開される。
\fIN\fP が 0 ではじまる場合は 8 進数とみなされ、
それ以外の場合は 10 進数とみなされる。
.\"O .SS Character Classes
.SS 文字クラス
.\"O The notation `\fB[:\fICLASS\fB:]\fR' expands to all of the
.\"O characters in the
.\"O (predefined) class \fICLASS\fR.  The characters expand in no particular
.\"O order, except for the \fBupper\fR and \fBlower\fR classes, which expand in
.\"O ascending order.  When the \fB\-\-delete\fR and \fB\-\-squeeze\-repeats\fR
.\"O options are both given, any character class can be used in \fISET2\fR.
.\"O Otherwise, only the character classes  \fBlower\fR and \fBupper\fR are
.\"O accepted in \fISET2\fR, and then only if the corresponding character class
.\"O (\fBupper\fR and \fBlower\fR, respectively) is specified in the same
.\"O relative position in \fISET1\fR.  Doing this specifies case conversion.  The
.\"O class names are given below; an error results when an invalid class name is
.\"O given. 
`\fB[:\fICLASS\fB:]\fR' といった表記は、
あらかじめ定義された文字クラス \fICLASS\fP のすべての文字に展開される。
文字クラスには特定の順序は定義されていない。
ただし `upper' と `lower' クラスのみは例外で、昇順に展開される。
.BR \-\-delete  " (" \-d )
および
.BR \-\-squeeze\-repeats " (" \-s )
の両方が指定された場合は、
\fISET2\fP にはどんな文字クラスでも用いることができる。
それ以外の場合は、 \fISET2\fP に指定できるのは `lower' および `upper' のみで、
しかもそれぞれに対応するクラス
(`lower' には `upper'、 `upper' には `lower') が
\fISET1\fP の同じ位置に指定されていなければならない。
この場合は大文字小文字が変換される。
文字クラス名を以下に示す。
これら以外の名前が指定された場合にはエラーとなる。
.RS
.TP
.B alnum
.\"O Letters and digits
英文字と数字
.TP
.B alpha
.\"O Letters
英文字
.TP
.B blank
.\"O Horizontal whitespace
水平方向の空白 (Horizontal whitespace)
.TP
.B cntrl
.\"O Control characters
制御文字
.TP
.B digit
.\"O Digits
数字
.TP
.B graph
.\"O Printable characters, not including space
印刷できる文字 (空白は含まない)
.TP
.B lower
.\"O Lowercase letters
英小文字
.TP
.B print
.\"O Printable characters, including space
印刷できる文字 (空白も含む)
.TP
.B punct
.\"O Punctuation characters
句読点
.TP
.B space
.\"O Horizontal or vertical whitespace
水平および垂直方向の空白
.TP
.B upper
.\"O Uppercase letters
英大文字
.TP
.B xdigit
.\"O Hexadecimal digits
16 進数の文字
.PP
.\"O .SS Equivalence Classes
.SS 等価クラス
.\"O The syntax `\fB[=\fIC\fB=]\fR' expands to all of the characters that are
.\"O equivalent to \fIC\fR, in no particular order.  Equivalence classes are
.\"O a relatively recent invention intended to support non-English alphabets.
.\"O But there seems to be no standard way to define them or determine their
.\"O contents.  Therefore, they are not fully implemented in GNU \fBtr\fR; each
.\"O character's equivalence class consists only of that character, which is of
.\"O no particular use.
`\fB[=\fIC\fB=]\fR' といった表記は、
\fIC\fP と等価な文字に展開される。このとき順序は定義されない。
等価クラスは、英語以外のアルファベットをサポートするために
最近発明されたものである。
しかし現在のところこれらの定義や内容指定に標準的な方法はないようである。
したがって GNU 版
.BR tr
でも完全には実装されていない。
それぞれの文字の等価クラスはその文字からのみ構成されている。
したがってこの機能は現在のところ役に立たない。
.\"O .SH TRANSLATING
.SH 変換
.\"O \fBtr\fR performs translation when \fISET1\fR and \fISET2\fR are both given and
.\"O \fB\-\-delete\fR is not specified.  \fRtr\fN translates each character
.\"O of its input that is in \fISET1\fR to the corresponding character in \fISET2\fR.
.\"O Characters not in \fISET1\fR are passed through unchanged.  When a character
.\"O appears more than once in \fISET1\fR and the corresponding characters in \fISET2\fR
.\"O are not all the same, only the final one is used.  For example, these
.\"O two commands are equivalent:
.B tr
は \fISET1\fP と \fISET2\fP の両方が指定されていて、
.BR \-\-delete " (" \-d )
オプションが指定されていない場合には変換を行う。
.B tr
は入力のうち \fISET1\fR にある文字を
\fISET2\fR の対応する位置にある文字に変換する。
\fISET1\fR に無い文字はそのまま出力される。
もし文字が \fISET1\fR に 2 回以上現われ、
\fISET2\fR の対応する文字がすべて同じでない場合には、
最後の文字だけが使われる。例えば以下の二つのコマンドは等価である:
.sp
.RS
.nf
tr aaa xyz
tr a z
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O A common use of \fBtr\fR is to convert lowercase characters to
.\"O uppercase.  This can be done in many ways.  Here are three of them:
.B tr
の良くある使い方としては、英小文字の大文字への変換があげられる。
いろいろなやり方が可能であるが、以下に例を 3 つ示す。
.sp
.RS
.nf
tr abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
tr a\-z A\-Z
tr '[:lower:]' '[:upper:]'
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O When \fBtr\fR is performing translation, \fISET1\fR and \fISET2\fR typically have
.\"O the same length.  If \fISET1\fR is shorter than \fISET2\fR, the extra characters at
.\"O the end of \fISET2\fR are ignored.
.B tr
が変換を行う際には、 \fISET1\fR と \fISET2\fR は通常同じ長さでなければならない。
\fISET1\fR が \fISET2\fR より短い場合には、 \fISET2\fR の尾部の余りは無視される。

.\"O On the other hand, making \fISET1\fR longer than \fISET2\fR is not portable;
.\"O POSIX.2 says that the result is undefined.  In this situation, BSD \fBtr\fR
.\"O pads \fISET2\fR to the length of \fISET1\fR by repeating the last character
.\"O of \fISET2\fR as many times as necessary.  System V \fBtr\fR truncates
.\"O \fBSET1\fR to the length of \fBSET2\fR.
逆に \fISET1\fR を \fISET2\fR より長く指定すると、動作は予測できなくなる。
POSIX.2 によれば、結果は定義されない。
このような場合、 BSD 版
.B tr
では \fISET2\fR の足りない部分を最後の文字で埋め、 \fISET1\fR と同じ長さにする。
また System V 版
.B tr
は \fISET1\fR の尾部を切り捨てて \fISET2\fR と同じ長さにする。

.\"O By default, GNU \fBtr\fR handles this case like BSD \fBtr\fR.  When the
.\"O \fB\-\-truncate\-set1\fR option is given, GNU \fBtr\fR handles this case
.\"O like the System V \fBtr\fR instead.  This option is ignored for operations
.\"O other than translation. Acting like System V \fBtr\fR in this case breaks the
.\"O relatively common BSD idiom:
デフォルトでは GNU 版
.B tr
は BSD 版
.B tr
と同じように振る舞う。
また \-\-truncate\-set1 (\fI\-t\fP) オプションが指定された場合には、
GNU 版
.B tr
は System V 版
.B tr
のように振る舞う。このオプションは変換以外の点に関しては無視される。
System V 版
.B tr
的な振る舞いの下では、 BSD 版の有名な用法:
.sp
.RS
.nf
tr \-cs A\-Za\-z0\-9 '\e012'
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O because it converts only zero bytes (the first element in the
.\"O complement of \fISET1\fR), rather than all non-alphanumerics, to newlines.
は使えなくなる。これはアルファベット文字および数字以外の文字を改行文字
に置換するものであるが、 System V では内容が 0 のバイト
(\fISET1\fR の補集合の先頭要素) のみを変換することになる。
.\"O .SH SQUEEZING REPEATS AND DELETING
.SH 繰り返しの圧縮と削除
.\"O When given just the \fB\-\-delete\fR option, \fBtr\fR removes any input
.\"O characters that are in \fISET1\fR.
.BR \-\-delete " (" \-d )
オプションだけが指定された場合は、
.B tr
は入力のうち \fISET1\fR にある文字を削除する。

.\"O When given just the \fB\-\-squeeze\-repeats\fR option, \fBtr\fR replaces
.\"O each input sequence of a repeated character that is in \fISET1\fR with a
.\"O single occurrence of that character.
.BR \-\-squeeze\-repeats " (" \-s )
オプションだけが指定された場合には、
.B tr
は入力のうち、 \fISET1\fR にある文字の繰り返しを、その文字 1 文字に置き換える。

.\"O When given both \fB\-\-delete\fR and \fB\-\-squeeze\-repeats\fR, \fBtr\fR
.\"O first performs any deletions using \fISET1\fR, then squeezes repeats from any
.\"O remaining characters using \fISET2\fR.
.BR \-\-delete " と " \-\-squeeze\-repeats
の両方のオプションが指定された場合には、
.B tr
はまず \fISET1\fR にある文字を削除し、
残りのうち \fISET2\fR にある文字の繰り返しを圧縮する。

.\"O The \fB\-\-squeeze\-repeats\fR option may also be used when translating, in
.\"O which case tr' first performs translation, then squeezes repeats from
.\"O any remaining characters using \fISET2\fR.
.B \-\-squeeze\-repeats
オプションは変換と共に用いることもできる。この場合には
.B tr
はまず変換を行い、残りの文字のうち \fISET2\fR にあるものを圧縮する。

.\"O Here are some examples to illustrate various combinations of options:
以下にこれらのオプションを組み合わせた利用例を示す:

.\"O \fB\(bu\fR Remove all zero bytes
\fB\(bu\fR 内容が 0 のバイトを削除する:
.sp
.RS
.nf
tr \-d '\e000'
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR Put all words on lines by themselves.  This converts all
.\"O non-alphanumeric characters to newlines, then squeezes each string
.\"O of repeated newlines into a single newline
\fB\(bu\fR すべての単語をそれ自身のみからなる行に変換する。
つまりアルファベット文字、数字以外の文字を改行文字に変換し、
改行文字の繰り返しを一つの改行文字に圧縮する:
.sp
.RS
.nf
tr \-cs '[a\-zA\-Z0\-9]' '[\en*]'
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR Convert each sequence of repeated newlines to a single newline
\fB\(bu\fR 改行文字の繰り返しを一つの改行文字に変換する。
.sp
.RS
.nf
tr \-s '\en'
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O \fB\(bu\fR Find doubled occurrences of words in a document.  For example,
.\"O people often write "the the" with the duplicated words separated by a
.\"O newline.  The bourne shell script below works first by converting each
.\"O sequence of punctuation and blank characters to a single newline.  That puts
.\"O each "word" on a line by itself.  Next it maps all uppercase characters to
.\"O lower case, and finally it runs \fBuniq\fR(1) with the \fB\-d\fR option to
.\"O print out only the words that were adjacent duplicates.
\fB\(bu\fR 文書中の同じ単語の連続を見つける。例えば
"the the" のように、改行を挟んで単語をダブって書いてしまうことがよくある。
以下の bourne シェルスクリプトは、まず句読点や空白の連続を改行に変換する。
これによって、各「単語」は、それぞれ自分自身だけからなる行に置かれる。
次に大文字を小文字に変換し、最後に
.BR uniq (1)
を
.B \-d
オプションで起動して、連続した同じ単語だけを表示する。
.sp
.RS
.nf
#!/bin/sh
cat "$@" \e
| tr \-s '[:punct:][:blank:]' '\en' \e
| tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]' \e
| uniq \-d
.fi
.RE
.sp      						     
.\"O .SH COMPATIBILITY
.SH 移植性
.\"O Setting the environment variable \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR turns off the
.\"O following warning and error messages, for strict compliance with
.\"O POSIX.2.  Otherwise, the following diagnostics are issued:
環境変数
.B POSIXLY_CORRECT
を指定すると、 POSIX.2 との厳密な互換性をとるために、
警告およびエラーメッセージのいくつかが出力されなくなる。
指定しなければ、以下のような場合にメッセージが出る。
.\"O .IP
.\"O 1. When the \fB\-\-delete\fR option is given but \fB\-\-squeeze\-repeats\fR is
.\"O not, and \fISET2\fR is given, GNU \fBtr\fR by default prints a usage message
.\"O and exits, because \fISET2\fR would not be used.  The POSIX specification
.\"O says that \fISET2\fR must be ignored in this case.  Silently ignoring
.\"O arguments is a bad idea.
.IP 1. 3
.B \-\-delete
オプションが指定されているが
.B \-\-squeeze\-repeats
が指定されておらず、かつ \fISET2\fP が与えられている場合には、GNU 版
.B tr
はデフォルトでは使用法のメッセージを表示して終了する。
なぜならこのとき \fISET2\fP は利用されないからである。
しかし POSIX 規格によれば、
この場合は \fISET2\fP は単に無視されなければならない。
引き数を黙って無視するのは良くない仕様だと思うのだが。
.\"O .IP
.\"O 2. When an ambiguous octal escape is given.  For example, `\400' is
.\"O actually \40' followed by the digit `0', because the value 400
.\"O octal does not fit into a single byte.
.IP 2.
あいまいな 8 進数エスケープが指定された場合。例えば `\e400' は実際に
は \e40 と数字 0 の並びと解釈される。
なぜなら 8 進数の 400 に対応するバイトは存在しないからである。
.PP	  
.\"O GNU \fBtr\fR does not provide complete BSD or System V compatibility.
.\"O For example, it is impossible to disable interpretation of the POSIX
.\"O constructs `[:alpha:]', `[=c=]', and `[c*10]'.  Also, GNU \fBtr\fR does not
.\"O delete zero bytes automatically, unlike traditional Unix versions,
.\"O which provide no way to preserve zero bytes.	     
GNU 版
.B tr
は BSD や System V と互換ではない。
例を挙げれば、 POSIX 定義にある `[:alpha:]', `[=c=]', `[c*10]'
といった指定の解釈を止めさせるようなオプションは存在しない。
また GNU 版
.B tr
は内容が 0 のバイトを自動的には削除しない。
一方これまでの UNIX 版では、このバイトを残す方法の方が存在しない。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
