.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU true man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 21:25:01 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" 
.TH true 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O true \- do nothing, successfully
.SH 名前
true \- 何もせずに成功する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B true [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B true
.\"O does nothing except return an exit status of 0, meaning ``success''.
.B true
は終了ステータスとして「成功」を意味する 0 を返す以外何もしない。

.\"O Implemented as a binary, it can be used as a place holder in shell scripts
.\"O where a successful command is needed (although the shell built-in command
.\"O `\fB:\fR' may be faster)
バイナリとして実装されているので、
成功するコマンドがシェルスクリプトで必要になった場合は
これを利用すると良い (しかしシェルの組み込みコマンドの
`\fB:\fP' の方が高速かもしれない)。

.\"O \fBtrue\fR ignores \fB\-\-help\fR and \fB\-\-version\fR if the
.\"O POSIXLY_CORRECT environment variable is set.
環境変数 POSIXLY_CORRECT が設定されている場合、
\fBtrue\fR は \fB\-\-help\fR と \fB\-\-version\fR を無視する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to sh-utils-bugs@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
