.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU tsort man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH TSORT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBtsort\fR \- print byte, word, and line counts
.\"nakano: ↑おかしい。
.SH 名前
tsort \- 有向グラフのトポロジカルなソートを行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B tsort
.\"O .RI [ FILE ]

.BR tsort " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBtsort\fR topologically sorts a given 
.\"O .IR FILE ".  If " FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B tsort
は与えられた
.I FILE
の内容をトポロジカルにソートする。
.I FILE
が与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O String pairs, each element separated by blanks, are read from \fIFILE\fR.
.\"O The total order in relation with the partial order indicated by
.\"O the elements of the string pairs is then printed to standard output.  If any
.\"O cycle is detected, it'll write the first one found to standard error.
.B tsort
空白で区切られた文字列の組み合わせを
.I FILE
から読み込み、
各組み合わせの順序から全体の順序関係を求めて標準出力に書く。
循環が見付かった場合には、最初の循環を標準出力に書く。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O We will give \fBtsort\fR a list of "X happened before Y" pairs,
.\"O and see if it can sort it.  Note that for a given partial order there may be
.\"O no unique total order.
.B tsort
に "X は Y より前に起こった" というペアを与え、
それがソートできるかを見てみよう。
各行に与える部分的な順序は、
必ずしも全体の順序で隣接しているわけではないことに注意。
.sp
.RS
.nf
tsort << EOF
neolitic bronze
greeks linux
pyramids greeks
bronze pyramids
bronze greeks
EOF
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O outputs
出力は以下となる。
.sp
.RS
.nf
neolitic
bronze
pyramids
greeks
linux
.fi
.RE
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
