.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU tty man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH tty 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O tty \- print the file name of the terminal connected to standard input
.SH 名前
tty \- 標準入力に接続されている端末のファイル名を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B tty [\-s] [\-\-silent] [\-\-quiet]
.sp
.B tty [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B tty
.\"O prints the file name of the terminal connected to its standard input.  It
.\"O prints `not a tty' if the standard input is not a terminal. Its exit
.\"O status is:
.B tty
は自分の標準入力に接続されている端末のファイル名を出力する。
もし標準入力が端末でなければ、 `not a tty'と出力する。
終了ステータスは以下の通り:
.\"nakano add .LP here
.LP
.nf
.\"O 0 if the standard input is a terminal
.\"O 1 if the standard input is not a terminal
.\"O 2 if given incorrect arguments
.\"O 3 if a write error occurs
0 標準入力が端末
1 標準入力が端末でない
2 間違った引数が与えられた
3 書き込みエラーが発生した
.fi
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B "\-s, \-\-silent, \-\-quiet"
.\"O Print nothing; only return an exit status.
何も表示せず、終了ステータスだけを返す。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to sh-utils-bugs@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
