.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU unexpand man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 21:52:22 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH UNEXPAND 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBunexpand\fR \- convert spaces to tabs
.SH 名前
unexpand \- スペースをタブに変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B unexpand
.RB [ \-a ]
.RB [ \-\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2... ]
.RB [ "\-t \fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2..." ]
.RB [ \-\-all ]
.RB [ \-\-first\-only ]
.RB [ \-\-tabs=\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2... ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR unexpand " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B unexpand
.\"O writes each 
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O to standard output, replacing strings of two or more spaces or tab
.\"O characters with as many tabs as possible followed by as many spaces as are
.\"O needed.  If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B unexpand
は指定されたファイルの内容を標準出力に書き込む。
その際「2 つ以上のスペースまたはタブ文字からなる文字列」を変換し、
できるだけ多くのタブ文字に、必要な分のスペース文字を加えた文字列にする。
.I FILE
が 1 つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2...\fR]\fB, \-t \fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2...\fR]\fB, \-\-tabs=\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2...\fR]
.\"O If only one tab stop is given, set the tabs \fITAB1\fR spaces apart
.\"O (default is 8).  Otherwise, set the tabs at columns \fITAB1\fR, \fITAB2\fR,
.\"O \fI...\fR (numbered from 0), and replace any tabs beyond the last
.\"O tabstop given with single spaces.  If the tabstops are specified
.\"O with the \fB\-\-tabs\fR option, they can be separated by blanks as well as
.\"O by commas.  Short option form \fB\-\fR is deprecated.
.\"nakano: 原文は expand の説明。unexpand.info からのものを
.\"        採用する。
.\" If only one tab stop is given, set the tabs \fITAB1\fR spaces apart
.\" (default 8).  Otherwise, set the tabs at columns \fITAB1\fR, \fITAB2\fR,
.\" \fI...\fR (numbered from 0), and leave spaces and tabs beyond the tabstops
.\" given unchanged.  If the tabstops are specified with the \fB\-\-tabs\fR
.\" option, they can be separated by blanks as well as by commas.
.\" This option implies the \fB\-a\fR option.
タブストップが 1 つだけ与えられた場合には、
タブを \fITAB1\fP おきに設定する (デフォルトは 8)。
その他の場合は、タブを \fITAB1\fP 桁、\fITAB2\fP 桁... に設定し
(桁数は 0 から数え始める) 、
最後のタブ位置以降のタブ文字やスペース文字は変換せずにそのまま出力する。
タブストップを
.BR \-\-tabs " (" \-t )
オプションで指定する際には、それぞれの間は空白またはコンマで区切る。
短いオプション形式 \fB\-\fR は推奨されない。
このオプションが指定されると
.B \-a
オプションも同時に指定されたことになる。
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-all
.\"O Convert all strings of two or more spaces or tabs, not just initial
.\"O ones, to tabs.
先頭のものだけでなく、
行中の「タブ文字とスペース文字からなる 2 文字以上の文字列」をすべて変換する。
.TP
.B \-\-first\-only
.\"O Perform only one replacement and exit.
1 度だけ置き換えを行って終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
