.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU uniq man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 24 23:23:11 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH UNIQ 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBuniq\fR \- uniquify files
.\"nakano: 原文は info のタイトルだが、わけわかんないので
.\"        textutils の man ページのタイトル
.\"        "remove duplicate lines from a sorted file"
.\"        を採用。
.SH 名前
uniq \- ソートされたファイルから重なった行を削除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B uniq
[<\fB+\fR|\fB-\fR>\fIN\fR] [\fB\-ciduD\fR] [\fB\-f \fIN\fR] [\fB\-s \fIN\fR] [\fB\-w \fIN\fR]
.\"O .RB [ -\-all\-repeated\fR[\fB={prepend,separate,none} ]]
.RB [ \-\-all\-repeated\fR[\fB={prepend,separate,none} ]]
.RB [ \-\-check\-chars=\fIN ]
.RB [ \-\-count ]
.RB [ \-\-ignore\-case ]
.RB [ \-\-repeated ]
.RB [ \-\-skip\-chars=\fIN ]
.RB [ \-\-skip\-fields=\fIN ]
.RB [ \-\-unique ]
.RI [ "INFILE " [ OUTFILE ]]

.BR uniq " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B uniq
.\"O writes the unique lines in the given
.\"O .I INFILE
.\"O to standard output, or
.\"O .I OUTFILE
.\"O if specified.  If
.\"O .I INFILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B uniq
は指定された
.I INFILE
にあるユニークな (＝他と内容の重ならない) 行を標準出力
.RI ( OUTFILE
が指定されていたらそれ) に書き出す。
.I INFILE
が与えられなかったり
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O By default, \fBuniq\fR prints the unique lines in a sorted file, i.e.,
.\"O discards all but one of identical successive lines.  Optionally, it can
.\"O instead show only lines that appear exactly once, or lines that appear
.\"O more than once.
デフォルトでは、
.B uniq
はソートされたファイルにあるユニークな行を表示する。
つまり複数の行が同一な内容を持つ場合は、1 行だけ表示して残りは捨てる。
オプションで指定すると、1 回しか現われない行だけを表示したり、
複数回現われる行だけを表示することもできる。

.\"O The input must be sorted.  If your input is not sorted, perhaps you
.\"O want to use `sort \-u'.
.B uniq
に与える入力はソートされていなければならない。
入力がソートされていない場合は、
`sort \-u' を使うのが良いだろう。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\fIN\fB, \-f \fIN\fB, \-\-skip\-fields\fB=\fIN
.\"O Skip \fIN\fR fields on each line before checking for uniqueness.  Fields
.\"O are sequences of non-space non-tab characters that are separated
.\"O from each other by at least one spaces or tabs.  Short option form \fB\-\fR
.\"O is deprecated.
同一行かどうかの判断を行う前に \fIN\FR 個のフィールドをスキップする。
フィールドとは空白とタブ以外の文字からなる文字列で、
フィールド間は 1 つ以上の空白かタブで区切られる。
短いオプション形式 \fB\-\fR は推奨されない。
.TP
.B \+\fIN\fB, \-s \fIN\fB, \-\-skip\-chars\fB=\fIN
.\"O Skip \fIN\fR characters before checking for uniqueness.  If you use both
.\"O the field and character skipping options, fields are skipped over first.
同一行かどうかの判断を行う前に \fIN\FR 個の文字をスキップする。
フィールドスキップと文字スキップのオプションを両方指定した場合は、
フィールドスキップが先に行われる。
.\"O Short option form \fB+\fR is deprecated.
短いオプション形式 \fB\+\fR は推奨されない。
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-count
.\"O Print the number of times each line occurred along with the line.
それぞれの行が何回現われたかを行の内容とともに表示する。
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-ignore\-case
.\"O Ignore differences in case when comparing lines.
比較の際に英大文字小文字の違いを無視する。
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-repeated
.\"O Print one of each duplicate lines, and only duplicate lines.
同じ内容が 2 行以上あるものだけを出力する。
.TP	       
.B \-u, \-\-unique
.\"O Print only unique lines.
1 回しか現われない行だけを出力する。
.TP
.B \-w \fIN\fB, \-\-check\-chars=\fIN
.\"O Compare \fIN\fR characters on each line (after skipping any specified fields
.\"O and characters).  By default the entire rest of the lines are compared.
行を比較するとき、各行の \fIN\fR 個の文字だけを使う。
これはフィールドや文字のスキップを行った後の数である。
デフォルトでは、スキップ後残った文字すべてが比較の対象にされる。
.TP
.B \-D, \-\-all\-repeated\fR[\fB={prepend,separate,none}\fR]
.\"O Print all duplicate lines, and only duplicate lines.  If \fBprepend\fR is
.\"O specified, precede each group of duplicated lines with a newline.
.\"O \fBseparate\fR does the same except that the first group that is outputted
.\"O is not prepended.
重複行をすべて表示し、重複しなかった行は表示しない。
\fBprepend\fR が指定された場合、重複した行のグループの前に改行を出力する。
\fBseparate\fR は、最初のグループの前に改行を出力しない以外は、
\fBprepend\fR と同じである。
.\"nakano: info uniq より以下も訳出。
.\" This option is useful mainly in conjunction with other options
.\" e.g., to ignore case or to compare only selected fields.
.\" This is a GNU extension.
このオプションは、主に他のオプションと組み合わせて使う。
例えば大文字小文字を無視して比較したり、
特定のフィールドだけで比較するような場合である。
このオプションは GNU による拡張である。
.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
man ページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
