.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU users man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH users 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O users \- print the user names of users currently logged in to the current host
users \- 現在ホストにログインしているユーザー全員のユーザー名を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "users [" file "]"
.sp
.B users [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B users
.\"O prints on a single line a blank-separated list of user names
.\"O of users currently logged in to the current host.
.\"O Each output user name corresponds to a login session, so if a user has more
.\"O than one login session, that user's name will appear the same
.\"O number of times in the output.
.\"O With no 
.\"O .I file 
.\"O argument,
.\"O .B users
.\"O extracts its information from the file
.\"O .BR /var/run/utmp .
.\"O If a 
.\"O .I file 
.\"O argument is given,
.\"O .B users
.\"O uses that file instead.
.\"O A common choice is
.\"O .BR /var/run/wtmp .
.B users
は現在のホストにログインしているユーザー全員のユーザー名を、
空白で区切って一行に表示する。
表示されたそれぞれのユーザー名は、ログインセッションに対応する。
したがってあるユーザーが複数のログインセッションを行っている場合は、
そのユーザーの名前はセッション数と同じだけ表示される。
.I file
引き数が与えられないと、
.B users
はログインユーザーの情報を
.B /var/run/utmp
ファイルから引き出す。
.I file
が引き数に与えられた場合は、
.B users
はそのファイルを代わりに用いる。
.B /var/run/wtmp
が良く使われる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
