.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU wc man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Wed 14 Jul 2004 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH WC 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O \fBwc\fR \- print byte, word, and line counts
.SH 名前
wc \- ファイルのバイト数・単語数・行数を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B wc
.RB [ \-clmwL ]
.RB [ \-\-bytes ]
.RB [ \-\-chars ]
.RB [ \-\-lines ]
.RB [ \-\-max\-line\-length ]
.RB [ \-\-words ]
.\"nakano modified next 2 lines.
[\fIFILE\fR]...
.br
.BR wc " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B wc
.\"O counts the number of bytes, whitespace-separated words, and newlines in each
.\"O given 
.\"O .IR FILE .
.\"O If
.\"O .I FILE
.\"O is omitted or if it is a
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for reading.
.B wc
は指定された各
.I FILE
のバイト数・空白で区切られた単語の数・行数を数える。
.I FILE
が一つも与えられないと標準入力から読み込む。また
.I FILE
が
.RB ` \- '
だった場合には、そのファイルには標準入力が用いられる。

.\"O By default, it prints all three counts.  Options can specify that
.\"O only certain counts be printed.  Options do not undo others previously
.\"O given, so `wc \-\-bytes \-\-words' prints both the byte counts and the word
.\"O counts.
デフォルトでは、
.B wc
は 3 つ全てを出力する。
オプション指定により出力する項目を指定できる。
オプションは先に指定したものを取り消すことはできない。
したがって `wc \-\-bytes \-\-words'
はバイト数と単語数の両方を出力する。

.\"O .B wc
.\"O also prints a final line containing the cumulative counts, with the
.\"O \fIFILE\fR total.  The counts are printed in this order: newlines, words,
.\"O bytes.
.B wc
は最後の行に各
.I FILE
のカウント数を合計して表示する。
結果は、改行数・単語数・バイト数の順に表示される。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-bytes
.\"O Print only the byte counts.
バイト数だけを出力する。
ロケールによっては、\fB\-\-chars\fR とは結果が異なるかもしれない。
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-lines
.\"O Print only the newline counts.
改行数だけを出力する。
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-chars
.\"O Print only character counts, which may differ from \fB-\-bytes\fR depending
.\"O on the locale.
文字数だけを出力する。
ロケールによっては、\fB\-\-bytes\fR とは結果が異なるかもしれない。
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-words
.\"O Print only the word counts.
単語数だけを出力する。
.TP	       
.B \-L, \-\-max\-line\-length
.\"O Print only the maximum line length per file, and if there is more than one
.\"O file also print the  maximum (not the sum) of those lengths.
ファイル中の行の最大長だけを表示する。
一つ以上のファイルが指定された場合は、
それらのうちでの最大長を表示する (合計ではない)。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH POSIX NOTES
.SH POSIX の注意
.\"O \fBwc\fR prints counts right justifying them in a 7 characters long field,
.\"O but \fBPOSIX\fR mandates to be exactly one space between the counts and the
.\"O filenames; you can get this last format by setting the \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR
.\"O environment variable.
.B wc
は 7 桁のフィールドに右詰でカウント数を表示する。
しかし \fBPOSIX\fP は、カウントの間 (と最後のファイル名との間) には
スペース一つだけをおくように命じている。後者のフォーマットは、
環境変数 \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR を指定すると得られる。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.\"O .br
.\"O Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-textutils@gnu.org に報告してください。
.br
このページは Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が作成しました。
