.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU who man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jan 25 00:32:18 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" 
.TH who 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O who \- show who is logged on
.SH 名前
who \- だれがいまログオンしているか表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B who
.B [\-abdilmpqrstuwHT] [\-\-all] [\-\-boot] [\-\-count] [\-\-dead]
.B [\-\-heading] [\-\-idle] [\-\-login] [\-\-lookup]
.B [\-\-message] [\-\-mesg] [\-\-process] [\-\-runlevel] [\-\-short]
.B [\-\-time] [\-\-users] [\-\-writable] [am i]
.BI [ file ]
.sp
.B who [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 名前
.\"O If given no non-option arguments,
.\"O .B who
.\"O prints the following information for each user currently logged on:
オプション以外の引数を与えずに実行すると、
.B who
は現在ログオンしているユーザそれぞれに対して以下の情報を表示する。
.\"nakano add here the LP instead of blank link in .nf - .fi
.LP
.RS
.nf
.\"O 
.\"O login name
.\"O terminal line
.\"O login time
.\"O remote hostname or X display
ログイン名
使っている端末
ログインした時刻
リモートのホスト名または X のディスプレイの名前
.fi
.RE
.PP
.\"O If given one non-option argument,
.\"O .B who
.\"O uses that instead of 
.\"O .BR "/var/run/utmp" " as the name of the file containing the"
.\"O .RB "record of users logged on.  "  /var/run/wtmp
.\"O is commonly given as an argument to
.\"O .B who
.\"O to look at who has previously logged on.
オプション以外の引数を 1 つ与えた場合、
.B who
はユーザのログイン情報を記録したファイルとして、
.B /var/run/utmp
の代わりに引数で与えられた名前のファイルを参照する。
以前にログインしていたユーザについて知りたい場合には、
.B /var/run/wtmp
を
.B who
の引数として与えることが良く行われる。
.PP
.\"O If given two non-option arguments,
.\"O .B who
.\"O prints only the entry for the user running it (determined from its
.\"O standard input), preceded by the hostname.
.\"O Traditionally, the two arguments given are `am i'.
オプション以外の引数を 2 つ与えた場合、
.B who
は
.B who
を起動したユーザ (標準入力から決定される) についての情報だけを表示する。
このとき名前の前にホスト名が置かれる。
普通は 2 つの引数には、`am i' が使われる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
.\"O Same as `who -b -d --login -p -r -t -u'.
`who -b -d --login -p -r -t -u' と同じ。
.TP
.B "\-b, \-\-boot"
.\"O Print only the time of the last system boot.
最後にシステムがブートした時刻のみを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-d, \-\-dead"
.\"O Print dead processes, showing an extra EXIT field with the exit code of
.\"O processes.
死んだプロセスを表示する。
そのプロセスの終了コードなどの EXIT フィールドを追加で表示する。
.TP
.B "\-i, \-u, \-\-idle"
.\"O After the login time, print the number of
.\"O hours and minutes that the user has been idle.
.\"O `.' means the user was active in last minute.
.\"O `old' means the user was idle for more than 24 hours.
ログインした時刻のあとに、
ユーザが最後に端末操作を行なってからの時間・分 (idle-time) が表示される。
`.' はユーザが 1 分以内に端末操作を行なったことを示す。
`old' はユーザが 24 時間以上何の端末操作も行なっていないことを示す。
.TP
.B \-\-login
.\"O Print only login processes.
ログインしているプロセスのみを表示する。
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-lookup
.\"O Use DNS to resolve the hostname of each user.
それぞれのユーザーのホスト名の解決に DNS を使う。
.TP
.B \-m
.\"O Same as `who am i'.
`who am i' と入力するのと同じ。
.TP
.\"O .B "\-p, \-\process"
.B "\-p, \-\-process"
.\"O Print processes spawned by init.
init によって生成されたプロセスのみを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-q, \-\-count"
.\"O Print only the login names and the number of users logged on.
.\"O Overrides all other options.
ログインしているユーザの名前と人数のみを表示する。
他のオプションは無効になる。
.TP
.B "\-r, \-\-runlevel"
.\"O Print only the current runlevel.
現在のランレベルのみを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-short"
.\"O Print only the NAME, LINE and TIME columns (This is the default.)
NAME, LINE, TIME カラムのみを表示する (これがデフォルトである)。
.TP
.B "\-t, \-\-time"
.\"O Print the time of the last change to the system clock.
システムクロックが最後に変更された時刻を表示する。
.TP
.B "\-u, \-\-users"
.\"O Prints the users currently logged in, and an IDLE field.
現在ログインしているユーザと IDLE フィールドを表示する。
.TP
.B "\-w, \-T, \-\-mesg, \-\-message, \-\-writable"
.\"O After each login name print a character indicating the user's
.\"O message status:
ログイン名の後に、
そのユーザのメッセージ状態を表す文字を付け加える:
.RS
.IP +
.\"O allowing \fBwrite\fP(1) messages
.BR write (1)
によるメッセージを受付ける。
.IP \-
.\"O disallowing \fBwrite\fP(1) messages
.BR write (1)
によるメッセージを受付けない。
.IP ?
.\"O cannot find terminal device
端末のデバイスが見付からない。
.RE
.TP
.B "\-H, \-\-heading"
.\"O Print a line of column headings.
表示の先頭に項目名を記述した行を挿入する。
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa
<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
