.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU whoami man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH whoami 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O whoami \- print effective userid
.SH 名前
whoami \- 実効ユーザー id を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B whoami
.sp
.B whoami [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B whoami
.\"O prints the user name associated with the current effective user ID.
.\"O It is equivalent to the command `id 
.\"O .BR \-un '.
.B whoami
は現在の実効ユーザー id に対応するユーザー名を表示する。
.B whoami
は、コマンド
.RB `id " -un'"
と等価である。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
