.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU yes man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH yes 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O yes \- output a string repeatedly until killed
.SH 名前
yes \- kill されるまで文字列を繰り返して出力する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "yes [" string... "]"
.sp
.B yes [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B yes
.\"O prints the command line arguments, separated by spaces and followed by
.\"O a newline, forever until it is killed.  If no arguments are given, it
.\"O prints `y' followed by a newline forever until killed.
.B yes
はコマンドライン引数をスペースで区切って末尾に改行 (newline) を付加し、
kill されるまで繰り返して表示する。
引数が一つも与えられないと、
.B yes
は `y' に改行を付加したものを kill されるまで表示しつづける。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O When GNU
.\"O .B yes
.\"O is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are
.\"O recognized:
GNU
.B yes
が引数一つだけで起動された場合には、
以下のオプションが認識される:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力して正常終了する。
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を出力して正常終了する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
.\"O Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
プログラムのバグについては bug-sh-utils@gnu.org に報告してください。
ページの更新は Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com> が行っています。
