.\" Copyright 1999, George Staikos (staikos@0wned.org)
.\" This file may be used subject to the terms and conditions of the
.\" GNU General Public License Version 2, or any later version
.\" at your option, as published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details."
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jul 16 14:46:59 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH SYSCTL 8 "21 Sep 1999" "" ""
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sysctl \- configure kernel parameters at runtime
sysctl \- 実行時にカーネルパラメータを設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "sysctl [-n] [-e] variable ..."
.br
.B "sysctl [-n] [-e] [-q] -w variable=value ..."
.br
.B "sysctl [-n] [-e] [-q] -p <filename>"
.br
.B "sysctl [-n] [-e] -a"
.br
.B "sysctl [-n] [-e] -A"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B sysctl
.\"O is used to modify kernel parameters at runtime.  The parameters available
.\"O are those listed under /proc/sys/.  Procfs is required for 
.\"O .B sysctl(8)
.\"O support in Linux.  You can use
.\"O .B sysctl(8)
.\"O to both read and write sysctl data.
.B sysctl
はカーネルのパラメータを実行時に修正するのに用いる。
変更できるパラメータは /proc/sys/ 以下にリストされているものである。
Linux における
.B sysctl
の機能には procfs が必要である。
.B sysctl
は sysctl データの読み書き両方に使える。
.\"O .SH PARAMETERS
.SH パラメータ
.TP
.B "variable"
.\"O The name of a key to read from.  An example is kernel.ostype.  The '/'
.\"O separator is also accepted in place of a '.'.
読み取りの対象とするキーの名前。例えば kernel.ostype など。
セパレータとして '.' の代わりに '/' を用いることもできる。
.TP
.B "variable=value"
.\"O To set a key, use the form variable=value, where variable is the key and
.\"O value is the value to set it to.  If the value contains quotes or characters
.\"O which are parsed by the shell, you may need to enclose the value in double
.\"O quotes.  This requires the -w parameter to use.
キーを設定する形式。 variable はキーで、
value がそのキーに設定される値である。
value にクォートやシェルによってパーズされる文字が入っている場合は、
value 全体をダブルクォートで括る必要がある。
この指定をしたら \-w パラメータも指定しなければならない。
.TP
.B "-n"
.\"O Use this option to disable printing of the key name when printing values.
キーの名前は表示せず、値だけ表示する。
.TP
.B "-e"
.\"O Use this option to ignore errors about unknown keys.
不明なキーについてのエラーを無視する。
.TP
.B "-N"
.\"O Use this option to only print the names. It may be useful with shells that
.\"O have programmable completion.
名前のみを表示する。
プログラム補完を持つシェルで役立つ。
.TP
.B "-q"
.\"O Use this option to not display the values set to stdout.
値のセットを標準出力に表示しない。
.TP
.B "-w"
.\"O Use this option when you want to change a sysctl setting.
sysctl の設定を変更する場合には、このオプションを指定する。
.TP
.B "-p"
.\"O Load in sysctl settings from the file specified or /etc/sysctl.conf if none given.
指定されたファイルから読み込んだ内容を sysctl 設定にロードする
(ファイル指定がなければ /etc/sysctl.conf から)。
.TP
.B "-a"
.\"O Display all values currently available.
現在利用できる全ての値を表示する。
.TP
.B "-A"
.\"O Display all values currently available in table form.
現在利用できる全ての値を表形式で表示する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.TP
/sbin/sysctl -a
.TP
/sbin/sysctl -n kernel.hostname
.TP
/sbin/sysctl -w kernel.domainname="example.com"
.TP
/sbin/sysctl -p /etc/sysctl.conf 
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /proc/sys
.I /etc/sysctl.conf
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR sysctl.conf (5)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The -A parameter behaves just as -a does.
\-A パラメータが \-a と同じようにしか動作しない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
George Staikos, <staikos@0wned.org>
