.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Sendmail, Inc. and its suppliers.
.\"	 All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" By using this file, you agree to the terms and conditions set
.\" forth in the LICENSE file which can be found at the top level of
.\" the sendmail distribution.
.\"
.\"
.\"     $Id: qtool.8,v 8.9.16.2 2000/12/15 19:50:41 gshapiro Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 20:51:09 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Thu Feb 15 03:19:13 JST 2001 by Yuichi SATO 
.\" Updated and Modified Mon Jan 14 17:58:43 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH QTOOL 8 "$Date: 2000/12/15 19:50:41 $"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
qtool
.\"O \- manipulate sendmail queues
\- sendmail のキューを操作する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B qtool.pl
.RB [options] 
target_directory source [source ...]
.PP
.B qtool.pl [-d|-b]
.RB [options]
source [source ...]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Qtool
.\"O moves the queue files used by sendmail between queues. It uses the same
.\"O locking mechanism as sendmail so can be safely used while sendmail is
.\"O running.
.B qtool
は sendmail が使用するキューファイルをキューディレクトリ間で移動する。
sendmail と同じロック機構を使うので、
sendmail が稼働している間も安全に使用できる。
.PP
.\"O With no options,
.\"O .B qtool
.\"O will move any queue files as specified by \fIsource\fP into 
.\"O \fItarget_directory\fP. \fISource\fP can be either an individual 
.\"O queue control file, a queue file id, or a queue directory.
オプションが指定されていない場合、
.B qtool
は \fIsource\fP で指定された全てのキューファイルを
ディレクトリ \fItarget_directory\fP に移動する。
\fIsource\fP は、キュー制御ファイル・キューファイルの ID・
キューディレクトリのどれでもよい。
.PP
.\"O If the -d option is specified, qtool will delete the messages specified by
.\"O source instead of moving them.
-d オプションが指定された場合、qtool は source で指定されたメッセージを
移動ではなく削除する。
.PP
.\"O If the -b option is specified, the selected messages will be bounced by
.\"O running sendmail with the -OTimeout.queuereturn=now option.
-b オプションが指定された場合、選択されたメッセージは
-OTimeout.queuereturn=now オプションをつけた sendmail を実行することにより
バウンスされる (送信者に送り返される)。 
.\"O .SS Options
.SS オプション
.TP  
\fB\-b\fP
.\"O Bounce all of the messages specified by source. The messages will be bounced
.\"O immediately. No attempt will be made to deliver the messages.
source で指定された全てのメッセージをバウンスする。
メッセージはすぐにバウンスされる。
メッセージの配送を試みない。
.TP  
\fB\-C\fP configfile
.\"O Specify the sendmail config file.
.\"O Defaults to /etc/mail/sendmail.cf.
sendmail の設定ファイルを指定する。
デフォルトは /etc/mail/sendmail.cf である。
.TP
\fB\-d\fP
.\"O Delete all of the messages specified by source.
source で指定された全てのメッセージを削除する。
.TP  
\fB\-e\fP \fIperl_expression\fP
.\"O Evalute \fIperl_expression\fP for each queue file as specified 
.\"O by \fIsource\fP. If \fIperl_expression\fP evaluates to true, then that 
.\"O queue file is moved. See below for more detail on \fIperl_expression\fP.
\fIsource\fP で指定されたキューファイルについて、
\fIperl_expression\fP を評価する。
\fIperl_expression\fP が真と評価された場合、そのキューファイルは移動される。
\fIperl_expression\fP の詳細については、下記を参照すること。
.TP 
\fB\-s\fP \fIseconds\fP
.\"O Move only the queue files specified by \fIsource\fP that have a
.\"O modification time older than \fIseconds\fP.
\fIsource\fP で指定されたキューファイルのうち
修正時刻が \fIseconds\fP 秒より前のものだけを移動する。
.\"O .SS Perl Expressions
.SS Perl 表現
.\"O You can use any valid perl expression. Inside the expression you have
.\"O access to a hash that contains many of the fields in the control file as
.\"O well as some other data about that queued message. The hash is called
.\"O \fI%msg\fP. If a field has multiple values (e.g. 'Recipient'), it will be
.\"O returned as an array, otherwise it will be returned as a scalar. Through
.\"O \fI%msg\fP, you can access the following variables:
このプログラムでは Perl 表現を使うことができる。
Perl 表現の中では、キューに入れられたメッセージのデータだけでなく、
制御ファイルのフィールドの内容を含むハッシュにもアクセスできる。
ハッシュは \fI%msg\fP という名前である。
フィールドに複数の値がある ('Recipient' のような) 場合、
値は配列として返される。
値が 1 つの場合、値はスカラーで返される。
ハッシュ \fI%msg\fP を使って、以下の値にアクセスすることができる。
.TP
\fBauth\fP
.\"O AUTH= parameter.
AUTH= パラメータ。
.TP
\fBbody_type\fP
.\"O Body type (\fB8BITMIME\fP, \fB7BIT\fP, or undefined).
ボディタイプ (\fB8BITMIME\fP, \fB7BIT\fP, または未定義)。
.TP
\fBbody_last_mod_time\fP
.\"O The last time the body was modified since the epoch in seconds.
ボディが最後に修正された時刻。紀元年 (epoch) から秒数で表す。
.TP
\fBbody_size\fP
.\"O The size of the body file in bytes.
ボディファイルのサイズ (バイト単位)。
.TP
\fBcharset\fP
.\"O Character set (for future use).
文字セット (将来使用するためにある)。
.TP
\fBcontent-length\fP
.\"O Content-Length: header value (Solaris sendmail only).
Content-Length: ヘッダー値 (Solaris の sendmail のみ)。
.TP
\fBcontrolling_user\fP
.\"O The controlling user.
制御しているユーザー。
.TP
\fBcontrol_last_mod_time\fP
.\"O The last time the body was modified since the epoch in seconds.
制御ファイルが最後に修正された時刻。紀元年 (epoch) から秒数で表す。
.TP
\fBcontrol_size\fP
.\"O The size of the control file in bytes.
制御ファイルのサイズ (バイト単位)。
.TP
\fBcreation_time\fP
.\"O The time when the control file was created.
制御ファイルが生成された時刻。
.TP
\fBdata_file_name\fP
.\"O The data file name (deprecated).
データファイル名 (使わない方が良い)。
.TP
\fBenvid\fP
.\"O Original envelope id form ESMTP.
ESMTP で送られてきたオリジナルのエンベロープの ID。
.TP
\fBerror_recipient\fP
.\"O The error recipient (deprecated).
エラーの場合の受信者 (使わない方が良い)。
.TP
\fBflags\fP
.\"O Array of characters that can be the following values:
以下の値を持つことできる文字配列。
.PD 0
.RS +8
.TP 8
w
.\"O warning message has been sent
警告メッセージが送信された。
.TP 8
r
.\"O This is an error respone or DSN
エラー応答、または DSN。
.TP 8
8
.\"O has 8 bit data in body
ボディに 8 ビットのデータがある。
.TP 8
b
.\"O delete Bcc: headers
Bcc: ヘッダーを削除する。
.TP 8
d
.\"O envelope has DSN RET= parameter
エンベロープに DSN RET= パラメータがある。
.TP 8
n
.\"O don't return body
ボディを返さない。
.PD
.RE
.TP
\fBheaders\fP
.\"O This is a Perl hash where the keys are rfc822 field names and the values
.\"O are rfc822 field values. If a field has only one value it will be returned
.\"O as a string. If a field has more than one value (e.g. 'Received') it will
.\"O be returned as a list of strings.
これは Perl のハッシュで、rfc822 フィールド名をキー、
rfc822 フィールド値を値にしている。
フィールドに 1 つしか値がない場合、値は文字列として返される。
('Received' のように) フィールドに 2 つ以上の値がある場合、
値は文字列のリストとして返される。
.TP
\fBinode_number\fP
.\"O The inode number for the data (body) file.
データ (ボディ) ファイルの i ノード番号。
.TP
\fBnext_delivery_time\fP
.\"O Earliest time of next delivery attempt.
次の配送が試みられる最も早い時刻。
.TP
\fBnum_delivery_attempts\fP
.\"O Number of delivery attempts that have been made.
配送を試みた回数。
.TP
\fBmacro\fP
.\"O Defined macro.
定義されたマクロ。
.TP
\fBmessage\fP
.\"O Envelope status message.
エンベロープ状態のメッセージ。
.TP
\fBoriginal_recipient\fP
.\"O Original recipient (ORCPT= parameter).
本来の受信者 (ORCPT= パラメータ)。
.TP
\fBpriority\fP
.\"O Adjusted priority of message.
変更されたメッセージの優先度。
.TP
\fBrecipient\fP
.\"O Array of character flags followed by colon and recipient name. Flags:
コロンと受信者名が後に続く文字フラグの配列。フラグを以下に示す。
.PD 0
.RS +8
.TP 8
N
.\"O Has NOTIFY= parameter.
NOTIFY= パラメータがある。
.TP 8
S
.\"O Success DSN requested.
要求した DSN が成功した。
.TP 8
F
.\"O Failure DSN requested.
要求した DSN が失敗した。
.TP 8
D
.\"O Delay DSN requested.
要求した DSN が遅れている。
.TP 8
P
.\"O Primary address (not the result of alias/forward expansion).
(alias または forward で展開される前の) 元々のアドレス。
.PD
.RE
.TP
\fBsender\fP
.\"O Sender
送信者。
.TP
\fBversion\fP
.\"O Version of control file.
制御ファイルのバージョン。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.TP
\fBqtool.pl q2 q1\fP
.\"O Moves all of the queue files in queue q1 to queue q2.
キューディレクトリ q1 にあるキューファイルを
キューディレクトリ q2 に移動する。
.TP
\fBqtool.pl q2 q1/d6CLQh100847\fP
.\"O Moves the message with id d6CLQh100847 in queue q1 to queue q2.
キューディレクトリ q1 にある ID が d6CLQh100847 のメッセージを
キューディレクトリ q2 に移動する。
.TP
\fBqtool.pl q2 q1/qfd6CLQh100847\fP
.\"O Moves the message with id d6CLQh100847 in queue q1 to queue q2.
キューディレクトリ q1 にある ID が d6CLQh100847 のメッセージを
キューディレクトリ q2 に移動する。
.TP
\fBqtool.pl -e '$msg{num_delivery_attempts} == 3' /q2 /q1\fP
.\"O Moves all of the queue files that have had three attempted deliveries from
.\"O queue q1 to queue q2.
今までに 3 回配送が試みられた全てのキューファイルを
キューディレクトリ q1 から q2 に移動する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O In sendmail 8.12, it is possible for a message's qf and df files
.\"O to be stored in different queues.
.\"O In this situation, you must give qtool the pathname of the qf file,
.\"O not of the df file.
.\"O To be safe, never feed qtool the pathname of a df file.
sendmail 8.12 では、メッセージの qf ファイルと df ファイルを
別々のキューに格納することができる。
この場合、qtool には df ファイルのパス名ではなく、
qf ファイルのパス名を指定しなければならない。
安全のため、絶対に qtool に df ファイルのパス名を指定してはならない。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
sendmail(8)
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .B qtool
.\"O command appeared in 
.\"O sendmail 8.10.
.B qtool
コマンドは
sendmail 8.10
で登場した。
