.\"                        -*- nroff -*- 
.ig /
groff_tmac.5

This file is part of groff, the GNU roff type-setting system.

Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
written by Bernd Warken <bwarken@mayn.de>

Last update: 17 May 2000

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being this .ig-section and AUTHOR, with no
Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts.

A copy of the Free Documentation License is included as a file called
FDL in the main directory of the groff source package.
./
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Setup
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.if n \{\
.  mso tmac.tty-char
.  ftr CR R
.  ftr CI I
.  ftr CB B
.\}
.
.\" text lines in macro definitions or bracketed sections \{...\}
.de text
.  if 1 \&\\$*\&
..
.
.de BIR
.  ie (\\n[.$] < 3) \
.    BI $@
.  el \{\
.    ds @tmp@ \fB\\$1\fP\fI\\$2\fP
.    shift 2
.    text \\*[@tmp@]\fR\\$*\fP
.    rm @tmp@
.  \}
..
.
.de 'char
.  ds @tmp@ `\f(CB\\$1\fP'
.  shift
.  text \\*[@tmp@]\\$*
.  rm @tmp@
..
.
.de option
.  ds @tmp@ \f(CB\\$1\fP
.  shift 1
.  text \\*[@tmp@]\\$*
.  rm @tmp@
..
.
.als shellcommand option
.
.de argument
.  ds @tmp@ \f(CI\\$1\fP
.  shift 1
.  text \\*[@tmp@]\\$*
.  rm @tmp@
..
.
.de request
.  ds @tmp@ \f(CB\\$1\fP
.  shift 1
.  text \\*[@tmp@]\\$*
.  rm @tmp@
..
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Title
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH GROFF_TMAC 5 "22 May 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O groff_tmac \- macro files in the roff typesetting system
groff_tmac \- roff テキスト整形システムのマクロファイル
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The
.\"O .BR roff (7)
.\"O type-setting system provides a set of macro packages suitable for
.\"O special kinds of documents.  Each macro package stores its macros and
.\"O definitions in a file called the package's
.\"O .BR "tmac file" .
.\"O The name is deduced from
.\"O .RB ` T roff
.\"O .BR MAC ros'.
.BR roff (7)
テキスト整形システムは、特定のドキュメントにとって便利なマクロパッケージを
提供している。それぞれのマクロパッケージはパッケージごとの
.B tmac ファイル
と呼ばれるファイルにマクロと定義を格納している。
この名前は
.RB ` T roff
.BR MAC ros'
に由来する。
.LP
.\"O The tmac files are normal roff source documents, except that they
.\"O usually contain only definitions and setup commands, but no text.  All
.\"O tmac files are kept in a single or a small number of directories, the
.\"O .B tmac
.\"O directories.
tmac ファイルは普通の roff のソースドキュメントで、通常は定義とセットアップ
コマンドだけを含み、テキストは含まれない。
すべての tmac ファイルは、ひとつあるいはいくつかのディレクトリ
.RB ( tmac
ディレクトリ) に格納される。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH NAMING
.SH 命名方法
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O In classical roff systems, there was a funny naming scheme.
.\"O If the name of a macro package started with
.\"O .'char m
.\"O this letter was omitted, e.g., the macro package for the man pages
.\"O .I man
.\"O was called
.\"O .I an
.\"O and its macro file
.\"O .IR tmac.an .
古典的な roff システムでは、奇妙な命名規則が用いられていた。
マクロパッケージの名前が
.'char m
で始まる場合は、この文字は省略された。たとえばマニュアルページ
.I man
用のマクロパッケージは
.I an
で、そのマクロファイルは
.I tmac.an
と命名された。
.LP
.\"O By a similar reasoning, macro packages that did not start with an
.\"O .'char m
.\"O were often referred to by adding an
.\"O .'char m ,
.\"O  e.g., the package corresponding to
.\"O .I tmac.doc
.\"O was called
.\"O .I mdoc
.\"O because the command-line for activating it reads
同じような理由から、
.'char m
で始まらないマクロパッケージはしばしば
.'char m
を追加されて呼ばれた。たとえば、
.I tmac.doc
に対応するパッケージは
.I mdoc
と呼ばれた。なぜなら、このマクロを用いるときのコマンドラインが以下のように
読めるからである。
.RS
.LP
.\"O .BIR "troff\ \-m" doc .
.BI "troff\ \-m" doc
.RE
.LP
.\"O Actual versions of
.\"O .BR groff (1)
.\"O provide both naming schemes for the inflicted macro packages, with and
.\"O without the leading
.\"O .'char m .
.\"O So in
.\"O .IR groff ,
.\"O the
.\"O .I man
.\"O macro package may be specified as
.\"O .RS
.\"O .LP
.\"O .BIR "groff\ \-m\ " man ,
.\"O .br
.\"O .BIR "groff\ \-m" an ,
.\"O .br
.\"O .BIR "groff\ \-m" man , or
.\"O .br
.\"O .BIR "groff\ \-m " an .
.\"O .RE
.\"O .LP
現行バージョンの
.BR groff (1)
では、使用するマクロパッケージの命名方法は先行する
.'char m
がある場合・ない場合の両方を提供している。
したがって、
.I groff
では
.I man
マクロパッケージは以下のように指定できる。
.RS
.LP
.BI "groff\ \-m\ " man
.br
.BI "groff\ \-m" an
.br
.BI "groff\ \-m" man
.br
.BI "groff\ \-m " an
.RE
.LP
.\"O The easiest way to find out which macro packages are available on a
.\"O system is to check the content of the
.\"O .I tmac
.\"O directories.
.\"O For example, a file called
.\"O .BI tmac. anything
.\"O determines a macro package named
.\"O .IR anything .
システム上で有効なマクロパッケージを見つけるもっとも簡単な方法は、
.I tmac
ディレクトリの内容をチェックすることである。
たとえば、
.BI tmac. anything
というファイルは
.I anything
という名前のマクロパッケージを定義している。
.LP
.\"O In
.\"O .IR groff ,
.\"O most macro packages are described in man pages called
.\"O .BR groff_<name> (7),
.\"O with a leading
.\"O .'char m
.\"O for the classical packages.
.I groff
では、ほとんどのマクロパッケージが
.BR groff_<name> (7)
というマニュアルページで説明されており、古典的なパッケージも
.'char m
を先行してある。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH INCLUSION
.SH マクロの使用方法
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O There are several ways to use a macro package in documents.  At
.\"O run-time, the groff option
.\"O .option \-m \ \c
.\"O .argument name
.\"O makes the definitions in the macro file
.\"O .BI tmac. name
.\"O available as described in the section
.\"O .BR NAMING .
ドキュメント中でマクロパッケージを使う方法はいくつかある。
実行時の指定方法では、groff の オプション
.option \-m \ \c
.argument name
で、
.B 命名方法
のセクションで記述したようにマクロファイル
.BI tmac. name
の定義を有効にする。
.LP
.\"O It is also possible to include the macro file into the document by using 
.\"O the groff requests
.\"O .request .so
.\"O or
.\"O .request .mso .
.\"O For
.\"O .request .so
.\"O the full filename of the macro file must be specified \(em including the
.\"O directory where it is kept.
.\"O If the macro file is stored in one of the tmac directories it is more
.\"O convenient to use
.\"O .request .mso
.\"O instead because it additionally searches the tmac path for the filename.
groff のリクエスト
.request .so
や
.request .mso
を使ってドキュメント中でマクロファイルを指定することもできる。
.request .so
では、マクロファイルは格納されているディレクトリも含めた完全なファイル名で
指定する必要がある。
マクロファイルが tmac ディレクトリのひとつに格納されている場合は、代わりに
.request .mso
を使用する方が便利である。こちらはファイル名に tmac パスを追加して
検索をする。
.LP
.\"O Note that in order to resolve the
.\"O .request .so
.\"O and
.\"O .request .mso
.\"O requests the roff preprocessor
.\"O .shellcommand soelim
.\"O must be called.  This can be done either directly by a pipeline on the
.\"O command line or by using the
.\"O .option \-s
.\"O option of
.\"O .shellcommand groff .
.request .so
と
.request .mso
のリクエストを解決するために roff のプリプロセッサ
.shellcommand soelim
が呼び出されなければならないことに注意すること。
これは、コマンドライン上のパイプラインで直接実行する方法と、
.shellcommand groff
の
.option \-s
オプションを使って呼び出す方法のどちらでも可能である。
.LP
.\"O You can also supply the letter
.\"O .'char s
.\"O in the preprocessor word as described in section
.\"O .BR CONVENTION .
.B 規定
のセクションで記述してあるように、プリプロセッサ指定子の文字
.'char s
で指定することもできる。
.LP
.\"O For example, suppose a macro file is stored as
.\"O .I /usr/share/groff/tmac/tmac.macros
.\"O and is used in some document called
.\"O .IR docu.roff .
たとえば、マクロファイルが
.I /usr/share/groff/tmac/tmac.macros
に格納されていて、
.I docu.roff
というドキュメントで使用すると仮定する。
.LP
.\"O At run-time, the formatter call for this is
実行時では、フォーマッタの呼び出し方法は以下のようになる。
.RS
.LP
.ft CR
.shellcommand "groff\ \-m"
.argument macros
.argument docu.roff
.ft P
.RE
.LP
.\"O To include the macro file directly in the document either
ドキュメント中でマクロファイルを直接指定するには、
.RS
.ft CR
\&\.mso tmac.macros
.ft P
.RE
.\"O is used or
を用いるか、
.RS
.ft CR
\&\.so /usr/share/groff/tmac/tmac.macros
.ft P
.RE
と指定する。
.LP
.\"O In both cases, the formatter is called with
どちらの場合でも、フォーマッタを
.ft CR
.RS
groff\ \-s docu.roff
.RE
.ft P
のようにして呼び出す。
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH CONVENTION
.SH 規定
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.LP
.\"O There is a convention that is supported by many modern roff
.\"O type-setters: the
.\"O .B preprocessor word
.\"O described in the following.
最近の多くの roff 整形システムでサポートされている
.B プリプロセッサ指定子
の規定について以下に記述する。
.LP
.\"O If the first line in a document is a comment, the first word (after the
.\"O comment characters and a blank) constitutes the
.\"O .B preprocessor
.\"O .BR word .
ドキュメントの先頭行がコメントの場合は、コメント文字と空白に続く最初の
文字は
.B プリプロセッサ指定子
を構成する。
.\"O That means that the letters of this word are interpreted as
.\"O abbreviations for those preprocessor commands that should be run
.\"O when formatting the document.  Mostly, only the letters corresponding to 
.\"O the options for the preprocessors are recognized, 
.\"O .'char e ,
.\"O .'char G ,
.\"O .'char g ,
.\"O .'char p ,
.\"O .'char R ,
.\"O .'char s , and
.\"O .'char t
.\"O (see
.\"O .BR roff (7)).
つまり、これらの文字はドキュメントを整形するときに起動される
プリプロセッサコマンドの省略形とみなされる。
たいていは、プリプロセッサの呼び出しオプションと一致する文字だけが認識され、
以下のものがある。
.'char e ,
.'char G ,
.'char g ,
.'char p ,
.'char R ,
.'char s ,
.'char t
.RB ( roff (7)
を参照のこと)
.LP
.\"O Besides being a good reminder for the user, some formatters (like the
.\"O .BR man (1)
.\"O program) are even able to automatically start the preprocessors
.\"O specified in the preprocessor word, but do not bet on this.
ユーザに良き助言を与えるならば、いくつかのフォーマッタ (たとえば
.BR man (1)
プログラムなど) もプリプロセッサ指定子によって指定されたプリプロセッサを
自動的に起動することができる。しかし、その動作を期待するべきではない。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "WRITING A MACRO FILE"
.SH マクロファイルの記述方法
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O Writing a groff macro file is easy.  Design a set of macros, strings,
.\"O registers, etc.  Store them in a single file.  Documents that use the
.\"O macros include this macro file with the
.\"O .request .so
.\"O request as described in the
.\"O .B INCLUSION
.\"O section.
groff のマクロファイルを記述することは簡単である。
一連のマクロ、文字列、レジスタなどをデザインし、それらをひとつのファイルに
格納する。このマクロを用いるドキュメントで
.request .so
リクエストによってマクロファイルを指定する方法は
.B マクロの使用方法
のセクションに記述してある。
.LP
.\"O To use the tmac functionality, call the macro file
.\"O .BI tmac. whatever
.\"O and put it in some directory of the tmac path, cf. section
.\"O .BR FILES .
.\"O Then documents can include it with the
.\"O .request .mso
.\"O request or the
.\"O .shellcommand "groff\ \-m"
.\"O option as described in the
.\"O .B INCLUSION
.\"O section.
tmac の機能を用いるには、マクロファイルを
.BI tmac. whatever
のように命名して tmac パスで指定されるディレクトリに格納する
.RB ( ファイル
のセクションを参照)。
そして、ドキュメントでは
.B マクロの使用方法
のセクションで記述してあるように、
.request .mso
リクエストや
.shellcommand "groff\ \-m"
オプションによってそのマクロを使用することができる。
.LP
.\"O If your macros might be of general usage contact the groff maintainers
.\"O to have them included in the groff
.\"O .I contrib
.\"O source directory.
もしあなたのマクロが一般的な用途に向いているならば、groff のメンテナに
連絡をとって groff の
.I contrib
ソースディレクトリにそれらを含めるようにしてほしい。
.LP
.\"O Some general guidelines might be helpful in writing macros.
マクロの記述には、一般的なガイドラインのいくつかが役に立つだろう。
.IP \(bu 2m
.\"O Double all functional backslashes,
機能的なバックスラッシュはすべて二重にする。
.'char \e
->
.\"O .'char \e\e .
.'char \e\e
.IP \(bu 2m
.\"O All printable backslashes must be written as
.\"O .'char \ee .
表示するためのバックスラッシュは次のように記述する。
.'char \ee
.IP \(bu 2m
.\"O Escape all dots,
ドットはすべてエスケープする。
.'char .
->
.\"O .'char \e. .
.'char \e.
.IP \(bu 2m
.\"O Make ample use of the non-printable character
.\"O .'char \e&
.\"O in text parts, esp. before
.\"O .'char \e
.\"O and at the beginning of a line, but not before a delayed command.
テキスト部分には非表示文字である
.'char \e&
を
.'char \e
の前と行の先頭に広く用いるようにする。ただし後に続くコマンドがある場合は
この限りではない。
.IP \(bu 2m
.\"O Use the character
.\"O .'char @
.\"O in temporary variable names.
一時的な変数名には文字
.'char @
を用いる。
.IP \(bu 2m
.\"O Test your macros for text and graphical devices, e.g.,
.\"O .I latin1
.\"O and
.\"O .IR ps .
マクロはテキストとグラフィックのデバイスでテストする。たとえば
.I latin1
と
.I ps
など。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O All macro names that want to use the tmac mechanism must be named
.\"O according to the form
.\"O .BIR tmac. name .
tmac のメカニズムで用いようとするマクロの名前は
.BI tmac. name
という形式で命名されていなければならない。
.LP
.\"O The macro files are kept in the
.\"O .B tmac
.\"O .BR directories ,
.\"O all of which constitue the
.\"O .B tmac
.\"O .BR path.
マクロファイルは
.B "tmac パス"
を構成する
.B "tmac ディレクトリ"
に格納される。
.\"O In accordance with the Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS), the standard
.\"O tmac directory location for groff is
.\"O .IR /usr/share/groff/tmac ,
.\"O a local installation will use
.\"O .IR /usr/local/share/groff/tmac .
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS) に準拠していれば、
groff の標準的な tmac ディレクトリの場所は
.I /usr/share/groff/tmac
であり、ローカルな導入先は
.I /usr/local/share/groff/tmac
が用いられるだろう。
.\"O Older systems used a subdirectory of
.\"O .IR /usr/lib .
古いシステムにおいては、
.I /usr/lib
以下のサブディレクトリを使用していた。
.\"O Independently of the default tmac path, the tmac path actually used by a
.\"O document can always be set by a shell environment variable, cf. section
.\"O .BR ENVIRONMENT .
デフォルトの tmac パスとは独立して、実際にドキュメントで用いられる
tmac パスは常にシェル環境変数で指定することができる。セクション
.B 環境変数
を参照のこと。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.B GROFF_TMAC_PATH
.\"O A colon separated list of tmac directories in which to search for macro
.\"O files, the
.\"O .B tmac
.\"O .BR path .
.\"O If unset a default path is used as is outlined in the
.\"O .B FILES
.\"O section.
マクロファイルを検索するための tmac ディレクトリ
.RB ( "tmac パス" )
をコロンで区切ったリスト。
指定されていない場合は、
.B ファイル
のセクションで示したデフォルトのパスが使用される。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The groff documentation is in evolution at the moment.  It is possible
.\"O that small inconsistencies between different documents exist
.\"O temporarily.
現在、groff システムのドキュメントは進化の途上にある。
一時的にドキュメント同士でささやかな矛盾点が見られるだろう。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O This document is part of groff, the GNU roff distribution.  It was
.\"O written by Bernd Warken <bwarken@mayn.de>.
このドキュメントは groff (GNU roff パッケージ) の一部である。
Bernd Warken <bwarken@mayn.de> によって記述された。
.LP
.\"O It is distributed under the terms of the FDL (GNU Free Documentation
.\"O License) version 1.1 or later.  You should have received a copy of the
.\"O FDL on your system, it is also available on-line under
このドキュメントは FDL (GNU Free Documentation License) のバージョン 1.1 
以降の元に配布される。あなたのシステムにも FDL のコピーがあるはずである。
以下でもオンラインで参照できる。
.RS
.LP
.IR <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html> .
.RE
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The authoritative source of information for all details of the groff
.\"O system is the groff
.\"O .BR info (1)
.\"O file.
groff システムの詳細について、信ずべき情報源は、groff の
.BR info (1)
ファイルである。
.LP
.\"O For a groff overview, see
.\"O .BR roff (7)
.\"O and the file
.\"O .I README
.\"O in the groff source package.
groff の概要については
.BR roff (7)
と groff ソースパッケージの
.I README
ファイルを参照のこと。
.LP
.\"O The groff tmac macro packages are
.\"O .BR groff_man (7),
.\"O .BR groff_markup (7),
.\"O .BR groff_mdoc (7),
.\"O .BR groff_mdoc.samples (7),
.\"O .BR groff_me (7),
.\"O .BR groff_mm (7),
.\"O .BR groff_mmroff (7),
.\"O .BR groff_ms (7),
.\"O .BR groff_msafer (7).
groff の tmac マクロパッケージについては以下を参照のこと。
.BR groff_man (7),
.BR groff_markup (7),
.BR groff_mdoc (7),
.BR groff_mdoc.samples (7),
.BR groff_me (7),
.BR groff_mm (7),
.BR groff_mmroff (7),
.BR groff_ms (7),
.BR groff_msafer (7)
.LP
.\"O The groff language is described in
.\"O .BR groff (7)
.\"O and the formatters in
.\"O .BR groff (1),
.\"O .BR troff (1).
groff 言語については
.BR groff (7)
に、フォーマッタについては
.BR groff "(1) と"
.BR troff (1)
に記述されている。
.LP
.\"O The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS) is available at
.\"O .BR http://www.pathname.com/fhs/ .
.\"O 
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS) については
.B http://www.pathname.com/fhs/
を参照のこと。


