.\"O .TH DBZ 1 "11 Feb 1992"
.TH DBZ 1 "11 Feb 1992"
.\"O .BY "C News"
.BY "C News"
.\"Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Hiroki Ohtsuji
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated  Fri, 24 Dec 2004
.\"         by Hiroki Ohtsuji
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O dbz \- operate on dbz databases of text
dbz \- テキストデータベースの操作
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .B dbz
.\"O [
.\"O .BR \- { axmc }
.\"O ] [
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O c
.\"O ] [
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O length
.\"O ] [
.\"O .BR \- { qiue }
.\"O ] [
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O old
.\"O ] [
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O parms
.\"O ] database file ...
.B dbz
[
.BR \- { axmc}
] [
.B \-\t
c
] [
.B \-l
length
] [
.BR \- { qiue }
] [
.B \-f
old
] [
.B \-p
params
] database file ...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O .I Dbz
.\"O is a shell-level interface to the
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)
.\"O database routines for indexed access to a text file.
.SH 説明
.I Dbz
は、シェルレベルの
テキストファイルへインデックスされたアクセスを行う
.IR dbz (3z)
データベースルーチンである。
.\"O .PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I database
.\"O file must be a text file,
.\"O one line per database record,
.\"O with the key the first field on the line.
.PP
.I database
ファイルはテキストファイルでなければならず、
データベースの1レコードにつき1行でかつ、最初のフィールドにキーがなければ
ならない。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O option sets the field-separator character; the default is tab.
.\"O Setting the separator character to NUL (with
.\"O .BR "\-t\ ''" )
.\"O makes the whole line the key.
.\"O Lines must not exceed 1023 bytes in length including the newline;
.\"O this limit can be increased with the
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O option.
.B \-t
オプションはフィールドセパレータの文字をセットする（これは、デフォルトで
はタブ文字である)。
フィールドセパレータの文字をヌルにする(with
.BR "\-t\ ''")
と、すべての行がキーになってしまう。
新しい行を含む長さは1023バイトを超えてはならない。
この制限は
.B \-l
オプションにより変更(増加)させることができる。
.\"O The limitations and restrictions of
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)
.\"O must also be observed;
.\"O in particular, it remains the user's responsibility to ensure that
.\"O no attempt is made to store two entries (whether identical or not)
.\"O with the same key.
.IR dbz (3z)
の制限は
詳細には、これはユーザーの責任において
2つのエントリ(同様またはそれと異なる)が同じキーにより作成されない事が確実で
なければならない。
.\"O .PP
.\"O In the absence of options,
.\"O .I dbz
.\"O creates a
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)
.\"O index for the database;
.\"O the index comprises files
.\"O .IB database .pag
.\"O and
.\"O .IB database .dir
.\"O in the same directory.
.\"O Any previous index is silently overwritten.
.\"O The
.\"O .BR \-a ,
.\"O .BR \-x ,
.\"O .BR \-m ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O options specify other operations.
.PP
オプションが指定されない中では、
.I dbz
は
同じディレクトリにある
.IB database .pag
と
.IB database .dir
を含む、データベースのための
.IR dbz (3z)
インデックスを作成する。
いずれの以前のインデックも、警告無しに上書きされる。
.BR \-a ,
.BR \-x ,
.BR \-m ,
と
.B \-c
オプションは、他の操作を指定する。
.\"O .PP
.\"O With
.\"O .BR \-a ,
.\"O .I dbz
.\"O appends lines from the
.\"O .IR file (s)
.\"O (standard input if none)
.\"O to the database, updating both the
.\"O text file and the indexes.
.BR \-a
オプションは
(標準入力が空であると)
.IR file (s)
からデータベースへと表を追加し、
テキストファイルとインデックスの両方を更新する。
.\"O .PP
.\"O With
.\"O .BR \-x ,
.\"O .I dbz
.\"O reads keys from the
.\"O .IR file (s)
.\"O (standard input if none)
.\"O and prints (on standard output) the corresponding lines, if any,
.\"O from the database.
.\"O The input is in the form of database lines, although only the keys are
.\"O significant.
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-q
.\"O option makes
.\"O .B \-x
.\"O print the input lines whose keys are found instead of the database
.\"O lines; this is somewhat faster.
.\"O .PP
.BR \-x
オプションを付加すると
.I dbz
は、標準入力が空であるならば
.IR file (s)
からキーを読み取り、標準出力へ相当する行を出力する(データベースにデータ
があれば)。
キーだけが重要であるが、入力はデータベース行の形式である。
.B \-q
オプションは
.B \-x
オプションに、データベースの代わりに見つかったキーの入力行を出力させる。
これは多少早い。
.\"O With
.\"O .BR \-m ,
.\"O operation is the same as for
.\"O .B \-x
.\"O except that the keys which are \fInot\fR present in the database
are printed.
.PP
.BR \-m ,
の指示はデータベースの中にないキーを印刷する以外は、
.B \-x
と同じである。
.\"O .PP
.\"O With
.\"O .BR \-c ,
.\"O .I dbz
.\"O checks the database for internal consistency.
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-q
.\"O option causes this check to be done more quickly but less thoroughly
.\"O (each key is looked up in the index, but no check is made to be sure
.\"O that the index entry points to the right place).
.PP
.BR \-c
オプションは、データーベースの内部整合性検査を行う。
.B \-q
オプションは、この検査の実行を高速にするが、綿密ではなくなる(各キーはイ
ンデックスの中
から調べられるが、インデックスエントリポイントが正しい場所にあるかを確か
めない)。
.\"O .PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O option suppresses the use of
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)'s
.\"O .I incore
.\"O facility.
.\"O This makes accesses slower, but keeps the files current
.\"O during updating
.\"O and reduces
.\"O startup/shutdown overhead.
.PP
.B \-i
オプションは
.IR dbz (3z)
のコア機能の使用を禁止する。
この機能はアクセスを低速にするが、カレントファイルを更新中も保持し、
開始・停止のオーバーヘッドも低減する。
.\"O .PP
.\"O Normally,
.\"O .I dbz
.\"O checks whether a key is already in the database before adding it.
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O option suppresses this check, speeding things up at the expense of
safety.
.PP
通常
.I dbz
はキーを追加する前に、それがデータベースの中にあるかどうかを確認する。
.B \-u
オプションはこのチェックをやめさせ、安全性を犠牲にして高速にする。
.\"O .PP
.\"O A new index is normally created with default size,
.\"O case mapping, and tagging.
.\"O The default size is right for 90-100,000 records.
.\"O The default case mapping is right for RFC822 message-ids.
.\"O See
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)
.\"O for what tagging is about.
.\"O (Note, these defaults can be changed when
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)
.\"O is installed.)
.PP
新しいインデックスは通常デフォルトのサイズで作成され、
大小文字のマッピング、タグ付けがされる。
デフォルトのサイズは90から1000,000レコードの間では適切である。
デフォルトの大小文字のマッピングはRFC822 message-idsに準じている。
タグ付けに関しては
.IR dbz (3z)
を参照せよ。
(これらのデフォルトの値は、
.IR dbz  (3z)
をインストールするときに変更することができる。
.\"O .PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option is given,
.\"O size, case mapping, and tagging
.\"O are instead initialized based on the
.\"O database
.\"O .IR old .
.\"O This is mostly useful when
.\"O creating a new generation of an existing database.
.\"O (See the description of
.\"O .I dbzagain
.\"O in
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)
.\"O for details.)
.PP
.B \-f
オプションが与えられると、
サイズ、ケースマッピング、およびタグ付けは代わりに
古いデータベースに基づいて初期化される。
.IR old.
これは、存在しているデータベースの新しい世代のものを作成するときに
大体便利である(詳細については
.I dbzagain
中の
.IR dbz (3z)
を見よ)。
.\"O .PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is given, the
.\"O .I parms
.\"O string specifies the size, case mapping, and tagging.
.PP
.B \-p
オプションが与えられると、
.I parms
文字列はサイズ、ケースマッピング、およびタグ付けを明示する。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parms
.\"O is a single decimal number,
.\"O that is taken as the expected number of records
.\"O in the index, with case mapping and tagging defaulted.
.I parms
が1つの整数であると、
それはケースマッピングとタグ付けを破棄し、
予期されるインデックス中のレコードとして扱われる。
.\"O Alternatively,
.\"O .I parms
.\"O can be three fields\(ema decimal number, a case-mapping code
character, and a
.\"O hexadecimal tag mask\(emseparated by white space.
.\"O The decimal number is, again, the expected number of records;
.\"O 0 means ``use the default''.
代わりに、
.I parms
は整数、ケースマッピングコード文字、16進数のタグマスクの3つにスペース
により分けられる。
整数はさらにまた、予期されるレコードで、0はデフォルトを使用することを意
味する。
.\"O See
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)
.\"O for possible choices of case-mapping code,
.\"O but in particular,
.\"O .B 0
.\"O means ``no case mapping''.
ケースマッピングコードとしてふさわしい選択のためには
.IR dbz (3z)
を見よ。しかし特に、0はケースマッピングをしないことを示す。
.\"O See
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)
.\"O for details on tag masks;
.\"O 0 means ``use the default''.
0がデフォルトを使用することを意味する、
タグマスクについての詳細は
.IR dbz (3z)
を見よ。
.\"O .PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-e
.\"O option is given, the decimal number in
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O is taken to be the exact table size, not the expected number of
records,
.\"O and invocation of
.\"O .I dbzsize
.\"O (see
.\"O .IR dbz (3z))
.\"O to predict a good size for that number of records is suppressed.
.B \-eオプションが与えられると、
.B \-p
の整数は、正確にはテーブルのサイズとして用い、予期されるレコードの数、
.I dbsize
(see
.IR dbz (3z))
を引き合いに出すこと、
抑制されたた良いレコードの数を予測するために使われない。
.\"O .PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \&.pag
.\"O file is normally about 6 bytes per record (based on the estimate
given to
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O or the previous history of the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O database).
.B \&.pag
ファイルは通常、1レコードにつき大体6バイトである(
.B \-p
オプションで与えられた見積もりもしくは
.B \-f
オプションで与えられたデータベースの以前の履歴に基づく)。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \&.dir
.\"O file is tiny.
.B \&.dir
ファイルは小さい。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.\"O dbz(3z)
.SH 関連項目
dbz(3z)
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.\"O Written at U of Toronto by Henry Spencer, for the C News project.
.\"O See
.\"O .IR dbz (3z)
.\"O for the history of the underlying database routines.
.SH 履歴
C Newsプロジェクトのために、トロント大学のHenry Spencerによって書かれた。
データベースルーチンの履歴の基礎については、
.IR dbz(3z)
を見よ。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.\"O There are a number of undocumented options with obscure effects,
.\"O meant for debugging and regression testing of
.\"O .IR dbz (3z).
.SH バグ
.IR dbz(3z)
のデバッグや回帰テストのための、文章化されておらず
結果が不明瞭であるオプションがある。
.\"O .PP
.\"O Permissions for the index files probably ought to be taken from those
.\"O of the base file.
.PP
インデックスファイルのパーミッションは、たいていベースファイルから
取り込むべきである。
.\"O .PP
.\"O The line-length limit is a blemish, alleviated only slightly by
.\"O .BR \-l .
.PP
行の制限は欠点であり
.BR \-l
によってのみ緩和される。
