.\" No comment!
.\"
.TH RSSH.CONF 5 "22 Feb 2003" "man pages" "Derek D. Martin"
.SH NAME 
rssh.conf \- configuration file for rssh
.SH OVERVIEW
.B rssh.conf
is the configuration file for \fBrssh\fP.  It allows the system administrator
to control the behavior of the shell.  Configuration keywords are either used
by themselves on a line, or followed by an equal sign ('=') and a
configuration value.  Comments start with a hash ('#') and can occur anywhere
on the line.  Configuration options are case insensitive. Spaces at the
beginning or end of line, or between the equal sign and the configuration
keywords or values are ignored.
.P
A default configuration file is provided with the source distribution of
\fBrssh\fP.  If no configuration file is used, rssh will assume a default
umask of 022, and allow both \fIscp\fP and \fIsftp\fP.  If a config file is
present, it
.I must
contain at least one keyword indicating whether scp or sftp are allowed.
.SH CONFIGURATION KEYWORDS 
.B allowscp
.RS
Tells the shell that scp is allowed.
.RE
.P
.B allowsftp
.RS
Tells the shell that sfcp is allowed.
.RE
.P
.B umask
.RS
Sets the umask value for file creations in the scp/sftp session.  This is
normally set at login time by the user's shell.  In order not to use the
system default, \fBrssh\fP must set the umask.
.RE
.P
.B logfacility
.RS
Allows the system administrator to control what syslog facility
.B rssh
logs to.  The facilities are the same as those used by \fIsyslogd.conf\fP(5),
or the C macros for the facilities can be used instead.  For example:
.P
logfacility=user
.br
logfacility=LOG_USER
.P
are equivalent, and tell
.B rssh
to use the user facility for logging to syslog.
.RE
.P
.B chrootpath
.RS
Causes \fBrssh\fP (actually a helper program) to call the 
.I chroot() 
system call, changing the root of the file system to whatever directory is
specified.  For example:
.P
chrootpath=/usr/chroot
.P
will change the root of the virtual filesystem to /usr/chroot, preventing the
user from being able to access anything below /usr/chroot in the filesystem,
and making /usr/chroot appear to be the root directory.  Care must be taken to
set up a proper chroot jail; see the file CHROOT in the rssh source
distribution for hints about how to do this.  See also the \fIchroot\fP(2) man
page.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fIrssh\fP(1), \fIsshd\fP(8), \fIssh\fP(1), \fIscp\fP(1), \fIsftp\fP(1),
\fIsyslogd.conf\fP(5), \fIchroot\fP(2).


