.ig \"-*- nroff -*-
Copyright (C) 1989-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.TH SOELIM 1 "8 April 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.SH 名前
soelim \- groff 入力の .so リクエストを処理する
.SH 書式
.B soelim
[
.B \-Cv
]
[
.BI \-I dir
]
[
.IR files \|.\|.\|.\|
]
.PP
.B \-I
コマンドラインオプションとそのパラメータの間に空白を含めることが
できる。
.SH 説明
.B soelim
はコマンドラインで指定されたファイルを読み込み、
.IP
.BI .so\  file
.LP
という形式の行を
.I file
の内容に置き換える。
ファイルに、プリプロセスが必要な
.B so
が含まれているときに役に立つ。
通常は、
.B soelim
は
.B groff
の
.B \-s
オプションによって呼び出される。
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-C
空白や改行以外の文字が続く
.B .so
も認識する。
.TP
.BI \-I dir
このオプションで、ファイルを検索するディレクトリが指定できる
 (コマンドラインのファイルと
.B \&.so
行で指定されたファイルの両方が対象となる)。
カレントディレクトリは、つねに最初に検索される。
このオプションは複数指定することができ、ディレクトリは指定された順番で
検索される。
絶対パスで指定されたファイルについては、ディレクトリ検索は実行されない。
.TP
.B \-v
バージョン番号を出力する。
.SH 関連項目
.BR groff (1)


