.\" t
.\" $Id: auto.master.5,v 1.2 2003/09/29 08:22:35 raven Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jun 14 04:45:01 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AUTO.MASTER 5 "9 Sep 1997"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O /etc/auto.master \- Master Map for automounter
/etc/auto.master \- オートマウントシステムのマスタマップ
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B auto.master
.\"O map is consulted when the
.\"O .BR autofs (8)
.\"O script is invoked to set up the necessary mount points for the automounter.
.B auto.master
マップは、
.BR autofs (8)
スクリプトが呼び出されてオートマウントシステムに必要なマウントポイントを
設定するときに参照される。
.\"O Each line in this file describes a mount point and points to another file
.\"O describing the file systems to be mounted under this mountpoint. The access
.\"O to those maps is governed by a key.
このファイルの各行には、マウントポイントと別ファイルの位置が書かれている。
別ファイルには、そのマウントポイントにマウントする
ファイルシステムが記述されている。
これらのマップへのアクセスはキーによって管理されている。
.P
.\"O For indirect automount maps access to an automounted file system is customarily
.\"O done using the path scheme:
間接マップでのオートマウントの場合、
オートマウントシステムでマウントされたファイルシステムへのアクセスは、
一般に次のようなパス形式で行われる:
.P
.RI / mountpoint / key / path / file ,
.P
.\"O where the
.\"O .I mountpoint
.\"O will be listed in the
.\"O .B auto.master
.\"O configuration file. The
.\"O .I key
.\"O is matched in the map file pointed to by the
.\"O master map (See
.\"O .BR autofs (5)).
ここで
.I mountpoint
は
.B auto.master
設定ファイルに列挙リストされるものである。
.I key
はマスタマップが指すマップファイル中の key に対応する
.RB ( autofs (5)
を参照)。
.\"O The path and the file are referring to the file on the file system mounted.
path と file はマウントされたファイルシステム上のファイルを参照する。
.\"O For direct automount maps access is via the full path to the filesystem
.\"O as given in the associated map. The mountpoint for the direct map is always
.\"O specified as /- in the auto.master map.
直接マップでのオートマウントの場合、
マウントされたファイルシステムへのアクセスは、
関連するマップで指定されたフルパスを使って行なわれる。
直接マップのマウントポイントは、
auto.master マップにおいて常に /- と指定される。
.\"O .SH "FORMAT"
.SH 書式
.\"O The file has three fields separated by an arbitrary number of blanks or
.\"O tabs. Lines beginning with # are comments. The first field is the mount
.\"O point. Second field is the map file to be consulted for this mount-point.
このファイルは 3 つのフィールドを持ち、各フィールドは
任意の数の空白またはタブで区切られる。
# で始まる行はコメントである。
1 番目のフィールドはマウントポイントである。
2 番目のフィールドは、そのマウントポイントに対して参照すべき
マップファイルである。
.\"O This field is of the form 
.\"O .IR maptype:mapname ,
.\"O where
.\"O .I maptype
.\"O is one of the supported map types (file, program, yp, nisplus, hesiod, userdir, ldap), and
.\"O .I mapname
.\"O is the name of the map. The third field is optional and can contain options to+ be applied to all entries in the map. Options are cumulative, which is a
.\"O difference from the behavior of the SunOS automounter.
2 番目のフィールドは
.I maptype:mapname
という形式である。
ここで
.I maptype
はサポートされているマップタイプ
(file, program, yp, nisplus, hesiod, userdir, ldap) のいずれかであり、
.I mapname
はマップの名前である。
3 番目のフィールドは存在してもしなくてもよく、
マップ中の全てのエントリに適用されるオプションを記述することができる。
オプションが各マップのオプションに追加されるという点は、
SunOS のオートマウントシステムの動作と異なる。

.\"O The format of the map file and the options are described in
.\"O .BR autofs (5).
マップファイルの書式とオプションは
.BR autofs (5)
に記述されている。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.0i
.nf
/home	/etc/auto.home
/misc	/etc/auto.misc
/mnt	yp:mnt.map
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O This will generate three mountpoints 
.\"O .IR /home ,
.\"O .IR /misc ,
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /mnt .
これは 3 つのマウントポイント
.IR /home ,
.IR /misc ,
.I /mnt
を生成する。
.\"O All accesses to
.\"O .I /home
.\"O will lead to the consultation of the map in
.\"O .IR /etc/auto.home ,
.I /home
への全てのアクセスは、
.I /etc/auto.home
にあるマップを参照する。
.\"O all accesses to
.\"O .I /misc
.\"O will consult the map in
.\"O .IR /etc/auto.misc ,
.I /misc
への全てのアクセスは、
.I /etc/auto.misc
にあるマップを参照する。
.\"O and all accesses to
.\"O .I /mnt
.\"O will consult the NIS map
.\"O .IR mnt.map .
.I /mnt
への全てのアクセスは、NIS マップ
.I mnt.map
を参照する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR automount (8),
.BR autofs (5),
.BR autofs (8).
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This manual page was written by Christoph Lameter <chris@waterf.org>,
.\"O for the Debian GNU/Linux system.  Edited by <hpa@transmeta.com>.
この man ページは Christoph Lameter <chris@waterf.org> によって
Debian GNU/Linux システムのために書かれた。
<hpa@transmeta.com> によって編集された。
