.\" t
.\" $Id: autofs.5,v 1.8 2004/05/18 12:22:40 raven Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jul  3 04:41:33 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"O .TH AUTOFS 5 "6 Apr 1998"
.TH AUTOFS 5 "14 Jan 2000"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O autofs \- Format of the automounter maps
autofs \- オートマウントシステムマップの書式
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH 説明
.\"O The automounter maps are files or NIS maps referred to by the master map of
.\"O the automounter (see
.\"O .BR auto.master (5)).
オートマウントシステムマップは、オートマウントシステムのマスタマップ
.RB ( auto.master (5)
を参照) によって参照される
ファイルまたは NIS マップである。
.\"O The automounter maps describe how file systems below the mountpoint of the map
.\"O (given in the auto.master file) are to be mounted.  This describes the
.\"O .B sun
.\"O map format; if another map format is specified (e.g. \fBhesiod\fP),
.\"O this documentation does not apply.
オートマウントシステムマップは (auto.master ファイルで指定される) 
マップのマウントポイント以下のファイルシステムがどのように
マウントされるかを記述する。
この man ページでは、
.B sun
マップの書式について記述している。
他のマップ書式 (例えば \fBhesiod\fP) が指定された場合、
この man ページは適用できない。
.\"O Maps can be changed on the fly and the automouter will recognize those
.\"O changes on the next operation it performs on that map.  This is not
.\"O true for the
.\"O .B auto.master
.\"O map!
マップは即時に変更可能で、オートマウントシステムはそのマップに対して
次の操作が行われたときに変更を認識できる。
これは
.B auto.master
マップについては当てはまらない。
.\"O .SH "FORMAT"
.SH 書式
.\"O This is a description of the text file format.  Other methods of specifying
.\"O these files may exist.  All empty lines or lines beginning with # are
.\"O ignored. The basic format of one line in such maps is:
これはテキストファイルの書式の説明である。
これらのファイルを指定する別の方法もある。
空行と # で始まる行は全て無視される。
マップ内の 1 行の基本的な書式は、以下の通りである:
.P
.BI "key [" -options "] location"

.SS key
.\"O For indirect mounts this is the part of the pathname between the mountpointi
.\"O and the path into the filesystem mounted. Usually you can think about the
.\"O key as a subdirectory name below the mountpoint.
間接マウントの場合、これはマウントポイントと
マウントされているファイルシステム内にあるパスとの間のパス名の一部分である。
このキーは通常はマウントポイント以下のサブディレクトリ名と考えることができる。

.\"O For direct mounts this is the full path of the mountpoint. This map is always
.\"O associated with the /- mountpoint in the master map. 
直接マウントの場合、これはマウントポイントの完全なパスである。
このマップはマスタマップにおける /- というマウントポイントと
常に関連づけられている。

.SS options
.\"O Options are optional.  Options can also be given in the 
.\"O .B auto.master
.\"O file in which case both values are cumulative (this is a difference
.\"O from SunOS).  The options are a list of comma separated options as
.\"O customary for the
.\"O .BR mount (8)
.\"O command. There are two special options
.\"O .I -fstype=
.\"O used to specify a filesystem type if the filesystem is not of the default
.\"O NFS type.  This option is processed by the automounter and not by the mount
.\"O command.
options は存在してもしなくてもよい。
options は
.B auto.master
ファイルでも指定することができる。
両方で指定されている場合は、両方の値が足し合わされる
(これが SunOS との違いである)。
options はコンマで区切られたオプションのリストで、
.BR mount (8)
コマンドに通常与えているものと同じである。
2 つの特殊なオプションがある。
.I -fstype=
はファイルシステムがデフォルトの
NFS タイプでない場合にファイルシステムタイプを指定するために使用される。
このオプションは mount コマンドではなく、オートマウントシステムで処理される。
.\"O .I -strict
.\"O is used to treat errors when mounting file systems as fatal. This is important when
.\"O multiple file systems should be mounted (`multimounts'). If this option
.\"O is given, no file system is mounted at all if at least one file system
.\"O can't be mounted.
.I -strict
はファイルシステムをマウントするときのエラーを
致命的なものとして扱うために使われる。
これは複数のファイルシステムがマウントされる
(`multimounts') 時に重要である。
このオプションが指定された場合、
ファイルシステムが 1 つでもマウントできない場合は、
全てのファイルシステムがマウントされない。

.SS location
.\"O The location specifies from where the file system is to be mounted.  In the
.\"O most cases this will be an NFS volume and the usual notation
.\"O .I host:pathname
.\"O is used to indicate the remote filesystem and path to be mounted.  If
.\"O the filesystem to be mounted begins with a / (such as local
.\"O .I /dev
.\"O entries or smbfs shares) a : needs to be prefixed (e.g. 
.\"O .IR :/dev/sda1 ).
location はどこからファイルシステムをマウントするかを指定する。
多くの場合、これは NFS ボリュームで通常は
.I host:pathname
という記法が使われ、
リモートファイルシステムとマウントされるパスを示す。
マウントされるファイルシステムが (ローカルの
.I /dev
エントリや smbfs 共有のように) / で始まる場合は、
: を前に付ける必要がある (例:
.IR :/dev/sda1 )。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.0i 3.0i
.nf
kernel	-ro,soft,intr	ftp.kernel.org:/pub/linux
boot	-fstype=ext2	:/dev/hda1
windoze	-fstype=smbfs	://windoze/c
removable	-fstype=ext2	:/dev/hdd
cd	-fstype=iso9660,ro	:/dev/hdc
floppy	-fstype=auto	:/dev/fd0
server	-rw,hard,intr	/ -ro myserver.me.org:/ \\
			/usr myserver.me.org:/usr \\
			/home myserver.me.org:/home
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O In the first line we have a NFS remote mount of the kernel directory on
.\"O .IR ftp.kernel.org .
1 行目では
.I ftp.kernel.org
にあるカーネルのディレクトリの NFS リモートマウントを指定している。
.\"O This is mounted read-only.  The second line mounts an ext2 volume on a
.\"O local ide drive.  The third makes a share exported from a Windows
.\"O machine available for automounting.  The rest should be fairly
.\"O self-explanatory. The last entry (the last three lines) is an example
.\"O of a multi-map (see below).
これは読み込み専用でマウントされる。
2 行目ではローカルの ide ドライブ上の ext2 ボリュームをマウントしている。
3 行目は Windows マシンで共有で公開されているドライブの
自動マウントを可能にしている。
残りは全く説明の必要がないだろう。
最後のエントリ (最後の 3 行) はマルチマップ (下記を参照) の例である。

.\"O If you use the automounter for a filesystem without access permissions
.\"O (like \fBvfat\fP), users usually can't write on such a filesystem
.\"O because it is mounted as user \fBroot\fP.
(\fBvfat\fP のように) アクセス許可を持たないファイルシステムに対して
オートマウントシステムを使った場合は、
\fBroot\fP ユーザとしてマウントされるので、
(一般の) ユーザは通常はそのファイルシステムに書き込むことができない。
.\"O You can solve this problem by passing the option \fIgid=<gid>\fP,
.\"O e. g. \fIgid=floppy\fP. The filesystem is then mounted as group
.\"O \fBfloppy\fP instead of \fBroot\fP. Then you can add the users
.\"O to this group, and they can write to the filesystem. Here's an
.\"O example entry for an autofs map:
この問題は (\fIgid=floppy\fP のように)
オプション \fIgid=<gid>\fP を渡すことで解決できる。
そうすると、そのファイルシステムは \fBroot\fP ではなく
グループ \fBfloppy\fP でマウントされる。
そしてユーザをそのグループに追加することで、
ファイルシステムに書き込むことができる。
以下は autofs マップのエントリの例である:
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.0i 3.0i
.nf
floppy-vfat  -fstype=vfat,sync,gid=floppy,umask=002  :/dev/fd0
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O .SH FEATURES
.SH 機能
.\"O .SS Map Key Substitution
.SS マップのキーの置換
.\"O An & character in the
.\"O .B location
.\"O is expanded to the value of the 
.\"O .B key
.\"O field that matched the line (which probably only makes sense together with
.\"O a wildcard key).
.B location
における & 文字は、その行にマッチする
.B key
フィールドの値に展開される
(これはワイルドカードキーと共に使った場合にのみ意味があるだろう)。
.\"O .SS Wildcard Key
.SS ワイルドカードキー
.\"O A * in the
.\"O .B key
.\"O field of indirect maps matches all keys.  An example for the usefulness
.\"O is the following entry:
間接マップの
.B key
フィールドにおける * は全てのキーにマッチする。
実用的な例としては、以下のエントリがある:
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.0i
.nf
*	&:/home/&
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O This will enable you to access all the home directory of local hosts using
.\"O the path
.\"O .RI / mountpoint / hostname / local-path .
これにより、パス
.RI / mountpoint / hostname / local-path
を使って、ローカルにあるホスト全ての home ディレクトリに
アクセスできるようになる。
.\"O .SS Variable Substitution
.SS 変数の置換
.\"O The following special variables will be substituted in the key and location
.\"O fields of an automounter map if prefixed with $ as customary from shell
.\"O scripts (Curly braces can be used to separate the fieldname):
オートマウントマップの key および location フィールドで、
シェルスクリプトでおなじみの $ を先頭に付けて
(フィールド名を区切るために中括弧 (curly brace) も使用可)
以下の特別な変数を使った場合、次のような値に置き換えられる:
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.5i
.nf
.\"O ARCH	Architecture (uname -m)
ARCH	アーキテクチャ (uname -m)
.\"O CPU	Processor Type
CPU	プロセッサタイプ
.\"O HOST	Hostname (uname -n)
HOST	ホスト名 (uname -n)
.\"O OSNAME	Operating System (uname -s)
OSNAME	オペレーティングシステム (uname -s)
.\"O OSREL	Release of OS (uname -r)
OSREL	OS のリリース (uname -r)
.\"O OSVERS	Version of OS (uname -v)
OSVERS	OS のバージョン (uname -v)
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O Additional entries can be defined with the -Dvariable=Value map-option to
.\"O .BR automount (8).
.BR automount (8)
の -Dvariable=Value マップオプションを使って、
追加でエントリを定義することができる。
.\"O .SS Executable Maps
.SS 実行可能マップ
.\"O A map can be marked as executable.  The init script that parses the
.\"O auto.master map will pass this as a
.\"O .B program
.\"O map to the automounter.  A
.\"O .B program
.\"O map will be called as a script with the key as an argument.  It may
.\"O return no lines of output if there's an error, or one or more lines
.\"O containing a map (with \\ quoting line breaks).
マップに実行可能のマークを付けることができる。
auto.master マップを解析する初期化スクリプトは、これを
.B program
マップとしてオートマウントシステムに渡す。
.B program
マップは key を引き数としたスクリプトとして呼び出される。
エラーが発生した場合、出力は 1 行も返されない。
成功した場合は、マップを含む 1 行以上が
(改行は \\ でクォートされて) 返される。
.P
.\"O To use a 
.\"O .B program
.\"O map, the
.\"O .BR automount (8)
.\"O daemon has to be started with the program type instead of the file
.\"O type.  This is implemented in the initialization script.
.B program
マップを使うためには、
.BR automount (8)
デーモンは file タイプではなく program タイプとして
開始されていなければならない。
これは初期化スクリプトの中で実装されている。
.P
.\"O A executable map can return an errorcode to indicate the failure in addition
.\"O to no output at all.  All output sent to stderr is logged into the system
.\"O logs.
実行可能マップは、エラーの場合、
全く出力を行わないことに加えて失敗を表すエラーコードを返すことができる。
標準エラー出力へ送られる全ての出力は、システムログに記録される。
.\"O .SS Multiple Mounts
.SS マルチマウント
.\"O A
.\"O .B multi-mount map
.\"O can be used to name multiple filesystems to mount.  It takes the form:
.B multi-mount
マップは複数のファイルシステムをマウントするのに使用される。
これは以下の形式である:
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.0i
.nf
.BI "key [" -options "] [mountpoint [" -options "] location...]..."
.fi
.RE
.sp
.P
.\"O This may extend over multiple lines, quoting the line-breaks with \`\\\'.
.\"O If present, the per-mountpoint mount-options are appended to the
.\"O default mount-options.
改行を \`\\\' でクォートすれば、複数行に渡って書くこともできる。
このマップが存在する場合、デフォルトのマウントオプションに加えて、
マウントポイント毎のマウントオプションが追加される。
.\"O .SS Replicated Server
.SS レプリケートされたサーバ
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.5i
.nf
.\"O Multiple replicated hosts, same path:
パスが同じ複数のレプリケートされたホスト:
<path> host1,host2,hostn:/path/path

.\"O Multiple hosts, some with same path, some with another
あるものはパスが同じで、あるものはパスが異なる複数のホスト:
<path> host1,host2:/blah host3:/some/other/path

.\"O Multiple replicated hosts, different (potentially) paths:
パスが異なる (可能性がある) 複数のレプリケートされたホスト:
<path> host1:/path/pathA host2:/path/pathB

.\"O Mutliple weighted, replicated hosts same path:
重み付けが異なり、パスが同じレプリケートされたホスト:
<path> host1(5),host2(6),host3(1):/path/path

.\"O Multiple weighted, replicated hosts different (potentially) paths:
重み付けが異なり、異なる (可能性がある) パスのレプリケートされたホスト:
<path> host1(3):/path/pathA host2(5):/path/pathB

.\"O Anything else is questionable and unsupported, but these variations will also work:
その他の書式は不自然でサポートされていないが、
変形したこれらの書式でも動作する:
<path> host1(3),host:/blah
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O .SH UNSUPPORTED
.SH サポート範囲外
.\"O This version of the automounter supports direct maps for FILE, NIS and LDAP maps only
.\"O and handles SunOS-style replicated filesystems only to the extent that
.\"O .BR mount (8)
.\"O does.
このバージョンのオートマウントシステムは FILE, NIS, LDAP マップに対する
直接マップのみをサポートしており、
SunOS 形式のレプリケートされたファイルシステムについては
.BR mount (8)
がサポートする範囲でのみ取り扱う。
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O Unlike Sun's multi-mount syntax, the mountpoint is mandatory for all
.\"O mounts.
Sun の multi-mount 書式とは異なり、
全てのマウントにおいてマウントポイントは必須である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR automount (8),
.BR auto.master (5),
.BR autofs (8),
.BR mount (8).
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This manual page was written by Christoph Lameter <chris@waterf.org>,
.\"O for the Debian GNU/Linux system.  Edited by H. Peter Anvin
.\"O <hpa@transmeta.com>, Jeremy Fitzhardinge <jeremy@goop.org> and
.\"O Ian Kent <raven@themaw.net>.
この man ページは Christoph Lameter <chris@waterf.org> によって
Debian GNU/Linux システムのために書かれた。
H. Peter Anvin <hpa@transmeta.com>, Jeremy Fitzhardinge <jeremy@goop.org>,
Ian Kent <raven@themaw.net> によって編集された。
