.\"
.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jun 25 22:07:43 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH IGAWK 1 "Nov 3 1999" "Free Software Foundation" "Utility Commands"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O igawk \- gawk with include files
igawk \- インクルードファイルを使う gawk
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B igawk
[ all
.I gawk
options ]
.B \-f
.I program-file
[
.B \-\^\-
] file .\^.\^.
.br
.B igawk
[ all
.I gawk
options ]
[
.B \-\^\-
]
.I program-text
file .\^.\^.
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I Igawk
.\"O is a simple shell script that adds the ability to have ``include files'' to
.\"O .IR gawk (1).
.I igawk
は
.IR gawk (1)
に「インクルードファイル」の機能を追加する簡単なシェルスクリプトである。
.PP
.\"O AWK programs for
.\"O .I igawk
.\"O are the same as for
.\"O .IR gawk ,
.\"O except that, in addition, you may have lines like
.\"O .RS
.\"O .sp
.\"O .ft B
.\"O @include getopt.awk
.\"O .ft R
.\"O .sp
.\"O .RE
.\"O in your program to include the file
.\"O .B getopt.awk
.\"O from either the current directory or one of the other directories
.\"O in the search path.
.I igawk
で使う AWK プログラムは
.I gawk
と同じであるが、
カレントディレクトリまたは検索パスのディレクトリにあるファイル
.B getopt.awk
をインクルードするために、
.RS
.sp
.ft B
@include getopt.awk
.ft R
.sp
.RE
のような行をプログラムに書くことができる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O See
.\"O .IR gawk (1)
.\"O for a full description of the AWK language and the options that
.\"O .I gawk
.\"O supports.
AWK 言語と
.I gawk
がサポートするオプションについての完全な説明は、
.IR gawk (1)
を参照すること。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.nf
.ft B
cat << EOF > test.awk
@include getopt.awk
.sp
BEGIN {
	while (getopt(ARGC, ARGV, "am:q") != \-1)
		\&.\^.\^.
}
EOF
.sp
igawk \-f test.awk
.ft R
.fi
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.IR gawk (1)
.PP
.IR "Effective AWK Programming" ,
Edition 1.0, published by the Free Software Foundation, 1995.
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Arnold Robbins
.RB ( arnold@skeeve.com ).
