.\"
.\" exportfs(8)
.\" 
.\" Copyright (C) 1995 Olaf Kirch <okir@monad.swb.de>
.\" Modifications 1999-2003 Neil Brown <neilb@cse.unsw.edu.au>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb  8 05:49:48 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Oct  1 04:07:23 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Dec 29 11:12:42 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH exportfs 8 "18 July 2003"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O exportfs \- maintain list of NFS exported file systems
exportfs \- NFS エクスポートするファイルシステムのリストを管理する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "/usr/sbin/exportfs [-avi] [-o " "options,.." "] [" "client:/path" " ..]
.br
.BI "/usr/sbin/exportfs -r [-v]"
.br
.BI "/usr/sbin/exportfs [-av] -u [" "client:/path" " ..]
.br
.BI "/usr/sbin/exportfs [-v]
.br
.BI "/usr/sbin/exportfs -f"
.br
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B exportfs
.\"O command is used to maintain the current table of exported file systems for
.\"O NFS. This list is kept in a separate file named
.\"O .BR /var/lib/nfs/xtab
.\"O which is read by
.\"O .B mountd
.\"O when a remote host requests access to mount a file tree, and parts of
.\"O the list which are active are kept in the kernel's export table.
.B exportfs
コマンドは、現在 NFS でエクスポートしているファイルシステムの
テーブルを管理するために使うコマンドである。
このリストは
.B /var/lib/nfs/xtab
という名前のファイルに保存される。
このファイルは
リモートホストからファイルツリーをマウントするアクセス要求があった時に
.B mountd
から参照される。
また、このリストのうちアクティブになっているものが
カーネルのエクスポートテーブルに保存される。
.P
.\"O Normally this 
.\"O .B xtab
.\"O file is initialized with the list of all file systems named in
.\"O .B /etc/exports 
.\"O by invoking
.\"O .BR "exportfs -a" .
通常この
.B xtab
ファイルは、
.B "exportfs -a"
を実行することにより、
.B /etc/exports 
に書かれた全てのファイルシステムのリストで初期化される。
.P
.\"O However, administrators can choose to add and delete individual file systems
.\"O without modifying
.\"O .B /etc/exports
.\"O using
.\"O .BR exportfs .
しかし管理者は、
.B /etc/exports
を修正することなく、
.B exportfs
を使って選択的に個々のファイルシステムを追加・削除できる。
.P
.\"O .B exportfs
.\"O and it's partner program
.\"O .B mountd
.\"O work in one of two modes, a legacy mode which applies to 2.4 and
.\"O earlier versions of the Linux kernel, and a new mode which applies to
.\"O 2.6 and later versions providing the
.\"O .B nfsd
.\"O virtual filesystem has been mounted at
.\"O .B /proc/fs/nfsd
.\"O or
.\"O .BR /proc/fs/nfs .
.B exportfs
とそのパートナとなるプログラム
.B mountd
は 2 つのモードの何れかで動作する。
レガシーモードは Linux カーネル 2.4 以前で利用される。
新しいモードは 2.6 以降で利用され、
.B /proc/fs/nfsd
または
.B /proc/fs/nfs
にマウントされる
.B nfsd
仮想ファイルシステムを提供する。
.\"O If this filesystem is not mounted in 2.6, the legacy mode is used.
このファイルシステムが 2.6 でマウントされない場合、
レガシーモードが使用される。
.P
.\"O In the new mode,
.\"O .B exportfs
.\"O does not give any information to the kernel but only provides it to
.\"O .B mountd
.\"O through the
.\"O .B /var/lib/nfs/xtab
.\"O file.
新しいモードでは、
.B exportfs
はカーネルには全く情報を提供ぜず、
.B /var/lib/nfs/xtab
ファイルを通して
.B mountd
に情報を提供するだけである。
.\"O .B mountd
.\"O will listen to requests from the kernel and will provide information
.\"O as needed.
.B mountd
はカーネルからの要求を待ち受け、必要に応じて情報を提供する。
.P
.\"O In the legacy mode,
.\"O any export requests which identify a specific host (rather than a
.\"O subnet or netgroup etc) are entered directly into the kernel's export
.\"O table as well as being written to
.\"O .BR /var/lib/nfs/xtab .
レガシーモードでは、
(サブネットやネットグループなどではなく)
特定のホストを指定したエクスポート要求は、
カーネルのエクスポートテーブルに直接書き込まれるとともに、
.B /var/lib/nfs/xtab
にも書き込まれる。
.\"O Further, any mount points listed in
.\"O .B /var/lib/nfs/rmtab
.\"O which match a non host-specific export request will cause an
.\"O appropriate export entry for the host given in
.\"O .B rmtab
.\"O to be entered
.\"O into the kernel's export table.
さらに、ホストを特定しないエクスポート要求が
.B /var/lib/nfs/rmtab
にリストされているマウントポイントにマッチすると、
このファイルに書かれているホストに向けたエクスポートエントリが、
カーネルのエクスポートテーブルに入れられる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP 
.B -a
.\"O Export or unexport all directories.
全てのディレクトリをエクスポート・アンエクスポートする。
.TP
.BI "-o " options,...
.\"O Specify a list of export options in the same manner as in
.\"O .BR exports(5) .
.BR exports (5)
と同じ形式でエクスポートオプションのリストを指定する。
.TP
.B -i
.\"O Ignore the
.\"O .B /etc/exports
.\"O file, so that only default options and options given on the command
.\"O line are used.
.B /etc/exports
ファイルを無視する。
デフォルトのオプションとコマンドラインで指定されたオプションのみが使われる。
.TP
.B -r
.\"O Reexport all directories. It synchronizes /var/lib/nfs/xtab
.\"O with /etc/exports. It removes entries in /var/lib/nfs/xtab
.\"O which are deleted from /etc/exports, and remove any entries from the
.\"O kernel export table which are no longer valid.
全てのディレクトリを再エクスポートする。
/var/lib/nfs/xtab を /etc/exports と同期させる。
/etc/exports から削除されたエントリを
/var/lib/nfs/xtab からも削除し、
既に無効になったエントリをカーネルのエクスポートテーブルから削除する。
.TP
.B -u
.\"O Unexport one or more directories.
1 つ以上のディレクトリをアンエクスポートする。
.TP
.B -f
.\"O In 'new' mode, flush everything out of the kernels export table. Any
.\"O clients that are active will get new entries added by
.\"O .B mountd
.\"O when they make their next request.
「新しい」モードにおいて、カーネルのエクスポートテーブルから全てを書き出す。
アクティブなクライアントは、
.B mountd
によって追加された新しいエントリを、次に要求を行ったときに取得する。
.TP
.B -v
.\"O Be verbose. When exporting or unexporting, show what's going on. When
.\"O displaying the current export list, also display the list of export
.\"O options.
詳細に表示する。
エクスポートまたはアンエクスポートするときに状況を表示する。
現在のエクスポートリストを表示するとともに、
エクスポートオプションも表示する。
.\"O .SH DISCUSSION
.SH 議論
.\"O .\" -------------------- Exporting Directories --------------------
.\" -------------------- ディレクトリのエクスポート --------------------
.\"O .SS Exporting Directories
.SS ディレクトリのエクスポート
.\"O The first synopsis shows how to invoke the command when adding new
.\"O entries to the export table.  When using 
.\"O .BR "exportfs -a" ,
.\"O all directories in
.\"O .B exports(5)
.\"O are added to
.\"O .B xtab
.\"O and the resulting list is pushed into the kernel.
1 番目の書式は、新しいエントリをエクスポートテーブルに追加するための
コマンドの呼び出し方である。
.B "exportfs -a"
を使うと、
.BR exports (5)
にある全てのディレクトリが
.B xtab
に追加され、結果として得られるリストがカーネルに入れられる。
.P
.\"O The
.\"O .I host:/path
.\"O argument specifies the directory to export along with the host or hosts to
.\"O export it to. All formats described in
.\"O .B exports(5)
.\"O are supported; to export a directory to the world, simply specify
.\"O .IR :/path .
.I host:/path
引き数は、エクスポートするディレクトリとホストを指定する。
.BR exports (5)
に記述されている全てのフォーマットがサポートされている。
全てのホストに対してディレクトリをエクスポートするには、単純に
.I :/path
と指定すればよい。
.P
.\"O The export options for a particular host/directory pair derive from
.\"O several sources.  There is a set of default options which can be overridden by
.\"O entries in
.\"O .B /etc/exports
.\"O (unless the
.\"O .B -i
.\"O option is given).
特定のホスト/ディレクトリのペアに対するエクスポートオプションは、
いろいろな方法で指定できる。
デフォルトのオプションがいくつか存在するが、
これらは
.RB ( -i
オプションが指定されない限り)
.B /etc/exports
のエントリで変更できる。
.\"O In addition, the administrator may overide any options from these sources
.\"O using the
.\"O .B -o
.\"O argument which takes a comma-separated list of options in the same fashion
.\"O as one would specify them in
.\"O .BR exports(5) .
さらに、管理者はこれらの方法で指定されたオプションを
.B -o
引き数を使って変更できる。
.B -o
オプションの後には、
.BR exports (5)
で指定するのと同じ形式で、コンマで区切ったオプションのリストを置く。
.\"O Thus,
.\"O .B exportfs
.\"O can also be used to modify the export options of an already exported
.\"O directory.
このようにして、
.B exportfs
は既にエクスポートされているディレクトリのオプションを変更することもできる。
.P
.\"O Modifications of the kernel export table used by
.\"O .B nfsd(8)
.\"O take place immediately after parsing the command line and updating the
.\"O .B xtab
.\"O file.
.BR nfsd (8)
が使うカーネルのエクスポートテーブルを修正すると、
コマンドラインが解析された後すぐに反映され、
.B xtab
ファイルが更新される。
.P
.\"O The default export options are
.\"O .BR sync,ro,root_squash,no_delay .
デフォルトのエクスポートオプションは
.B sync,ro,root_squash,no_delay
である。
.\"O .\" -------------------- Unexporting Directories ------------------
.\" -------------------- ディレクトリのアンエクスポート ------------------
.\"O .SS Unexporting Directories
.SS ディレクトリのアンエクスポート
.\"O The third synopsis shows how to unexported a currently exported directory.
.\"O When using
.\"O .BR "exportfs -ua" ,
.\"O all entries listed in
.\"O .B xtab
.\"O are removed from the kernel export tables, and the file is cleared. This
.\"O effectively shuts down all NFS activity.
3 番目の書式は、現在エクスポートされているディレクトリを
アンエクスポートする方法である。
.B "exportfs -ua"
を使うと、
.B xtab
にリストされているエントリがカーネルのエクスポートテーブルから削除され、
このファイルはクリアされる。
これにより全ての NFS の動作を効率的にシャットダウンすることができる。
.P
.\"O To remove individial export entries, one can specify a
.\"O .I host:/path
.\"O pair. This deletes the specified entry from
.\"O .B xtab
.\"O and removes the corresponding kernel entry (if any).
個々のエクスポートエントリを削除するためには、
.I host:/path
ペアを指定すればよい。
(このペアがもし存在すれば) 指定されたエントリが
.B xtab
から削除され、対応するカーネルエントリも削除される。
.P
.\"O .\" -------------------- Dumping the Export Table -----------------
.\" -------------------- エクスポートテーブルのダンプ -----------------
.\"O .SS Dumping the Export Table 
.SS エクスポートテーブルのダンプ
.\"O Invoking
.\"O .B exportfs
.\"O without further options shows the current list of exported file systems.
.\"O When giving the
.\"O .B -v
.\"O option, the list of flags pertaining to each export are shown in addition.
.B exportfs
を引き数なしで起動すると、現在エクスポートされている
ファイルシステムのリストを表示する。
.B -v
オプションを指定すると、各エクスポートエントリに付属している
フラグのリストも表示する。
.\"O .\" -------------------- EXAMPLES ---------------------------------
.\" -------------------- 例 ---------------------------------
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O The following adds all directories listed in
.\"O .B /etc/exports to /var/lib/nfs/xtab
.\"O and pushes the resulting export entries into the kernel:
次のコマンドは、
.B /etc/exports
にリストされた全てのディレクトリを
.B /var/lib/nfs/xtab
に追加し、
結果として得られるエクスポートエントリをカーネルにプッシュする:
.P
.nf
.B "# exportfs -a
.fi
.P
.\"O To export the
.\"O .B /usr/tmp
.\"O directory to host 
.\"O .BR djando ,
.\"O allowing asynchronous writes, one would do this:
.B /usr/tmp
ディレクトリをホスト
.B djando
にエクスポートし、非同期書き込みを許可する場合は、次のようにすればよい。
.P
.nf
.B "# exportfs -o async django:/usr/tmp
.fi
.\"O .\" -------------------- DEPENDENCIES -----------------------------
.\" -------------------- 依存性 -----------------------------
.\"O .SH DEPENDENCIES
.SH 依存性
.\"O Exporting to IP networks, DNS and NIS domains does not enable clients
.\"O from these groups to access NFS immediately; rather, these sorts of
.\"O exports are hints to
.\"O .B mountd(8)
.\"O to grant any mount requests from these clients.
.\"O This is usually not a big problem, because any existing mounts are preserved
.\"O in
.\"O .B rmtab
.\"O across reboots.
IP ネットワークや DNS ドメイン、NIS ドメインへエクスポートしたときは、
これらのグループに属するクライアントは即座には NFS にアクセスできない。
どちらかというと、このようなエクスポートは
.BR mountd (8)
がこれらのクライアントからのマウント要求を許可するかどうかに対する
ヒントなのである。
既存のマウントポイントはリブートしても
.B rmtab
に保存されるので、これは通常は大した問題にはならない。
.P
.\"O When unexporting a network or domain entry, any current exports to members
.\"O of this group will be checked against the remaining valid exports and
.\"O if they themselves are nolonger valid they will be removed.
ネットワークエントリやドメインエントリをアンエクスポートする場合、
このグループのメンバに現在エクスポートされているエントリについて、
エクスポートが有効になっているかがチェックされ、
既に有効でない場合は削除される。
.P
.\"O .\" -------------------- SEE ALSO --------------------------------
.\" -------------------- 関連項目 --------------------------------
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR exports(5) ", " mountd(8)
.\"O .\" -------------------- AUTHOR ----------------------------------
.\" -------------------- 著者 ----------------------------------
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Olaf Kirch, <okir@monad.swb.de>
.br
Neil Brown, <neilb@cse.unsw.edu.au>
