.\"
.\" mountd(8)
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1999 Olaf Kirch <okir@monad.swb.de>
.\" Modified by Paul Clements, 2004.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002-2005 Yuichi SATO 
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jan  3 17:42:24 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Oct  1 03:56:25 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Dec 30 06:52:11 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH rpc.mountd 8 "31 Aug 2004"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O rpc.mountd \- NFS mount daemon
.SH 名前
rpc.mountd \- NFS マウントデーモン
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "/usr/sbin/rpc.mountd [" options "]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O program implements the NFS mount protocol. When receiving a MOUNT
.\"O request from an NFS client, it checks the request against the list of
.\"O currently exported file systems. 
.B rpc.mountd
プログラムは NFS のマウントプロトコルを実装している。
.B rpc.mountd
は NFS クライアントから MOUNT リクエストを受け取ると、
現在エクスポートされているファイルシステムのリストを参照し、
そのリクエストが正当なものかどうかをチェックする。
.\"O If the client is permitted to mount
.\"O the file system,
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O obtains a file handle for requested directory and returns it to
.\"O the client.
クライアントがそのファイルシステムのマウントを許可されている場合には、
.B rpc.mountd
は要求されたディレクトリのファイルハンドルを取得し、
それをクライアントに返す。
.\"O .SS Exporting NFS File Systems
.SS NFS ファイルシステムのエクスポート
.\"O Making file systems available to NFS clients is called
.\"O .IR exporting .
ファイルシステムを NFS クライアントが使用できるようにすることを、
\fIエクスポート\fRという。
.P
.\"O Usually, a file system and the hosts it should be made available to
.\"O are listed in the
.\"O .B /etc/exports
.\"O file, and invoking
.\"O .B exportfs -a
.\"O whenever the system is booted. 
通常 NFS の使用を許可するファイルシステムとホストは
.B /etc/exports
ファイルにリストされ、システムのブート時に
.B exportfs -a
で有効にされる。
.\"O The
.\"O .BR exportfs (8)
.\"O command makes export information available to both the kernel NFS
.\"O server module and the
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O daemon.
.BR exportfs (8)
コマンドは、カーネル NFS サーバーモジュールと
.B rpc.mountd
デーモンとの両方に対して、エクスポート情報を利用可能にする。
.P
.\"O Alternatively, you can export individual directories temporarily 
.\"O using
.\"O .BR exportfs 's
.\"O .IB host : /directory
.\"O syntax.
もしくは、
.B exportfs
の
.IB host : /directory
という書式を使って、個別のディレクトリを一時的にエクスポートすることもできる。
.\"O .SS The rmtab File
.SS rmtab ファイル
.\"O For every mount request received from an NFS client,
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O adds an entry to the
.\"O .B /var/lib/nfs/rmtab
.\"O file. When receiving an unmount request, that entry is removed.
NFS クライアントからマウント・リクエストを受けとるごとに、
.B rpc.mountd
は
.B /var/lib/nfs/rmtab
ファイルにエントリを追加する。
アンマウント・リクエストを受け取ると、そのエントリは削除される。
.P
.\"O However, this file is mostly ornamental. One, the client can continue
.\"O to use the file handle even after calling
.\"O .B rpc.mountd 's
.\"O UMOUNT procedure. And two, if a client reboots without notifying
.\"O .B rpc.mountd ,
.\"O a stale entry will remain in
.\"O .BR rmtab .
ただし、このファイルはほとんど飾りのようなものである。
ひとつには、
.B rpc.mountd 
の UMOUNT プロシージャが呼ばれた後でも
クライアントはファイルハンドルを使い続けることができてしまうし、
またもうひとつには、
.B mountd
に知らせずにリブートすると、
.B rmtab
に古いエントリが残ってしまう。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.\"O .B \-d kind " or " \-\-debug kind
.B \-d kind " または " \-\-debug kind
.\"O Turn on debugging. Valid kinds are: all, auth, call, general and parse.
デバッグを有効にする。
kind として指定可能な値は以下の通り: all, auth, call, parse.
.TP
.\"O .B \-F " or " \-\-foreground
.B \-F " または " \-\-foreground
.\"O Run in foreground (do not daemonize)
フォアグラウンドで実行する (デーモン化しない)。
.TP
.\"O .B \-f " or " \-\-exports-file
.B \-f " または " \-\-exports-file
.\"O This option specifies the exports file, listing the clients that this server
.\"O is prepared to serve and parameters to apply to each such mount (see
.\"O exports(5)).
.\"O By default exports are read from
.\"O .IR /etc/exports .
このオプションはエクスポートファイルを指定する。
エクスポートファイルには、このサーバーがサービスを提供するクライアントと、
それぞれのマウントに対して適用されるパラメータがリストされている
.RB ( exports (5)
を見よ)。デフォルトのエクスポートファイルは
.I /etc/exports
である。
.TP
.\"O .B \-h " or " \-\-help
.B \-h " または " \-\-help
.\"O Display usage message.
使用法のメッセージを表示する。
.TP
.\"O .B \-o num " or " \-\-descriptors num
.B \-o num " または " \-\-descriptors num
.\"O Set the limit of the number of open file descriptors to num. The
.\"O default is to leave the limit unchanged.
オープンするファイルディスクリプタの上限を num にする。
デフォルトでは上限を変更しない。
.TP
.\"O .B \-N " or " \-\-no-nfs-version
.B \-N " または " \-\-no-nfs-version
.\"O This option can be used to request that
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O do not offer certain versions of NFS. The current version of
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O can support both NFS version 2 and the newer version 3. If the
.\"O NFS kernel module was compiled without support for NFSv3,
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O must be invoked with the option
.\"O .B "\-\-no-nfs-version 3" .
このオプションを使うと、
.B rpc.mountd
に特定のバージョンの NFS を提供させないようにできる。
.B rpc.mountd
の現在のバージョンでは、NFS バージョン 2 と
より新しいバージョン 3 の両方をサポートしている。
NFS カーネルモジュールが NFSv3 に対応するようにコンパイルされていない場合、
.B rpc.mountd
をオプション
.B "\-\-no-nfs-version 3"
で起動しなければならない。
.TP
.\"O .B \-n " or " \-\-no-tcp
.B \-n " または " \-\-no-tcp
.\"O Don't advertise TCP for mount.
mount の際に TCP に広報しない。
.TP
.B \-P
.\"O Ignored (compatibility with unfsd??).
無視される (unfsd との互換性のためにある)。
.TP
.\"O .B \-p " or " \-\-port num
.B \-p " または " \-\-port num
.\"O Force
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O to bind to the specified port num, instead of using the random port
.\"O number assigned by the portmapper.
.B rpc.mountd
を特定のポート num にバインドさせる。
portmapper によって割り当てられるランダムなポートを使わない。
.TP
.\"O .B \-H " or " \-\-ha-callout prog
.B \-H " または " \-\-ha-callout prog
.\"O Specify a high availability callout program, which will receive callouts
.\"O for all client mount and unmount requests. This allows 
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O to be used in a High Availability NFS (HA-NFS) environment. This callout is not
.\"O needed (and should not be used) with 2.6 and later kernels (instead,
.\"O mount the nfsd filesystem on
.\"O .B /proc/fs/nfsd
.\"O ).
高可用性コールアウトプログラムを指定する。
このプログラムは全てのクライアントのマウント要求とアンマウント要求の
コールアウトを受け付ける。
これにより、高可用性 NFS (High Availability NFS, HA-NFS) 環境で
.B rpc.mountd
を使用することができる。
このコールアウトは 2.6 以降のカーネルでは必要ない
(使用すべきではない)。
(代わりに、nfsd ファイルシステムを
.B /proc/fs/nfsd
にマウントすること)。
.\"O The program will be called with 4 arguments.
このプログラムは 4 つの引き数を付けて呼ばれる。
.\"O The first will be
.\"O .B mount
.\"O or
.\"O .B unmount
.\"O depending on the reason for the callout.
1 番目の引き数は
.B mount
または
.B unmount
である。これはコールアウトの理由に依存する。
.\"O The second will be the name of the client performing the mount.
.\"O The third will be the path that the client is mounting.
.\"O The last is the number of concurrent mounts that we believe the client
.\"O has of that path.
2 番目の引き数はマウントを実行しているクライアントの名前である。
3 番目の引き数はクライアントがマウントしているパスである。
最後の引き数は同時マウント数である。
これは mountd が把握している、
そのパスをマウントしているクライアントの数である。
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: 最後の引き数の翻訳がうまくできない。
.\"Osato: 
.TP
.\"O .B \-V " or " \-\-nfs-version
.B \-V " または " \-\-nfs-version
.\"O This option can be used to request that
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O offer certain versions of NFS. The current version of
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O can support both NFS version 2 and the newer version 3.
このオプションを使うと、
.B rpc.mountd
に特定のバージョンの NFS を提供させることができる。
.B rpc.mountd
の現在のバージョンでは、NFS バージョン 2 と
より新しいバージョン 3 の両方に対応することができる。
.TP
.\"O .B \-v " or " \-\-version
.B \-v " または " \-\-version
.\"O Print the version of
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O and exit.
.B rpc.mountd
のバージョンを表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH TCP_WRAPPERS SUPPORT
.SH TCP_WRAPPERS のサポート
.\"O This
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O version is protected by the
.\"O .B tcp_wrapper
.\"O library. You have to give the clients access to
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O if they should be allowed to use it. To allow connects from clients of
.\"O the .bar.com domain you could use the following line in /etc/hosts.allow:
このバージョンの
.B rpc.mountd
は
.B tcp_wrapper
ライブラリによって保護することができる。
クライアントに
.B rpc.mountd
の使用を許可するためには、アクセス権を与えなければならない。
\&.bar.com ドメインのクライアントからの接続を許可するためには、
以下の行を /etc/hosts.allow に記述する。

mountd: .bar.com

.\"O You have to use the daemon name 
.\"O .B mountd
.\"O for the daemon name (even if the binary has a different name).
デーモン名としては (バイナリの名前がこれとは違っても)
.B mountd
を使わなければならない。

.\"O For further information please have a look at the
.\"O .BR tcpd (8)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR hosts_access (5)
.\"O manual pages.
より詳しい情報については、
.BR tcpd (8),
.BR hosts_access (5)
の man ページを参照してほしい。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR rpc.nfsd (8),
.BR exportfs (8),
.BR exports (5),
.BR rpc.rquotad (8).
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.BR /etc/exports ,
.BR /var/lib/nfs/xtab .
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Olaf Kirch, H. J. Lu, G. Allan Morris III, and a host of others.
Olaf Kirch, H. J. Lu, G. Allan Morris III, その他の多くの人々。
