.\"
.\" nfsd(8)
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1999 Olaf Kirch <okir@monad.swb.de>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 14 06:18:26 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH rpc.nfsd 8 "31 May 1999"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O rpc.nfsd \- NFS server process
rpc.nfsd \- NFS サーバープロセス
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "/usr/sbin/rpc.nfsd [-p " port "] " nproc
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B rpc.nfsd
.\"O program implements the user level part of the NFS service. The
.\"O main functionality is handled by the
.\"O .B nfsd.o
.\"O kernel module; the user space program merely starts the specified
.\"O number of kernel threads.
.B rpc.nfsd
プログラムは NFS サービスのユーザーレベル部分を実装している。
主な機能は
.B nfsd.o
カーネルモジュールで処理される。
ユーザー空間プログラムは単に指定された番号の
カーネルスレッドを開始するだけである。
.P
.\"O The
.\"O .B rpc.mountd
.\"O server provides an ancillary service needed to satisfy mount requests
.\"O by NFS clients.
NFS クライアントからのマウント要求を満たすために必要なサービスは
.B rpc.mountd
サーバーが提供する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-p " port"
.\"O specify a diferent port to listen on for NFS requests. By default,
.\"O .B rpc.nfsd
.\"O will listen on port 2049.
NFS リクエストを待ち受けるポートを通常とは異なるものにする。
デフォルトでは
.B rpc.nfsd
は 2049 番ポートで待ち受ける。
.TP
.I nproc
.\"O specify the number of NFS server threads. By default, just one
.\"O thread is started. However, for optimum performance several threads
.\"O should be used. The actual figure depends on the number of and the work
.\"O load created by the NFS clients, but a useful starting point is
.\"O 8 threads. Effects of modifying that number can be checked using
.\"O the
.\"O .BR nfsstat (8)
.\"O program.
NFS サーバースレッドの数を指定する。
デフォルトでは 1 つのスレッドしか起動しない。
しかし、性能を最適化するためには複数のスレッドを使うべきである。
どのくらいにすればよいかは
NFS クライアントの数とそれらによる負荷に依存するが、
最初は 8 スレッドくらいがよいだろう。
スレッド数を変更したときの効果は
.BR nfsstat (8)
プログラムを使ってチェックできる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR rpc.mountd (8),
.BR exportfs (8),
.BR rpc.rquotad (8),
.BR nfsstat (8).
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Olaf Kirch, Bill Hawes, H. J. Lu, G. Allan Morris III,
.\"O and a host of others.
その他の人々。
