.\"
.\" nfsstat(8)
.\" 
.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Olaf Kirch <okir@monad.swb.de>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 29 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH nfsstat 8 "05 Oct 2001"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O nfsstat \- print NFS statistics
.SH 名前
nfsstat \- NFS の統計情報を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "/usr/sbin/nfsstat [-anrcsz] [-o " "facility" "] ...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B nfsstat
.\"O displays statistics kept about NFS client and server activity.
.B nfsstat
は NFS クライアントとサーバの動作に関して保存されている統計を表示する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -s
.\"O Print only server-side statistics. The default is to print both server and
.\"O client statistics.
サーバ側の統計のみを表示する。
デフォルトではサーバとクライアント両者の統計を表示する。
.TP
.B -c
.\"O Print only client-side statistics.
クライアント側の統計のみを表示する。
.TP
.B -n
.\"O Print only NFS statistics. The default is to print both NFS and RPC
.\"O information.
NFS の統計のみを表示する。
デフォルトでは NFS と RPC 両者の情報を表示する。
.TP
.B -r
.\"O Print only RPC statistics.
RPC の統計のみを表示する。
.TP
.BI -o " facility
.\"O Display statistics for the specified facility, which must be one of:
指定した
.I facility
の統計のみを表示する。以下のうちのひとつを指定できる。
.RS
.TP
.B nfs
.\"O NFS protocol information, split up by RPC call.
RPC コールを除く、NFS プロトコルの情報。
.TP
.B rpc
.\"O General RPC information.
一般的な RPC 情報
.TP
.B net
.\"O Network layer statistics, such as the number of received packets, number
.\"O of TCP connections, etc.
ネットワーク層の統計。
例えば受信パケットの数、TCP 接続回数など。
.TP
.B fh
.\"O Usage information on the server's file handle cache, including the
.\"O total number of lookups, and the number of hits and misses.
サーバのファイルハンドルキャッシュの利用情報。
ルックアップの回数、ヒットとミスの回数を含む。
.TP
.B rc
.\"O Usage information on the server's request reply cache, including the
.\"O total number of lookups, and the number of hits and misses.
サーバのリクエスト返信用キャッシュの利用情報。
ルックアップの回数、ヒットとミスの回数を含む。
.RE
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.\" --------------------- FILES ----------------------------------
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.B /proc/net/rpc/nfsd
.\"O .BR procfs -based
.\"O interface to kernel NFS server statistics.
\fBprocfs\fP ベースの kernel NFS サーバ統計へのインターフェース。
.TP
.B /proc/net/rpc/nfs
.\"O .BR procfs -based
.\"O interface to kernel NFS client statistics.
\fBprocfs\fP ベースの kernel NFS クライアント統計へのインターフェース。
.\" -------------------- SEE ALSO --------------------------------
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR rpc.nfsd (8).
.BR rpc.nfsd (8)
.\" -------------------- AUTHOR ----------------------------------
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Olaf Kirch, <okir@monad.swb.de>
