.\" @(#)nhfsstone.man 1.13 89/10/05 Copyright (c) 1989, Legato Systems Inc
.\" See DISCLAIMER file for restrictions
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Jun 14 06:50:33 JST 2006
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp> catch up to v1.0.7
.\"
.TH NHFSSTONE 8 "4 October 1989"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O nhfsstone \- Network File System benchmark program
nhfsstone \- ネットワークファイルシステムのベンチマークプログラム
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B nhfsstone
[
.B \-v
] [[
.B \-t secs
] | [
.B -c calls
]] [
.B \-l load
] [
.B \-p nprocs
] [
.B \-m mixfile
] [
.B dir
]...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O (pronounced n\-f\-s\-stone, the "h" is silent)
.\"O is used on a
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O client to generate an artificial load with a particular mix of
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O operations. It reports the average response time of the server in
.\"O milliseconds per call and the load in calls per second.
.B nhfsstone
(n\-f\-s\-stone と発音し、"h" は読まない) は
.SM NFS
クライアント上で人為的な負荷を生成するために使用する。
この負荷には、特定の組み合わせの
.SM NFS
操作が含まれる。
このプログラムはサーバーの平均応答時間 (1 回の呼び出し当りのミリ秒数) と
負荷 (1 秒当りの呼び出し回数) を表示する。
.\"O The program adjusts its calling patterns based on the client's kernel
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O statistics and the elapsed time.
このプログラムは、クライアントのカーネルの
.SM NFS
統計と所要時間に基づいて、呼び出しパターンを調整する。
.\"O Load can be generated over a given time or number of
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O calls.
負荷は時間または
.SM NFS
呼び出しの数を指定することで生成できる。
.LP
.\"O Because it uses the kernel
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O statistics to monitor its progress,
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O cannot be used to measure the performance of non\-NFS filesystems.
.B nhfsstone
は進捗状況の監視にカーネルの
.SM NFS
統計情報を使用するので、
NFS ファイルシステム以外の性能を計測するのには使えない。
.LP
.\"O The
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O program uses file and directory manipulation in an attempt to generate
.\"O particular
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O operations in response to particular system calls.
.B nhfsstone
プログラムは、ファイルとディレクトリ操作を使って、
特定のシステムコールに対応する
.SM NFS
操作を生成する。
.\"O To do this it uses several tricks
.\"O that are based on a knowledge of the implementation of the
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O client side reference port.
これを行うため、
.SM NFS
クライアント側の参照ポートの実装についての知識に基づいた、
いくつかのトリックを使っている。
.\"O For example, it uses long file names to circumvent the kernel name lookup
.\"O cache so that a
.\"O .BR stat (2)
.\"O system call generates an
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O lookup operation.
例えば、長いファイル名を使ってカーネルの名前検索キャッシュを回避させることで、
.BR stat (2)
システムコールで
.SM NFS
lookup 操作を生成する。
.LP
.\"O The mix of
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O operations can be set with a mix file, which is the output of the
.\"O .BR nfsstat (8C)
.\"O command (see the "\-m" option below).
.SM NFS
操作の組み合わせは、組み合わせ (mix) ファイルで設定できる。
これは
.BR nfsstat (8C)
コマンド (下記の "\-m" オプションを参照) の出力である。
.\"O The percentages taken from
.\"O the mix file are calculated based on the number of
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O calls, not on the percentages printed by nfsstat. Operations with
.\"O 0% in the mix will never get called by
.\"O .BR nhfsstone .
組み合わせファイルから取得される割合は、
nfsstat
で表示される割合ではなく、
.SM NFS
呼び出しの数に基づいて計算される。
組み合わせファイルで 0% となっている操作は、
.B nhfsstone
から呼び出されない。
.\"O In a real server load mix, even though the percentage of call for
.\"O a particular
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O operation may be zero, the number of calls is often nonzero.
実際のサーバーにおける負荷の組み合わせでは、特定の
.SM NFS
操作の割合が 0% になっているかもしれないが、
呼び出し数は 0 でないことが多い。
.\"O .B Nhfsstone
.\"O makes the assumption that the number of calls to these 0 percent
.\"O operations will have an insignificant effect on server response.
.B nhfsstone
は「割合が 0% になっている操作の呼び出し数は、
サーバーの応答に些細な影響しか与えない」と仮定している。
.LP
.\"O Normally
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O should be given a list of two or more test directories to use
.\"O (default is to use the current directory).
通常は
.B nhfsstone
に対して、使用する 2 つ以上のテストディレクトリのリストを指定すべきである
(デフォルトではカレントディレクトリを使用する)。
.\"O The test directories used should be located on different disks and
.\"O partitions on the server to realistically simulate typical server loads.
使用するテストディレクトリは、
典型的なサーバーの負荷を現実的にシミュレートするために、
サーバー上の別々のディスクとパーティションに置くべきである。
.\"O Each
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O process looks for a directory
.\"O .B <dir>/testdir<n>
.\"O (where <n> is a number from 0 to
.\"O .B nprocs
.\"O \- 1).
各
.B nhfsstone
プロセスはディレクトリ
.B <dir>/testdir<n>
を扱う
(ここで <n> は 0 から
.B nprocs
\- 1 までの数値である)。
.\"O If a process directory name already exists,
.\"O it is checked for the correct set of test files.
.\"O Otherwise the directory is created and populated.
処理するディレクトリ名が既に存在する場合、
テストファイルのセットが正しいかをチェックする。
存在しない場合は、ディレクトリを作成して (訳註: テストファイルを) 配置する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP 12
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose output.
詳細な出力。
.TP
.B \-t secs
.\"O Sets
.\"O .B calls
.\"O based on the given running time (in seconds) and the load.
指定した実行時間 (単位: 秒) と負荷に基づいて、
.B calls
を設定する。
.TP
.B \-c calls
.\"O Total number of
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O calls to generate (default is 5000).
生成する
.SM NFS
呼び出しの総数 (デフォルトは 5000)。
.TP
.B \-l load
.\"O Load to generate in
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O calls per second (default is 30).
1 秒当りの
.SM NFS
呼び出しを生成する負荷 (デフォルトは 30)。
.TP
.B \-p nprocs
.\"O Number of load generating sub\-processes to fork (default is 7).
.\"O This can be used to maximize the amount of load a single machine can generate.
.\"O On a small client machine (slow CPU or small amount of memory)
.\"O fewer processes might be used to avoid swapping.
負荷生成を行うサブプロセスを fork させる数 (デフォルトは 7)。
これは 1 つのマシンで生成できる負荷の総量を最大化するために使用される。
(CPU が遅い、またはメモリ量が少ない) 小さなクライアントマシンでは、
スワッピングを避けるために、プロセス数を少なくした方が良いかもしれない。
.TP
.B \-m mixfile
.\"O Mix of
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O operations to generate.
生成する
.SM NFS
操作の組み合わせ。
.\"O The format of
.\"O .B mixfile
.\"O is the same as the output of the
.\"O .BR nfsstat (8C)
.\"O program.
.B mixfile
のフォーマットは
.BR nfsstat (8C)
プログラムの出力と同じである。
.\"O A mix file can be created on a server by typing "nfsstat \-s > mixfile".
組み合わせファイルは、サーバー上で "nfsstat \-s > mixfile" を
実行することで生成できる。
.\"O The default mix of operations is: null 0%, getattr 13%, setattr 1%,
.\"O root 0%, lookup 34%, readlink 8%, read 22%, wrcache 0%, write 15%, create 2%,
.\"O remove 1%, rename 0%, link 0%, symlink 0%, mkdir 0%, rmdir 0%, readdir 3%,
.\"O fsstat 1%.
デフォルトの操作の組み合わせは以下の通り:
null 0%, getattr 13%, setattr 1%,
root 0%, lookup 34%, readlink 8%, read 22%, wrcache 0%, write 15%, create 2%,
remove 1%, rename 0%, link 0%, symlink 0%, mkdir 0%, rmdir 0%, readdir 3%,
fsstat 1%.
.\"O .SH USING NHFSSTONE
.SH NHFSSTONE の使用法
.\"O As with all benchmarks,
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O can only provide numbers that are useful if experiments that use it are
.\"O set up carefully.
他の全てのベンチマークと同様に、
使用される試験内容を注意深く設定した場合にのみ、
.B nhfsstone
は有用な数値を提供できる。
.\"O Since it is measuring servers, it should be run on a client
.\"O that will not limit the generation of
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O requests.
このプログラムはサーバーを測定するので、
.SM NFS
リクエストの生成に制限がないクライアント上で実行すべきである。
.\"O This means it should have a fast CPU,
.\"O a good ethernet interface and the machine
.\"O should not be used for anything else during testing.
クライアントマシンは、速い CPUと優れたイーサーネットインタフェースを備え、
テストの最中にその他の用途で使用すべきではない、という意味である。
.\"O A Sun\-3/50 can generate about 60
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O calls per second before it runs out of CPU.
Sun\-3/50 では、CPU を使いきる前に、1 秒当り 60
.SM NFS
呼び出しが可能である。
.LP
.\"O .B Nhfsstone
.\"O assumes that all
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O calls generated on the client are going to a single server, and that
.\"O all of the
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O load on that server is due to this client.
.B nhfsstone
は「クライアントで生成された全ての
.SM NFS
呼び出しが 1 つのサーバーに対して行われ、全ての
.SM NFS
負荷はこのクライアントに依るものである」と仮定している。
.\"O To make this assumption hold,
.\"O both the client and server should be as quiescent as possible during tests.
この仮定を維持するため、テストの最中は
クライアントとサーバーの両方を出来る限り静かにさせて
(他の仕事をさせないで) おくべきである。
.LP
.\"O If the network is heavily utilized the delays due to collisions
.\"O may hide any changes in server performance.
.\"O High error rates on either the client or server can also
.\"O cause delays due to retransmissions of lost or damaged packets.
ネットワークを高負荷で使用していると、
衝突による遅れがサーバー性能の変化を隠してしまうかもしれない。
クライアントとサーバーのどちらかでエラー率が高いと、
失われたパケットや壊れたパケットを再送信するために遅れが生じる可能性がある。
.\"O .BR netstat (8C)
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O can be used to measure the error and collision rates on the client and server.
.BR netstat (8C)
.B \-i
を使ってクライアントとサーバーにおけるエラー率と衝突率を計測できる。
.LP
.\"O To best simulate the effects of
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O clients on the server, the test
.\"O directories should be set up so that they are on at least two of the
.\"O disk partitions that the server exports and the partitions should be
.\"O as far apart as possible. The
.\"O .BR dkinfo (8)
.\"O command can be used to find the physical geometry of disk on BSD based systems.
サーバーに対する
.SM NFS
クライアントの影響を最も正しくシミュレートするには、
サーバーがエクスポートするテストディレクトリを
少なくとも 2 つのディスクパーティションに置いて、
かつそれらのパーティションを出来る限り離すべきである。
.BR dkinfo (8)
コマンドを使うと、BSD 系システムにおける
ディスクの物理的ジオメトリが分かる。
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O operations tend to randomize
.\"O access the whole disk so putting all of the
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O test directories on a single partition or on
.\"O two partitions that are close together will not show realistic results.
.SM NFS
操作ではディスク全体へランダムにアクセスする傾向があるので、
全ての
.B nhfsstone
のテストディレクトリを 1 つのパーティションに置いたり、
2 つのパーティションが近かったりすると、現実的な結果を示さない。
.LP
.\"O On all tests it is a good idea to run the tests repeatedly and compare results.
全てのテストにおいて、テストを繰り返し行って
結果を比較するのは、良い考えである。
.\"O The number of calls can be increased
.\"O (with the
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O option) until the variance in milliseconds per call is acceptably small.
呼び出しの数は
.RB ( \-c
オプションを使って) 呼び出し一回当りの時間 (ミリ秒) の変化が
充分小さくなるまで増やすことができる。
.\"O If increasing the number of calls does not help there may be something
.\"O wrong with the experimental setup.
呼び出し回数を増やしても助けにならない (訳註: 何の変化も見られない) 場合、
実験の設定に何か問題があるかもしれない。
.\"O One common problem is too much memory on the client
.\"O test machine. With too much memory,
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O is not able to defeat the client caches and the
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O operations do not end up going to the server at all. If you suspect that
.\"O there is a caching problem you can use the
.\"O .B -p
.\"O option to increase the number of processes.
1 つの一般的な問題としては、
クライアントのテストマシンにメモリが多すぎる場合がある。
メモリが多すぎると、
.B nhfsstone
がクライアントのキャッシュに勝てず、
.SM NFS
操作がサーバーに全く行かなくなる。
キャッシュに問題があると感じた場合は、
.B -p
オプションを使ってプロセス数を増やすことができる。
.LP
.\"O The numbers generated by
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O are most useful for comparison if the test setup on the client machine
.\"O is the same between different server configurations. 
.B nhfsstone
で生成される数値は、クライアントマシンでのテスト設定を等しくして、
異なるサーバー設定を比較する場合に最も有効である。
.\"O Changing
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O parameters between runs will produce numbers that can not be
.\"O meaningfully compared.
実行する毎に
.B nhfsstone
のパラメータを変更すると、意味のある比較が出来ない数値が生成される。
.\"O For example, changing the number of generator processes
.\"O may affect the measured response
.\"O time due to context switching or other delays on the client machine, while
.\"O changing the mix of
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O operations will change the whole nature of the experiment.
たとえば、負荷を生成するプロセスの数は、
クライアントマシンでのコンテクスト切り替えやその他の遅れにより、
計測される応答時間に影響を与えるかもしれない。
一方、
.SM NFS
操作の組み合わせを変更すると、実験の全体的な特性を変えることになる。
.\"O Other changes to the client configuration may also effect the comparability
.\"O of results.
その他のクライアント設定についての変更は、
結果が比較できるかに影響を与える可能性がある。
.\"O While
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O tries to compensate for differences in client configurations
.\"O by sampling the actual
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O statistics and adjusting both the load and mix of operations, some changes
.\"O are not reflected in either the load or the mix. For example, installing
.\"O a faster CPU or mounting different
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O filesystems may effect the response time without changing either the
.\"O load or the mix.
.B nhfsstone
は実際の
.SM NFS
統計をサンプリングして、操作の負荷と組み合わせを調整することで、
クライアント設定の違いを補正しようとするが、
いくつかの変更は負荷にも組合わせにも反映されない。
例えば、負荷も組み合わせも変更せず、より速い CPU を組み込んだり、
別の
.SM NFS
ファイルシステムをマウントすると、応答時間に影響が出るだろう。
.LP
.\"O To do a comparison of different server configurations, first set up the
.\"O client test directories and do
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O runs at different loads to be sure that the variability is
.\"O reasonably low. Second, run
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O at different loads of interest and
.\"O save the results. Third, change the server configuration (for example,
.\"O add more memory, replace a disk controller, etc.). Finally, run the same
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O loads again and compare the results.
異なるサーバー設定を比較する場合、
第 1 段階では、クライアントのテストディレクトリを設定し、
.B nhfsstone
をいくつかの負荷で実行して変動が適度に小さいことを確かめる。
第 2 段階では、興味を持ったいくつかの負荷で
.B nhfsstone
を実行し、結果を保存する。
第 3 段階では、サーバーの設定を変更する
(メモリを増やす・ディスクコントローラを変更する、など)。
最終段階では、
.B nhfsstone
を同じ負荷で再度実行し、結果を比較する。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.LP
.\"O The
.\"O .B nhfsstone.c
.\"O source file has comments that describe in detail the operation of
.\"O of the program.
ソースコード
.B nhfsstone.c
には、プログラムの詳細な操作を記述したコメントが書かれている。
.\"O .SH ERROR MESSAGES
.SH エラーメッセージ
.TP
.B "illegal calls value"
.\"O The 
.\"O .B calls
.\"O argument following the
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O flag on the command line is not a positive number.
コマンドラインで指定された
.B \-c
フラグの後の
.B calls
引き数が正の数でない。
.TP
.B "illegal load value"
.\"O The
.\"O .B load
.\"O argument following the
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O flag on the command line is not a positive number.
コマンドラインで指定された
.B \-l
フラグの後の
.B load
引き数が正の数でない。
.TP
.B "illegal time value"
.\"O The
.\"O .B time
.\"O argument following the
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O flag on the command line is not a positive number.
コマンドラインで指定された
.B \-t
フラグの後の
.B time
引き数が正の数でない。
.TP
.B "bad mix file"
.\"O The
.\"O .B mixfile
.\"O file argument following the
.\"O .B \-m
.\"O flag on the command line could not be accessed.
コマンドラインで指定された
.B \-m
フラグの後の
.B mixfile
ファイル引き数にアクセスできない。
.TP
.B "can't find current directory"
.\"O The parent process couldn't find the pathname of the current directory.
.\"O This usually indicates a permission problem.
親プロセスがカレントディレクトリのパス名を見つけることができない。
権限の問題を表していることが多い。
.TP
.B "can't fork"
.\"O The parent couldn't fork the child processes. This usually results from
.\"O lack of resources, such as memory or swap space.
親プロセスが子プロセスを fork できない。
メモリやスワップ空間といったリソースの不足の結果であることが多い。
.TP
.PD 0
.B "can't open log file"
.TP
.B "can't stat log"
.TP
.B "can't truncate log"
.TP
.B "can't write sync file"
.TP
.B "can't write log"
.TP
.B "can't read log"
.PD
.\"O A problem occurred during the creation, truncation, reading or writing of the
.\"O synchronization log file. The parent process creates the
.\"O log file in /tmp and uses it to synchronize and communicate with its children.
同期ログファイルの作成・切り詰め・読み込み・書き出しの時に問題が起こった。
親プロセスがログファイルを /tmp に作成し、
子プロセスとの同期や通信に使用する。
.TP
.PD 0
.B "can't open test directory"
.TP
.B "can't create test directory"
.TP
.B "can't cd to test directory"
.TP
.B "wrong permissions on test dir"
.TP
.B "can't stat testfile"
.TP
.B "wrong permissions on testfile"
.TP
.B "can't create rename file"
.TP
.B "can't create subdir"
.PD
.\"O A child process had problems creating or checking the contents of its
.\"O test directory. This is usually due to a permission problem (for example
.\"O the test directory was created by a different user) or a full filesystem.
子プロセスがテストディレクトリの内容を作成・検査するときに問題が起こった。
権限の問題 (例えば、テストディレクトリが
別のユーザーによって作成されている場合) や
ファイルシステムがいっぱいである場合が多い。
.TP
.PD 0
.B "bad mix format: unexpected EOF after 'nfs:'"
.TP
.B "bad mix format: can't find 'calls' value"
.TP
.B "bad mix format: unexpected EOF after 'calls'"
.TP
.B "bad mix format: can't find %d op values"
.TP
.B "bad mix format: unexpected EOF"
.PD
.\"O A problem occurred while parsing the
.\"O .B mix
.\"O file. The expected format of the file is the same as the output of
.\"O the
.\"O .BR nfsstat (8C)
.\"O command when run with the "\-s" option.
.B mix
ファイルを解析しているときに問題が起こった。
このファイルの想定されるフォーマットは、
.BR nfsstat (8C)
コマンドを "\-s" オプションで実行したときの出力と同じである。
.TP
.B "op failed: "
.\"O One of the internal pseudo\-NFS operations failed. The name of the operation,
.\"O e.g. read, write, lookup, will be printed along with an indication of the
.\"O nature of the failure.
内部的な疑似 NFS 操作の 1 つが失敗した。
操作の名前、例えば read, write, lookup が、失敗の種類と共に表示される。
.TP
.B "select failed"
.\"O The select system call returned an unexpected error.
select システムコールが予期せぬエラーを返した。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.LP
.\"O Running
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O on a non\-NFS filesystem can cause the program to run forever because it
.\"O uses the kernel NFS statistics to determine when enough calls have been made.
.B nhfsstone
を NFS ファイルシステム以外で実行すると、プログラムが永久に動作し続ける。
このプログラムがカーネルの NFS 統計を使って、
充分な呼び出し回数が実行されたかを決定しているためである。
.LP
.\"O .B Nhfsstone
.\"O uses many file descriptors. The kernel on the client may
.\"O have to be reconfigured to increase the number of available file table entries.
.B nhfsstone
が多くのファイルディスクリプタを使う。
クライアントのカーネルを再設定し、
利用可能なファイルテーブルエントリを増やす必要があるかもしれない。
.LP
.\"O Shell scripts that used
.\"O .B nhfsstone
.\"O will have to catch and ignore SIGUSR1 (see
.\"O .BR signal (3)).
.B nhfsstone
を使うシェルスクリプトは SIGUSR1
.RB ( signal (3)
を参照) をキャッチして無視する必要がある。
.\"O This signal is
.\"O used to synchronize the test processes. If the signal is not caught
.\"O the shell that is running the script will be killed.
このシグナルはテストプロセスを同期するのに使われる。
このプロセスをキャッチしないと、
スクリプトを実行しているシェルが kill される。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B /vmunix
.\"O system namelist
システムのネームリスト
.TP
.B /dev/kmem
.\"O kernel virtual memory
カーネルの仮想メモリ
.TP
.B ./testdir*
.\"O per process test directory
プロセス毎のテストディレクトリ
.TP
.B /tmp/nhfsstone%d
.\"O process synchronization log file
プロセスの同期ログファイル
.PD
