.\"@(#)rquotad.8"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 29 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH RQUOTAD 8 "8 Mar 2001"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O rquotad, rpc.rquotad \- remote quota server
.SH 名前
rquotad, rpc.rquotad \- リモートクォータサーバ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /usr/etc/rpc.rquotad [-p " port "] "
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.LP
.IX  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  daemons  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "user quotas"  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "disk quotas"  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "quotas"  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "file system"  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "remote procedure call services"  "rquotad"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.\"O .BR rquotad
.\"O is an
.\"O .BR rpc (3N)
.\"O server which returns quotas for a user of a local file system
.\"O which is mounted by a remote machine over the
.\"O .SM NFS\s0.
.\"O The results are used by
.\"O .BR quota (1)
.\"O to display user quotas for remote file systems.
.B rquotad
は
.BR rpc (3)
のサーバであり、
リモートマシンで NFS マウントされている
ローカルファイルシステムの、
あるユーザに対するクォータ (quota: 割当のこと) を返す。
この結果は、
.BR quota (1)
がリモートファイルシステムにおけるユーザクォータ
を表示するために用いられる。
.\"nakano see also では quota(8) になっているが...

.\"O The
.\"O .BR rquotad
.\"O daemon is normally started at boottime from the
.\"O .BR rc.net
.\"O script (on systems with BSD'ish scripts, e.g. Slackware), or from the
.\"O .BR nfs
.\"O script in
.\"O .BR /etc/rc.d/init.d/
.\"O or
.\"O .BR /etc/init.d/
.\"O (on systems with SysV'ish scripts, e.g. RedHat, SuSE, etc).
.B rquotad
デーモンは、通常ブート時に、
.B rc.net
スクリプト (Slackware など、BSD 的なスクリプトのシステム) か、
.B /etc/rc.d/init.d/
または
.B /etc/init.d/
にある
.B nfs
スクリプト (RedHat や SuSE など、SysV 的なスクリプトのシステム)
から起動される。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI "\-p," "" " \-\-port " port
.\"O specify a port for 
.\"O .BR rpc.rquotad 
.\"O to listen on.  By default,
.\"O .BR rpc.rquotad
.\"O will ask
.\"O .BR portmap (8)
.\"O to assign it a port number.  As of this writing, there is not
.\"O a standard port number that 
.\"O .BR portmap
.\"O always or usually assigns.  Specifying
.\"O a port may be useful when implementing a firewall.
.\"nakano (rpc.)rquotad の有無が揺れているな。
.B rpc.rquotad
が listen するポートを指定する。
デフォルトでは
.B rpc.rquotad
は
.BR portmap (8)
にポート番号を割り当ててくれるよう要求する。
このマニュアルの執筆時点では、
.B portmap
が常に割り当てに用いるような、標準的なポート番号はない。
ポートの指定は、ファイアウォールを実装するときに便利だろう。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH TCP_WRAPPERS SUPPORT
.SH TCP_WRAPPERS のサポート
.\"O This
.\"O .BR rpc.rquotad
.\"O version is protected by the
.\"O .BR tcp_wrapper
.\"O library. You have to give the clients access to
.\"O .BR rpc.rquotad
.\"O if they should be allowed to use it. To allow connects from clients of
.\"O the .bar.com domain you could use the following line in /etc/hosts.allow:
この版の
.B rpc.rquotad
は
.B tcp_wrapper
ライブラリによって保護されている。
クライアントからの
.B rpc.rquotad
に対するアクセスが必要なら、
許可するよう設定しなければならない。.bar.com ドメインの
クライアントからのアクセスを許可するには、
/etc/hosts.allow に次のように書けばよい。
.\"O 
.\"O mountd: .bar.com
.\"O 
.\"nakano typo?
.sp
rquotad: .bar.com
.sp
.\"O You have to use the daemon name 
.\"O .BR rquotad
.\"O for the daemon name (even if the binary has a different name).
デーモンの名前は (バイナリのファイル名が異なっていても)
.B rquotad
としなければならない。

.\"O For further information please have a look at the
.\"O .BR tcpd (8)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR hosts_access (5)
.\"O manual pages.
詳細は
.BR tcpd (8)
と
.BR hosts_access (5)
各 man ページを見てほしい。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.BR quota.user ,
.BR quota.group
.\"O -- quota files locate in the file system's root
-- ファイルシステムのルートに置かれる quota ファイル
.PD
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR quota (8),
.BR rpc (3N),
.BR nfs (5),
.BR services (5),
.BR portmap(8),
.BR inetd (8)
