.\"
.\" Original manual page is a part of nfs-server package.
.\" Following is a exerpt from README of version 2.2beta37.
.\" 
.\" 7.  Copyright
.\" 
.\" Much of the code in this package was originally  written  by
.\" Mark Shand, and is placed under the following copyright:
.\" 
.\"    This  software may be used for any purpose provided
.\"    the above  copyright  notice  is  retained.  It  is
.\"    supplied  as  is,  with  no warranties expressed or
.\"    implied.
.\" 
.\" Other code, especially that written by Rick Sladkey and some
.\" replacement routines included from the GNU libc, are covered
.\" by the GNU General Public License, version 2,  or  (at  your
.\" option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" Copyright 1993 Rick Sladkey <jrs@world.std.com>
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed 11 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified for nfs-utils Sun 29 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH SHOWMOUNT 8 "6 October 1993"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O showmount \- show mount information for an NFS server
.SH 名前
showmount \- NFS サーバのマウント情報を表示する。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /usr/sbin/showmount
.B "[\ \-adehv\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-all\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-directories\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-exports\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-help\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-version\ ]"
.B "[\ host\ ]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B showmount
.\"O queries the mount daemon on a remote host for information about
.\"O the state of the NFS server on that machine.  With no options
.\"O .B showmount
.\"O lists the set of clients who are mounting from that host.
.\"O The output from
.\"O .B showmount
.\"O is designed to
.\"O appear as though it were processesed through ``sort -u''.
.B showmout
はリモートホストの mount デーモンに問い合わせ、そのマシンの
NFS サーバの情報について尋ねる。オプションを指定しないと、
.B showmount
はそのホストからマウントを行っているクライアントの一覧を表示する。
.B showmount
の出力は、 ``sort -u'' の作業をしてから表示されるようになっている。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.\"O .BR \-a " or " \-\-all
.BR \-a " または " \-\-all
.\"O List both the client hostname and mounted directory in
.\"O host:dir format.
クライアントのホスト名とマウントされたディレクトリの両方を
host:dir 形式でリストする。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-d " or " \-\-directories
.BR \-d " または " \-\-directories
.\"O List only the directories mounted by some client.
あるクライアントからマウントされているディレクトリだけを表示する。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-e " or " \-\-exports
.BR \-e " または " \-\-exports
.\"O Show the NFS server's export list.
NFS サーバーのエクスポートリストを表示する。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-h " or " \-\-help
.BR \-h " または " \-\-help
.\"O Provide a short help summary.
ヘルプの短い要約を表示する。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-v " or " \-\-version
.BR \-v " または " \-\-version
.\"O Report the current version number of the program.
プログラムの現在のバージョン番号を表示する。
.TP
.\"O .B \-\-no\-headers
.B \-\-no\-headers
.\"O Suppress the descriptive headings from the output.
出力からヘッダ情報を取り去る。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR rpc.mountd (8),
.BR rpc.nfsd (8)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The completeness and accurary of the information that
.\"O .B showmount
.\"O displays varies according to the NFS server's implementation.
.B showmount
が表示する情報の完全性・正確性は、 NFS サーバーの実装に依存する。
.P
.\"O Because
.\"O .B showmount
.\"O sorts and uniqs the output, it is impossible to determine from
.\"O the output whether a client is mounting the same directory more than once.
.B showmount
は出力を uniq, sort するので、クライアントが同じディレクトリを
複数マウントしているかどうかは判別できない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Rick Sladkey <jrs@world.std.com>
