.\"
.\" statd(8)
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1999 Olaf Kirch <okir@monad.swb.de>
.\" Modified by Jeffrey A. Uphoff, 1999, 2002.
.\" Modified by Lon Hohberger, 2000.
.\" Modified by Paul Clements, 2004.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun 29 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Wed 29 Mar 2006 by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH rpc.statd 8 "31 Aug 2004"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O rpc.statd \- NSM status monitor
.SH 名前
rpc.statd \- NSM ステータスモニタ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "/sbin/rpc.statd [-F] [-d] [-?] [-n " name "] [-o " port "] [-p " port "] [-H " prog "] [-V]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O server implements the NSM (Network Status Monitor) RPC protocol.
.\"O This service is somewhat misnomed, since it doesn't actually provide
.\"O active monitoring as one might suspect; instead, NSM implements a
.\"O reboot notification service. It is used by the NFS file locking service,
.\"O .BR rpc.lockd ,
.\"O to implement lock recovery when the NFS server machine crashes and
.\"O reboots.
.\"nakano misnomed は misnamed かな
.B rpc.statd
サーバは NSM (Network Status Monitor) RPC プロトコルを実装したものである。
このサービスは少々名前が適切ではなく、
予想されるようなアクティブなモニタリングを実際に行うわけではない。
実際には NSM はリブート通知サービスを実装したものなのである。
.B rpc.statd
は NFS ファイルロックサービス
.BR rpc.lockd
が利用するもので、
NFS サーバマシンがクラッシュして復帰したときに、
ロックを回復するために用いられる。
.\"O .SS Operation
.SS 動作
.\"O For each NFS client or server machine to be monitored,
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O creates a file in
.\"O .BR /var/lib/nfs/sm .
.\"O When starting, it iterates through these files and notifies the
.\"O peer
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O on those machines.
モニタの対象となる
NFS のクライアントとサーバのマシンそれぞれに対し、
.B rpc.statd
は
.B /var/lib/nfs/sm
にファイルを作る。
起動するとき、
.B rpc.statd
はこれらのファイルを順次調べ、
それら接続先のマシンの
.B rpc.statd
に通知する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -F
.\"O By default,
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O forks and puts itself in the background when started. The
.\"O .B -F
.\"O argument tells it to remain in the foreground. This option is
.\"O mainly for debugging purposes.
デフォルトでは
.B rpc.statd
はフォークしてバックグラウンドに移動してから動作を始める。
.B -F
オプションは、
.B rpc.statd
にフォアグラウンドに留まるよう伝える。
このオプションは主にデバッグのためのものである。
.TP
.B -d
.\"O By default,
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O sends logging messages via
.\"O .BR syslog (3)
.\"O to system log.  The
.\"O .B -d
.\"O argument forces it to log verbose output to
.\"O .B stderr
.\"O instead. This option is mainly for debugging purposes, and may only
.\"O be used in conjunction with the
.\"O .B -F
.\"O parameter.
デフォルトでは
.B rpc.statd
はログメッセージを
.BR syslog (3)
を通してシステムログに送る。
.B -d
オプションは、このログ出力を詳細にし、
.B stderr
に送るよう指示する。
このオプションは主にデバッグのためのものであり、
おそらく
.B -F
と同時にのみ使うことになるだろう。
.TP
.BI "\-n," "" " \-\-name " name 
.\"O specify a name for
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O to use as the local hostname. By default,
.\"O .BR rpc.statd
.\"O will call
.\"O .BR gethostname (2)
.\"O to get the local hostname. Specifying
.\"O a local hostname may be useful for machines with more than one
.\"O interfaces.
.B rpc.statd
がローカルのホスト名として用いる名前を指定する。
デフォルトでは
.B rpc.statd
は
.BR gethostname (2)
を呼んでローカルのホスト名を取得する。
インターフェースが 2 つ以上あるマシンでは、
ローカルのホスト名を指定すると便利かもしれない。
.TP
.BI "\-o," "" " \-\-outgoing\-port "  port
.\"O specify a port for
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O to send outgoing status requests from.  By default,
.\"O .BR rpc.statd
.\"O will ask
.\"O .BR portmap (8)
.\"O to assign it a port number.  As of this writing, there is not
.\"O a standard port number that
.\"O .BR portmap
.\"O always or usually assigns.  Specifying
.\"O a port may be useful when implementing a firewall.
.B rpc.statd
が外向きのステータスリクエストを送信するときに使うポートを指定する。
デフォルトでは
.B rpc.statd
は
.BR portmap (8)
にポート番号を割り当ててくれるよう要求する。
このマニュアルの執筆時点では、
.B portmap
が常に割り当てに用いるような、標準的なポート番号はない。
ポートの指定は、ファイアウォールを実装するときに便利だろう。
.TP
.BI "\-p," "" " \-\-port " port
.\"O specify a port for
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O to listen on.  By default,
.\"O .BR rpc.statd
.\"O will ask
.\"O .BR portmap (8)
.\"O to assign it a port number.  As of this writing, there is not
.\"O a standard port number that
.\"O .BR portmap
.\"O always or usually assigns.  Specifying
.\"O a port may be useful when implementing a firewall.
.B rpc.statd
が listen するポートを指定する。
デフォルトでは
.B rpc.statd
は
.BR portmap (8)
にポート番号を割り当ててくれるよう要求する。
このマニュアルの執筆時点では、
.B portmap
が常に割り当てに用いるような、標準的なポート番号はない。
ポートの指定は、ファイアウォールを実装するときに便利だろう。
.TP
.BI "\-P," "" " \-\-state\-directory\-path "  directory
.\"O specify a directory in which to place statd state information.
.\"O If this option is not specified the default of 
.\"O .BR /var/lib/nfs
.\"O is used.
statd の状態情報を置くディレクトリを指定する。
このオプションが指定されない場合、デフォルトの
.B /var/lib/nfs
が使用される。
.TP
.B -N
.\"O Causes statd to run in the notify-only mode. When started in this mode, the
.\"O statd program will check its state directory, send notifications to any
.\"O monitored nodes, and exit once the notifications have been sent. This mode is
.\"O used to enable Highly Available NFS implementations (i.e. HA-NFS).
statd を通知専用モードで実行させる。
このモードで起動すると、
statd プログラムは状態情報を置くディレクトリをチェックして、
全てのモニタ対象ノードに通知を送信し、通知の送信が完了したら終了する。
このモードは高可用性 (Highly Available) NFS 実装 (つまり HA-NFS) を
有効にするために使用される。
.TP
.BI "\-H, " "" " \-\-ha-callout " prog
.\"O Specify a high availability callout program, which will receive callouts
.\"O for all client monitor and unmonitor requests. This allows
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O to be used in a High Availability NFS (HA-NFS) environment. The
.\"O program will be run with 3 arguments:  The first is either
.\"O .B add-client
.\"O or
.\"O .B del-client
.\"O depending on the reason for the callout.
高可用性コールアウトプログラムを指定する。
このプログラムは全てのクライアントモニタとモニタ終了リクエストに対する
コールアウトを受け取る。
これにより
.B rpc.statd
を高可用性 NFS (HA-NFS) 環境で使用することができる。
このプログラムは 3 つの引き数を付けて実行される。
1 つ目は、
.B add-client
または
.B del-client
であり、コールアウトの理由に依存する。
.\"O The second will be the name of the client.
2 つ目はクライアントの名前である。
.\"O The third will be the name of the server as known to the client.
3 つ目はクライアントに知らせるサーバの名前である。
.TP
.B -?
.\"O Causes
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O to print out command-line help and exit.
コマンドラインヘルプを表示して終了する。
.TP
.B -V
.\"O Causes
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O to print out version information and exit.
バージョン情報を表示して終了する。
.\"O 
.\"O 
.\"O 
.\"O .SH TCP_WRAPPERS SUPPORT
.SH TCP_WRAPPERS のサポート
.\"O This
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O version is protected by the
.\"O .B tcp_wrapper
.\"O library. You have to give the clients access to
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O if they should be allowed to use it. To allow connects from clients of
.\"O the .bar.com domain you could use the following line in /etc/hosts.allow:
この版の
.B rpc.statd
は
.B tcp_wrapper
ライブラリによって保護されている。
クライアントからの
.B rpc.statd
に対するアクセスが必要なら、
許可するよう設定しなければならない。.bar.com ドメインの
クライアントからのアクセスを許可するには、
/etc/hosts.allow に次のように書けばよい。
.\"O 
.sp
statd: .bar.com
.\"O 
.sp
.\"O You have to use the daemon name 
.\"O .B statd
.\"O for the daemon name (even if the binary has a different name).
デーモンの名前は (バイナリのファイル名が異なっていても)
.B statd
としなければならない。

.\"O For further information please have a look at the
.\"O .BR tcpd (8)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR hosts_access (5)
.\"O manual pages.
詳細は man ページ
.BR tcpd (8)
と
.BR hosts_access (5)
を見てほしい。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O .BR SIGUSR1
.\"O causes
.\"O .B rpc.statd
.\"O to re-read the notify list from disk
.\"O and send notifications to clients. This can be used in High Availability NFS
.\"O (HA-NFS) environments to notify clients to reacquire file locks upon takeover
.\"O of an NFS export from another server.
.B SIGUSR1
を送ると、
.B rpc.statd
はディスクから通知リストを読み直して、クライアントに通知を送る。
このシグナルは高可用性 NFS (HA-NFS) 環境において、
他のサーバから NFS エクスポートの引き継ぎを行うときに、
クライアントに通知を行ってファイルロックを再取得するために使用される。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.BR /var/lib/nfs/state
.br
.BR /var/lib/nfs/sm/*
.br
.BR /var/lib/nfs/sm.bak/*
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR rpc.nfsd(8),
.BR portmap(8)
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.br
Jeff Uphoff <juphoff@nrao.edu>
.br
Olaf Kirch <okir@monad.swb.de>
.br
H.J. Lu <hjl@gnu.org>
.br
Lon Hohberger <hohberger@missioncriticallinux.com>
.br
Paul Clements <paul.clements@steeleye.com>
