.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999,2000 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"	$Id: ftpd.8,v 1.4 2001/11/28 03:04:40 jm Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all right reserved,
.\" Translated Wed Jun 27 18:24:25 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.TH FTPD 8 "Jan 10, 1997"
.UC 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ftpd \- Internet File Transfer Protocol server
.SH 名前
ftpd \- インターネットファイル転送プロトコルサーバ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B ftpd
[
.B \-d
] [
.B \-v
] [
.B \-l
] [
.BR \-t
timeout
] [
.BR \-T
maxtimeout
] [
.BR \-a
] [
.BR \-A
] [
.BR \-L
] [
.BR \-i
] [
.BR \-I
] [
.BR \-o
] [
.BR \-p
ctrlport
] [
.BR \-P
dataport
] [
.BR \-q
] [
.BR \-Q
] [
.BR \-r
rootdir
] [
.BR \-s
] [
.BR \-S
] [
.BR \-u
umask
] [
.BR \-V
] [
.BR \-w
] [
.BR \-W
] [
.BR \-X
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I Ftpd
.\"O is the Internet File Transfer Protocol
.\"O server process.  The server uses the TCP protocol
.\"O and listens at the port specified in the ``ftp''
.\"O service specification; see
.\"O .IR services (5).
.\"O .PP
.I ftpd
はインターネットファイル転送プロトコルサーバプロセスである。
サーバはTCP プロトコルを使用し、``ftp'' サービス仕様書
で指定されたポートの接続を待つ。
.IR services (5)
を参照。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O option causes the program to display copyright and version information, then
.\"O terminate.
.\"O .PP
.\"O If the 
.\"O .B \-d
.\"O or 
.\"O .B \-v
.\"O option is specified,
.\"O debugging information is written to the syslog.
.\"O .PP
.B \-V
オプションは著作権とバージョン情報を出力し、終了する。
.PP
.B \-d
もしくは
.B \-v
オプションを指定した場合、
syslog にデバッグ情報を記述する。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O option is specified,
.\"O each ftp session is logged in the syslog.
.\"O .PP
.B \-l
オプションを指定した場合、
各々の ftp セションが syslog に記録される。
.PP
.\"O The ftp server
.\"O will timeout an inactive session after 15 minutes.
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O option is specified,
.\"O the inactivity timeout period will be set to
.\"O .I timeout
.\"O seconds.
ftp サーバは接続してから 15 分後に動作していないセションをタイムアウトにする。
.B \-t
オプションを指定した場合、
動作していない時のタイムアウト期間を
.I timeout
秒で設定する。
.\"O A client may also request a different timeout period;
.\"O the maximum period allowed may be set to
.\"O .I timeout
.\"O seconds with the
.\"O .B \-T
.\"O option.
.\"O The default limit is 2 hours.
.\"O .PP
クライアントは違うタイムアウト期間をも要求することができる。
最大期間は
.B \-t
オプションで指定した場合、
.I timeout
秒を設定することを許可する。
デフォルト制限は 2 時間である。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option is specified, the use of the
.\"O .IR ftpaccess (5)
.\"O configuration file is enabled.
.\"O .PP
.B \-a
オプションが指定された場合、
.IR ftpaccess (5)
の設定ファイルの使用が可能である。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-A
.\"O option is specified, use of the
.\"O .IR ftpaccess (5)
.\"O configuration file is disabled. This is the default.
.\"O .PP
.B \-A
オプションが指定された場合、
.IR ftpaccess (5)
の設定ファイルの使用は不可能である。
これはデフォルトである。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-L
.\"O option is specified, commands sent to the
.\"O .IR ftpd (8)
.\"O server will be logged to the syslog.  The 
.\"O .B \-L
.\"O option is overridden by the use of the
.\"O .IR ftpaccess (5)
.\"O file.  If the 
.\"O .B \-L 
.\"O flag is used, command logging will be on by
.\"O default as soon as the ftp server is invoked.
.\"O This will cause the server to log all USER
.\"O commands, which if a user accidentally enters a
.\"O password for that command instead of the
.\"O username, will cause passwords to be logged via syslog.
.\"O .PP
.B \-L
オプションが指定された場合、
.IR ftpd (8)
サーバに送信されたコマンドは syslog に記録される。
.B \-L
オプションは
.IR ftpaccess (5)
ファイルの設定より優先される。
.B \-L
フラグが使用されると、ftp サーバが起動すると同時に
コマンドのログへの記録はデフォルトの設定になる。
これはすべてのユーザコマンドを記録し、
ユーザが偶然にもコマンドにユーザ名の
かわりにパスワードを入力した場合、
syslog を経由してパスワードが記録される。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O option is specified, files received by the
.\"O .IR ftpd (8)
.\"O server will be logged to the
.\"O .IR xferlog (5).
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O option is overridden by the use of the
.\"O .IR ftpaccess (5)
.\"O file.
.\"O .PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-I
.\"O option disables the use of RFC931 (AUTH/ident) to attempt to determine the
.\"O username on the client.
.\"O .PP
.B \-i
オプションが指定された場合、
.IR ftpd (8)
サーバにより受信したファイルを
.IR xferlog (5)
に記録する。
.B \-i
オプションは
.IR ftpaccess (5)
ファイルの使用よりも優先する。
.PP
.B \-I
オプションはクライアントのユーザ名を決定しようとするための
RFC931 (AUTH/ident) の使用を無効にする。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-o
.\"O option is specified, files transmitted by the
.\"O .IR ftpd (8)
.\"O server will be logged to the 
.\"O .IR xferlog (5).  
.\"O The 
.\"O .B \-o
.\"O option is overridden by the use of the
.\"O .IR ftpaccess (5)
.\"O file.  If the
.\"O .B \-X
.\"O option is specified, the output created by the
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-o
.\"O options is not saved to the xferlog file but saved via syslog
.\"O so you can collect output from several hosts on one central loghost.
.\"O .PP
.B \-o
オプションが指定された場合、
.IR ftpd (8)
サーバが送信したファイルは
.IR xferlog (5)
に記録される。
.B \-o
オプションは
.IR ftpaccess (5)
ファイルの使用より優先させる。
.B \-X
オプションが指定された場合、
.B \-i
及び
.B \-o
オプションで作成された出力は
xferlog ではなく、syslog を経由して記録される、
そこで、いくつかのホストからの出力をひとつの中央ログホストに
集約することができる。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O option is specified, the default umask is set to
.\"O .I umask.
.\"O .PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-W
.\"O option is specified user logins are not recorded in the wtmp file.  The
.\"O default (
.\"O .B \-w
.\"O ) is to record every login and logout.
.\"O .PP
.B \-u
オプションが指定された場合、デフォルト umask は
.I umask
に設定される。
.PP
.B \-W
オプションが指定された場合、ユーザのログインが
wtmp ファイルに記録されなくなる。デフォルト
.B( \-w)
はすべてのログインとログアウトを記録する。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-S
.\"O options place the daemon in standalone operation mode.  The
.\"O .B \-S
.\"O option runs the daemon in the background and is useful in startup scripts
.\"O during system initialization (ie., in rc.local).  The
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O option leaves the daemon in foreground and is useful when running from init
.\"O (ie., /etc/inittab).
.\"O .PP
.B \-s
及び
.B \-S
オプションはスタンドアローンオペレーションモードで
デーモンを位置付ける。
.B \-S
オプションはバックグラウンドでデーモンを実行し、
システムの初期化中 (例 rc.local) の起動スクリプトで役立つ。
.B \-s
オプションはデーモンをフォアグラウンドに出して
init から実行させる時に役立つ。(例、/etc/inittab)
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-P
.\"O options override the port numbers used by the daemon.  Normally, the daemon
.\"O determines the port numbers by looking in /etc/services for "ftp" and "ftp-data".
.\"O If there is no /etc/services entry for "ftp-data" and the
.\"O .B \-P
.\"O option is not specified, the daemon uses the port just prior to the control connection
.\"O port.
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is only available if running as a standalone daemon.
.\"O .PP
.B \-p
及び
.B \-P
オプションはデーモンが使用するポート番号を受け付ける。
通常、デーモンは /etc/services から "ftp" と "ftp-data" を探すことにより
ポート番号を決定する。
もし "ftp-data" が /etc/services になくて、
.B \-P
オプションが指定されなかった場合、
デーモンは制御接続ポートのちょうど前のポートを使用する。
.B \-p
オプションはデーモンをスタンドアローンとして実行する場合のみ
使用可能である。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-q
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-Q
.\"O options deterine whether the daemon uses the PID files.  These files are required by the
.\"O limit directive to determine the number of current users in each access class.  Disabling
.\"O the use of the PID files disables user limits.  The default (
.\"O .B \-q
.\"O ) is to use the PID files.  Specify
.\"O .B \-Q
.\"O when testing the server as a normal user when access permissions prevent the use of the PID files.
.\"O Large, busy sites which do not wish to impose limits on the number of concurrent users may also consider
.\"O disabling the PID files.
.\"O .PP
.B \-q
及び
.B \-Q
オプションはデーモンが PID ファイルを使用するかどうかを決定する。
これらのファイルはそれぞれのアクセスクラスで現在のユーザの数を
決定するための指示的な制限により要求される。
PID ファイルの使用を無効にすると、ユーザ制限が無効になる。デフォルトは
.B (\-q)
PID ファイルを使用する。
アクセス許可が PID の使用を妨げるときに一般ユーザとしてサーバでテストする時に
.B \-Q
を指定する。同時ユーザ数の制限を強いられるのを望まない、大きく、
ビジーなサイトをも PID ファイルを無効にすることを検討可能である。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O option instructs the daemon to chroot(2) to the specified rootdir immedeately upon loading.  This can
.\"O improve system security by limiting the files which may be damaged should a breakin occur through the
.\"O daemon.  Set is much like anonymous FTP, with additional files needed which vary from system to system.
.\"O .PP
.B \-r
オプションはデーモンに対し指定されたルートディレクトリへロードされると
すぐに chroot(2) するように指示する。
これはデーモンを経由して不正進入された場合、破壊される可能性のあるファイルを制限することにより
システムのセキュリティを向上させる。設定は anonymous FTP とほぼ同様に、
システムにより異なる、必要とされる追加ファイルがある。
.PP
.\"O The ftp server currently supports the following ftp
.\"O requests; case is not distinguished.
.\"O .PP
ftp サーバは現在次の ftp 要求をサポートしている。
大文字と小文字の区別はしない。
.PP
.nf
.\"O .ta \w'Request        'u
.\"O \fBRequest	Description\fP
.\"O ABOR	abort previous command
.\"O ACCT	specify account (ignored)
.\"O ALLO	allocate storage (vacuously)
.\"O APPE	append to a file
.\"O CDUP	change to parent of current working directory
.\"O CWD	change working directory
.\"O DELE	delete a file
.\"O HELP	give help information
.\"O LIST	give list files in a directory (``ls -lgA'')
.\"O MKD	make a directory
.\"O MDTM	show last modification time of file
.\"O MODE	specify data transfer \fImode\fP
.\"O NLST	give name list of files in directory 
.\"O NOOP	do nothing
.\"O PASS	specify password
.\"O PASV	prepare for server-to-server transfer
.\"O PORT	specify data connection port
.\"O PWD	print the current working directory
.\"O QUIT	terminate session
.\"O REST	restart incomplete transfer
.\"O RETR	retrieve a file
.\"O RMD	remove a directory
.\"O RNFR	specify rename-from file name
.\"O RNTO	specify rename-to file name
.\"O SITE	non-standard commands (see next section)
.\"O SIZE	return size of file
.\"O STAT	return status of server
.\"O STOR	store a file
.\"O STOU	store a file with a unique name
.\"O STRU	specify data transfer \fIstructure\fP
.\"O SYST	show operating system type of server system
.\"O TYPE	specify data transfer \fItype\fP
.\"O USER	specify user name
.\"O XCUP	change to parent of current working directory (deprecated)
.\"O XCWD	change working directory (deprecated)
.\"O XMKD	make a directory (deprecated)
.\"O XPWD	print the current working directory (deprecated)
.\"O XRMD	remove a directory (deprecated)
.ta \w'リクエスト        'u
\fBリクエスト	説明\fP
ABOR	前のコマンドを中止する
ACCT	アカウントを指定する (無視される)
ALLO	ストレージを割り当てる (意味はない)
APPE	ファイルに追加する
CDUP	現在の作業ディレクトリの親に変更する
CWD		作業ディレクトリを変更する
DELE	ファイルを削除する
HELP	ヘルプ情報を送出する
LIST	ディレクトリ内のファイルのリストを送出する (``ls -lgA'')
MKD		ディレクトリを作成する
MDTM	ファイルの最終更新時間を表示する
MODE	データの転送 \fImode\fP を指定する
NLST	ディレクトリ内のファイルリスト名を送出する 
NOOP	なにもしない
PASS	パスワードを指定する
PASV	サーバ - サーバの転送を準備する 
PORT	指定したデータの接続ポート
PWD		現在の作業ディレクトリを出力する
QUIT	セションを終了する
REST	未完了の転送を再度開始する
RETR	ファイルを取得する
RMD		ディレクトリを削除する
RNFR	リネームされるファイル名を指定する
RNTO	リネームするファイル名を指定する
SITE	非標準コマンド (次節を参照)
SIZE	ファイルサイズを返す
STAT	サーバの状態を返す
STOR	ファイルを蓄積する
STOU	一意名でファイルを蓄積する
STRU	データ転送の \fIstructure\fP を指定する
SYST	サーバシステムのオペレーションシステムの種類を表示する
TYPE	データ転送の \fItype\fP を指定する
USER	ユーザ名を指定する
XCUP	現在の作業ディレクトリの親に変更する (重要ではない)
XCWD	作業ディレクトリを変更する (重要ではない)
XMKD	ディレクトリを作成する (重要ではない)
XPWD	現在の作業の作業ディレクトリを表示する (重要ではない)
XRMD	ディレクトリを削除する (重要ではない)
.fi
.PP
.\"O The following non-standard or UNIX specific commands are supported
.\"O by the SITE request.
次の標準ではない、もしくは UNIX 独自のコマンドが SITE 要求により
サポートされている。
.PP
.nf
.\"O .ta \w'Request        'u
.\"O \fBRequest	Description\fP
.\"O UMASK	change umask. \fIE.g.\fP SITE UMASK 002
.\"O IDLE	set idle-timer. \fIE.g.\fP SITE IDLE 60
.\"O CHMOD	change mode of a file. \fIE.g.\fP SITE CHMOD 755 filename
.\"O HELP	give help information. \fIE.g.\fP SITE HELP
.\"O NEWER	list files newer than a particular date
.\"O MINFO	like SITE NEWER, but gives extra information
.\"O GROUP	request special group access. \fIE.g.\fP SITE GROUP foo
.\"O GPASS	give special group access password. \fIE.g.\fP SITE GPASS bar
.\"O EXEC	execute a program.  \fIE.g.\fP SITE EXEC program params
.\"O .ta \w'Request        'u
.ta \w'リクエスト        'u
\fBリクエスト	説明\fP
UMASK	umask を変更する。\fI例\fP SITE UMASK 002
IDLE	idle-timer を設定する。\fI例\fP SITE IDLE 60
CHMOD	ファイルのモードを変更する。\fI例\fP SITE CHMOD 755 filename
HELP	ヘルプ情報を出力する。\fI例\fP SITE HELP
NEWER	特定の日付より新しいファイルをリストする。
MINFO	SITE NEWER に似ているが、追加情報を出力する。
GROUP	特定のグループのアクセスを要求する。\fI例\fP SITE GROUP foo
GPASS	特定のグループのアクセスパスワードを出力する。\fI例\fP SITE GPASS bar
EXEC	プログラムを実行する。\fI例\fP SITE EXEC program params
.fi
.PP
.\"O The remaining ftp requests specified in Internet RFC 959 are
.\"O recognized, but not implemented.
.\"O MDTM and SIZE are not specified in
.\"O RFC 959, but will appear in the next updated FTP RFC.
.\"O .PP
インターネット RFC 959 で指定された残りの ftp 要求は認識されるが、
実装はされていない。
MDTM 及び SIZE は RFC 959 では指定されないが、次に更新される FTP RFC には
あらわれるだろう。
.PP
.\"O The ftp server will abort an active file transfer only when the
.\"O ABOR command is preceded by a Telnet "Interrupt Process" (IP)
.\"O signal and a Telnet "Synch" signal in the command Telnet stream,
.\"O as described in Internet RFC 959.
.\"O If a STAT command is received during a data transfer, preceded by a Telnet IP
.\"O and Synch, transfer status will be returned.
.\"O .PP
FTP サーバは ABOR コマンドがインターネット RFC 959 に記述されるように
コマンド Telnet ストリームの Telnet "Synch" シグナル及び
Telnet "割り込みプロセス" (IP) シグナルによって前置きされる時にのみ
実行中のファイル転送を中断する。
Telnet IP と Synch の前置きの後に STAT コマンドが
データ転送中に受信した場合、転送状態が返される。
.PP
.\"O .I Ftpd
.\"O interprets file names according to the ``globbing''
.\"O conventions used by
.\"O .IR csh (1).
.\"O This allows users to utilize the metacharacters ``*?[]{}~''.
.\"O .PP
.I ftpd
は
.IR csh (1)
によって使用される ``globbing'' 規則に従ってファイル名を解釈する。
これはユーザがメタ文字 ``*?[]{}~'' を利用することを許可する。
.PP
.\"O .I Ftpd
.\"O authenticates users according to four rules. 
.I Ftpd
は 4 つの規則によりユーザを認証する。
.IP 1)
.\"O The user name must be in the password data base,
.\"O .IR /etc/passwd ,
.\"O or whatever is appropriate for the operating system,
.\"O and the password must not be null.  In this case a password
.\"O must be provided by the client before any file operations
.\"O may be performed.
ユーザ名がパスワードデータベース
.I /etc/passwd
もしくはオペレーティングシステムに適切なものでなければならず、
パスワードはヌル文字であってはならない。この場合、パスワードは
すべてのファイル操作するまえにクライアントによって行わなければ
ならない。
.IP 2)
.\"O The user name must not appear in the file
.\"O .IR /etc/ftpusers .
ユーザ名は
.I /etc/ftpusers
ファイルに存在してはならない。
.IP 3)
.\"O The user must have a standard shell returned by 
.\"O .IR getusershell (3).
ユーザは
.IR getusershell (3)
により返される標準シェルを持っていなければならない。
.IP 4)
.\"O If the user name is ``anonymous'' or ``ftp'', an
.\"O anonymous ftp account must be present in the password
.\"O file (user ``ftp'').  In this case the user is allowed
.\"O to log in by specifying any password (by convention this
.\"O is given as the client host's name).
.\"O .PP
ユーザ名が ``anonymous'' または ``ftp'' の場合、anonymous ftp アカウントは
パスワードファイル（ユーザ ``ftp'' ）に存在していなければならない。
この場合、ユーザは指定するどんなパスワードでもログインすることを
許可される。（規則によりこれはクライアントのホスト名が与えられる）
.PP
.\"O In the last case, 
.\"O .I ftpd
.\"O takes special measures to restrict the client's access privileges.
.\"O The server performs a 
.\"O .IR chroot (2)
.\"O command to the home directory of the ``ftp'' user.
.\"O In order that system security is not breached, it is recommended
.\"O that the ``ftp'' subtree be constructed with care;  the following
.\"O rules are recommended.
最後の場合では、
.I ftpd
はクライアントのアクセス特権を制限するために特別な評価をする。
サーバは
.IR chroot (2)
コマンドを ``ftp'' ユーザのホームディレクトリに実行する。
システムセキュリティが侵害されないようにするために、
``ftp'' サブツリーは注意して構築することを推奨する;
次の規則が推奨される。
.IP ~ftp)
.\"O Make the home directory owned by super-user and unwritable by anyone.
スーパーユーザによりホームディレクトリを作成し
誰からも書き込まれないようにする。
.IP ~ftp/bin)
.\"O Make this directory owned by the super-user and unwritable by
.\"O anyone.  The program
.\"O .IR ls (1)
.\"O must be present to support the list command.  This
.\"O program should have mode 111.
スーパーユーザによりこのディレクトリを作成し
誰からも書き込まれないようにする。プログラム
.IR ls (1)
は list コマンドをサポートするために存在しなければならない。
このプログラムはモード 111 であるべきである。
.IP ~ftp/etc)
.\"O Make this directory owned by the super-user and unwritable by
.\"O anyone.  The files
.\"O .IR passwd (5)
.\"O and
.\"O .IR group (5)
.\"O must be present for the 
.\"O .I ls
.\"O command to be able to produce owner names rather than numbers. Depending
.\"O on the operating system, there may be other required files. Check your
.\"O manual page for the 
.\"O .IR getpwent (3)
.\"O library routine.
スーパーユーザによりこのディレクトリを作成し
誰からも書き込まれないようにする。このファイルは
.IR passwd (5)
及び
.IR group (5)
は ls コマンドが番号の代わりに所有者を表示するように存在しなければならない。
オペレーティングシステム次第で、その他必要なファイルがあることが
あります。
.IR getpwent (3)
ライブラリルーティンのマニュアルページを調べてください。
.\"O The password field in
.\"O .I passwd
.\"O is not used, and should not contain real encrypted passwords.
.\"O These files should be mode 444 and owned by the super-user.
.\"O Don't use the system's /etc/passwd file as the password file or
.\"O the system's /etc/group file as the group file in the ~ftp/etc directory.
.\"O .IP ~ftp/pub)
.\"O Create a subdirectory in ~ftp/pub
.\"O with the appropriate mode (777 or 733) if you want to allow normal
.\"O users to upload files.
.\"O .PP
.I passwd
のパスワードフィールドは使用されず、本物の暗号化されたパスワードが
含まれるべきではない。これらのファイルはモード 444 でスーパーユーザに
所有されるべきである。パスワードファイルとしてシステムの
/etc/passwd ファイルを使用したり、システムの /etc/group ファイルを
group ファイルとして ~ftp/etc ディレクトリで使用するべきではない。
.PP
.\"O .SH AUTHENTICATION MECHANISM ON BSD/OS SYSTEMS ONLY
.SH BSD/OS システム専用の認証メカニズム
.\"O The authentication mechanism used by ftpd is determined by
.\"O the ``auth-ftp'' entry in the
.\"O .IR /etc/login.conf
.\"O file
.\"O (see
.\"O .IR login.conf (5))
.\"O that matches the users class.
ftpd によって使用される認証メカニズムは、ユーザの class と一致する
.IR /etc/login.conf
ファイル
.IR （ login.conf (5)
を参照)の ``auth-ftp'' エントリによって決定される。
.\"O If there is no ``auth-ftp'' entry for the class, the normal ``auth'' entry
.\"O will be used instead.
.\"O An alternate authentication mechanism may be specified by
.\"O appending a colon (``:'') followed by the authentication
.\"O style, i.e. ``joe:skey''.
classに ``auth-ftp'' エントリが存在しない場合、通常の ``auth'' エントリが
代わりに使用される。
代わりの認証メカニズムはコロン (``:'') を追加し、次に認証スタイルを
追加することにより指定することが可能である。例えば ``joe:skey'' のようになる。
.\"O .SH GENERAL FTP EXTENSIONS
.SH 一般的な FTP 拡張
.PP
.\"O There are some extensions to the FTP server such that if the user
.\"O specifies a filename (when using a RETRIEVE command) such that:
.\"O .PP
ユーザがファイル名 (RETRIEVE コマンドを使用するとき) を指定する場合の
FTP サーバへのいくつかの拡張がある:
.PP
.nf
.\"O  True Filename  Specified Filename  Action
.\"O  -------------  ------------------  -----------------------------------
.\"O  <filename>.Z   <filename>          Decompress file before transmitting
.\"O  <filename>     <filename>.Z        Compress <filename> before 
.\"O                                             transmitting
.\"O  <filename>     <filename>.tar      Tar <filename> before transmitting
.\"O  <filename>     <filename>.tar.Z    Tar and compress <filename> before
.\"O                                             transmitting
 実ファイル名   指定ファイル名      動作
 -------------  ------------------  -----------------------------------
 <filename>.Z   <filename>          転送前にファイルを解凍する
 <filename>     <filename>.Z        転送前に<filename>を圧縮する 
 <filename>     <filename>.tar      転送前に<filename>を tar する 
 <filename>     <filename>.tar.Z    転送前に<filename>を tar して圧縮する
.fi
.PP
.\"O Also, the FTP server will attempt to check for valid e-mail addresses and
.\"O chide the user if he doesn't pass the test.  For users whose FTP client
.\"O will hang on "long replies" (i.e. multiline responses), using a dash as
.\"O the first character of the password will disable the server's lreply()
.\"O function.
.\"O .PP
また、FTP サーバは正式な電子メールアドレスをチェックし、
チェックが通らなかったらユーザに警告する。
ユーザの FTP クライアントが「長い応答文」（つまり、複数行の応答）で
応答しなくなってしまう場合は、パスワードの最初の文字にダッシュを
使用するとサーバの lreply() 関数を無効にする。
.\"O The FTP server can also log all file transmission and reception,
.\"O keeping the following information for each file transmission that takes
.\"O place.
.\"O .PP
FTP サーバはすべてのファイルの送信と受信を記録することもでき、
各々のファイル転送で発生する次の情報を保持する。
.PP
.nf
Mon Dec  3 18:52:41 1990 1 wuarchive.wustl.edu 568881 /files.lst.Z a _ o a chris@wugate.wustl.edu ftp 0 *

  %.24s %d %s %d %s %c %s %c %c %s %s %d %s
    1   2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10 11 12 13

.\"O   1 current time in the form DDD MMM dd hh:mm:ss YYYY
.\"O   2 transfer time in seconds
.\"O   3 remote host name
.\"O   4 file size in bytes
.\"O   5 name of file
.\"O   6 transfer type (a>scii, b>inary)
.\"O   7 special action flags (concatenated as needed):
.\"O         C   file was compressed
.\"O         U   file was uncompressed
.\"O         T   file was tar'ed
.\"O         _   no action taken
.\"O   8 file was sent to user (o>utgoing) or received from 
.\"O     user (i>ncoming)
.\"O   9 accessed anonymously (r>eal, a>nonymous, g>uest) -- mostly for FTP
.\"O  10 local username or, if guest, ID string given 
.\"O     (anonymous FTP password)
.\"O  11 service name ('ftp', other)
.\"O  12 authentication method (bitmask)
.\"O         0   none
.\"O         1   RFC931 Authentication
.\"O  13 authenticated user id (if available, '*' otherwise)
  1 DDD MMM dd hh:mm:ss YYYY 形式の現在時刻
  2 秒単位の転送時間
  3 リモートホスト名
  4 バイト単位のファイルサイズ
  5 ファイル名
  6 転送の種類 (a>scii, b>inary)
  7 特別の動作のフラグ (必要に応じて連結する):
        C   ファイルは圧縮された
        U   ファイルは解凍された
        T   ファイルは tar された
        _   なにもされなかった
  8 ファイルはユーザに送信された (o>utgoing),
  　またはユーザから受信した (i>ncoming)
  9 匿名でアクセスされた (r>eal, a>nonymous, g>uest) -- 主に FTP のため
 10 ローカルユーザ名または、ゲストであれば、与えられた ID 文字列
    (anonymous FTP password)
 11 サービス名 ('ftp', その他)
 12 認証メソッド (bitmask)
        0   なし
        1   RFC931 認証
 13 認証されたユーザ ID (可能な場合、そうでなければ '*')
.fi
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ftp(1) ,
.BR getusershell(3) ,
.BR syslogd(8) ,
.BR ftpaccess(5) ,
.BR xferlog(5) ,
.BR umask(2)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The anonymous account is inherently dangerous and should
.\"O avoided when possible.
.\"O .PP
anonymous アカウントは本質的に危険であり
可能であれば避けるべきである。
.PP
.\"O The server must run as the super-user
.\"O to create sockets with privileged port numbers.  It maintains
.\"O an effective user id of the logged in user, reverting to
.\"O the super-user only when binding addresses to sockets.  The
.\"O possible security holes have been extensively
.\"O scrutinized, but are possibly incomplete.
.\"O 
.\"O 
サーバは特権のあるポート番号でソケットを作成するために
スーパーユーザとして実行しなければならない。アドレスを
ソケットにバインドする時にのみスーパーユーザに復帰し、
ログインした有効なユーザ ID を保持する。可能性のある
セキュリティホールは可能な限り調査したが、完全でない可能性
がある。
