.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999,2000 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"     $Id: ftprestart.8,v 1.2 2001/05/22 09:04:14 jm Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed May 16 16:27:34 JST 2001
.\     by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.\"
.TH ftprestart 8
.\"O .SH Name
.\"O ftprestart \- restart previously shutdown ftp servers
.SH 名前
ftprestart \- 前回シャットダウンしたftpサーバを再起動させる
.\"O .SH Syntax
.\"O .B ftprestart
.\"O [
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O ]
.\"O .PP
.\"O The
.\"O .PN ftprestart
.\"O command
.\"O provides an automated way to restart previously shutdown ftp servers.
.\"O .PN ftprestart
.\"O is used when you are ready to re-enable your FTP server. It does the opposite of 
.\"O ftpshut and removes shutdown message files that were created by ftpshut. It will 
.\"O remove the system-wide shutdown message file as well as the shutdown message files 
.\"O in the anonymous ftp areas and any virtual ftp server areas. 
.\"O .PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O option causes the program to display copyright and version information, then
.\"O terminate.
.\"O 
.SH 書式
.B ftprestart
[
.B \-V
]
.PP
.PN ftprestart
コマンド
は以前にシャットダウンしたftpサーバを
自動的に再起動する。
.PN ftprestart
はFTPサーバが再作動する準備ができた時に使用する。
ftpshutと反対のことを行い、ftpshutにより作成された
シャットダウンメッセージファイルを削除する。
ftprestartはanonymous ftp領域と仮想ftpサーバ領域の
シャットダウンメッセージファイルと同様にシステム
全体のシャットダウンメッセージファイルを削除する。
.PP
.B \-V
オプションはプログラムに著作権とバージョン情報を
表示し、終了させる。

.\"O .SH Sample Output
.\"O .PP
.\"O   ftprestart: /servers/some.domain/ftp/etc/shutmsg removed. 
.\"O   ftprestart: /servers/other.domain/ftp/etc/shutmsg removed. 
.\"O   ftprestart: /etc/shutmsg removed. 
.\"O 
.SH 出力例
.PP
  ftprestart: /servers/some.domain/ftp/etc/shutmsg removed. 
  ftprestart: /servers/other.domain/ftp/etc/shutmsg removed. 
  ftprestart: /etc/shutmsg removed. 

.\"O .SH See Also
.\"O shutdown(1), ftpshut(8), ftpaccess(5)
.\"O 
.\"O 
.SH 関連項目
shutdown(1), ftpshut(8), ftpaccess(5)
