.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999,2000 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"     $Id: ftpshut.8,v 1.2 2001/07/04 03:04:25 jm Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"  all right reserved,
.\" Translated Tue Jun 26 09:07:13 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.\"
.\"
.TH ftpshut 8
.\"O .SH Name
.\"O ftpshut \- close down the ftp servers at a given time
.SH 名前
ftpshut \- 指定した時刻にftpサーバを終了する
.\"O .SH Syntax
.\"O .B ftpshut
.\"O [
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O ] [
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O min] [
.\"O .B \-d
.\"O min]
.\"O .I time [ warning-message ... ]
.SH 書式
.B ftpshut
[
.B \-V
] [
.B \-l
min] [
.B \-d
min]
.I time [ warning-message ... ]
.\"O .SH Description
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B ftpshut
.\"O command
.\"O provides an automated shutdown procedure that a superuser
.\"O can use to notify ftp users
.\"O when the ftp server is shutting down.
.\"O .PP
.B ftpshut
コマンドはftp サーバのシャットダウンを自動化する機能を提供する。
ftp サーバのシャットをシャットダウンする時に、スーパユーザは
このコマンドを使ってユーザに通知を行うことができる。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O option causes the program to display copyright and version information, then
.\"O terminate.
.\"O .PP
.B \-V
オプションは著作権とバージョン情報を表示し、終了する。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I time
.\"O is the time at which
.\"O .B ftpshut
.\"O will bring the ftp servers down. 
.\"O It may be the word
.\"O `now',
.\"O indicating an immediate shutdown,
.\"O or specify a future time in one of two formats:
.\"O .I + number
.\"O or
.\"O .I HHMM.
.\"O The first form brings the ftp servers down in
.\"O .I number
.\"O minutes.
.\"O The second brings the ftp servers down at the time of day indicated,
.\"O using a 24\-hour clock format.
.\"O .PP
.B ftpshut
がftp サーバをシャットダウンする時刻である。
.I time
には、すぐにシャットダウンすることを表す`now'、
または未来の時刻を指定する。未来の時刻は、
.I + number
もしくは
.I HHMM。
のいずれかの形式で指定する。
一番目の形式は
.I number
分後にftp サーバをシャットダウンする。
二番目の形式は
24時間形式を使用して指定した時刻に
ftp サーバをシャットダウンする。
.PP
.\"O Ten minutes before shutdown, or immediately if
.\"O .B ftpshut
.\"O is timed for less than ten minutes, new ftp
.\"O access will be disabled.  This time may be 
.\"O adjusted through the -l flag.
.\"O .PP
シャットダウンの10分前になると、
新規のftp アクセスを無効にする。
.B ftpshut
が設定された場合には、設定が行われた直後から
新規のアクセスを無効になる。
この時間は -l フラグで調整することができる。
.PP
.\"O Five minutes before shutdown, or immediately if
.\"O .B ftpshut
.\"O is timed for less than five minutes, all
.\"O current ftp connections will be disconnected.
.\"O This time may be adjusted through the -d flag.
.\"O .PP
シャットダウンの5分前になると、すべての
接続中の ftp コネクションを切断する。
.B ftpshut
が5分以内に設定されている場合、
すぐに切断が行われる。
この時間は-d フラグで調整することができる。
.PP
.\"O The 
.\"O .I [ warning-message ... ]
.\"O will be formatted to be 75 characters wide.
.\"O .B ftpshut
.\"O knows about the actual string length of
.\"O the magic cookies.
.\"O .PP
.I [ warning-message ... ]
は75文字幅にフォーマットされる。
.B ftpshut
は magic cookie の実際の長さを知る。
.PP
.\"O Running this command will create a file that the server will use to
.\"O determine when to shutdown. Once the shutdown has occured, the server
.\"O will continue to refuse connections until this file is removed. The location
.\"O of this file is specified by the 
.\"O .I shutdown
.\"O stanza in the 
.\"O .B ftpaccess
.\"O file.
.\"O .PP
このコマンドを実行すると、サーバがシャットダウンする時刻を決定するために
使用するファイルを作成する。
一度シャットダウンが行われると、このファイルが削除されるまでサーバは
接続を拒否し続ける。このファイルの位置は
.B ftpaccess
ファイルの
.I shutdown
節に明記されている。
.\"O The following magic cookies are available:
.\"O .nf
.\"O .ta \w'Request        'u
.\"O     \fBCookie      Description\fP
.\"O       %s      time system is going to shut down
.\"O       %r      time new connections will be denied
.\"O       %d      time current connections will be dropped
.\"O       %C      current working directory
.\"O       %E      the maintainer's email address as defined in ftpaccess
.\"O       %F      free space in partition of CWD (kbytes)
.\"O               [not currently supported on all systems]
.\"O       %L      local host name
.\"O       %M      maximum allowed number of users in this class
.\"O       %N      current number of users in this class
.\"O       %R      remote host name
.\"O       %T      local time (form Thu Nov 15 17:12:42 1990)
.\"O       %U      username given at login time
.\"O .fi
次の magic cookie が利用可能である:
.nf
.ta \w'Request        'u
    \fBCookie      説明\fP
      %s      システムがシャットダウンする時刻
      %r      新規の接続が拒否される時間
      %d      現在の接続が中断される時間
      %C      現在の作業ディレクトリ
      %E      ftpaccessに定義されている管理者の電子メールアドレス
      %F      CWDのパーティションの空き容量 (kbytes)
              [全てのシステムで現在サポートされているわけではない]
      %L      ローカルホスト名
      %M      この class の最大許容ユーザ数
      %N      この class の現在のユーザ数
      %R      リモートホスト名
      %T      地域時間 (Thu Nov 15 17:12:42 1990 形式)
      %U      ログイン時に与えられたユーザ名
.fi
.\"O .SH Restrictions
.\"O You can kill the servers only between now and 23:59, if
.\"O you use the absolute time.
.SH 制限
絶対時間(HHMM形式)を使用する場合、指定可能なシャットダウン時刻は
now から23:59までの間だけである。
.\"O .SH See Also
.SH 関連項目
.BR shutdown(1) , 
.BR ftpaccess(5) ,
.BR ftprestart(8)
.\"O 
.\"O
