.\" @(#)mpg123.1 0.01 21-Apr-1997 OF; from mpg123 archive
.\"
.\" Translated Wed Aug 18 22:36:46 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH mpg123 1 "21 Apr 1997"
.\"0 .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"0 mpg123 \- play audio MPEG 1.0/2.0 file (layers 1, 2 and 3)
mpg123 \- MPEG 1.0/2.0 形式のオーディオファイルの演奏 (レイヤ 1, 2, 3 対応)
.\"0 .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mpg123
[
.B \-tscvqy01m24
]
[
.BI \-b " size"
]
[
.BI \-k " num"
]
[
.BI \-n " num"
]
[
.BI \-f " factor"
]
[
.BI \-r " rate"
]
[
.BI \-g " gain"
]
[
.BI \-a " dev"
]
[
.BR "\-o s" " | " "\-o h" " | " "\-o l"
]
[
.BI \-d " n"
]
[
.BI \-h " n"
]
[
.BI \-p " proxy"
]
[
.BI \-@ " file"
]
.IR file " ... | " URL " ... | "
.B \-
.\"0 .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"0 .B mpg123
.\"0 reads one or more
.\"0 .IR file\^ s
.\"0 (or standard input if ``\-'' is specified) or
.\"0 .IR URL\^ s
.\"0 and plays them on the audio device (default) or
.\"0 outputs them to stdout.
.\"0 .IR file\^ / URL
.\"0 is assumed to be an MPEG-1/2 audio bit stream.
.B mpg123
は
.IR file
や
.IR URL
を読み込み(いずれも複数指定可。また``\-'' を指定すると標準入力から読
み込みます)、これらをオーディオデバイスで演奏するか(デフォルトの動作)、
標準出力に出力します。
.IR file\^ / URL
は MPEG-1/2 のオーディオビットストリームであるものとします。
.\"0 .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"0 .B mpg123
.\"0 options may be either the traditional POSIX one letter options,
.\"0 or the GNU style long options.  POSIX style options start with a
.\"0 single ``\-'', while GNU long options start with ``\-\^\-''.
.B mpg123
のオプションは、伝統的な POSIX 形式でも GNU 形式の長いオプション名でも
指定できます。POSIX 形式のオプションは ``\-'' で始まり、GNU 形式の
オプションは ``\-\^\-'' で始まります。
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\^\-test
.\"0 Test mode.  The audio stream is decoded, but no output occurs.
テストモード。オーディオストリームをデコードしますが、出力は行いません。
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\^\-stdout
.\"0 The decoded audio samples are written to standard output,
.\"0 instead of playing them through the audio device.  This
.\"0 option must be used if your audio hardware is not supported
.\"0 by
.\"0 .BR mpg123 .
.\"0 The output format is raw (headerless) linear PCM audio data,
.\"0 16 bit, stereo, host byte order.
デコードしたオーディオのサンプル音を標準出力に出力します。
オーディオデバイスを使った演奏は行いません。
お使いのハードウェアが
.BR mpg123
でサポートされていなければ、このオプションを使わなければなりません。
出力フォーマットは raw (ヘッダ無し)形式、16 ビット、ステレオの PCM オー
ディオデータであり、そのバイト順はホストに従います。
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\^\-check
.\"0 Check for filter range violations, and report them for each frame
.\"0 if any occur.
フィルタレンジの違反をチェックし、これが起こるとフレームごとに報告しま
す。
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\^\-verbose
.\"0 Increase the verbosity level.  For example, displays the frame
.\"0 numbers during decoding.
詳しいメッセージを出力するようにします。例えば、デコード中に
フレーム番号を表示します。
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\^\-quiet
.\"0 Quiet.  Suppress diagnostic messages.
静かに動作するようにします。診断メッセージを表示しなくなります。
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\^\-resync
.\"0 Try to resync and continue decoding if an error occurs in
.\"0 the input file.  Also try to recover from certain broken
.\"0 headers.  Useful if you have a broken MPEG file, on which
.\"0 .B mpg123
.\"0 normally gives up saying `Illegal header'.  Be careful:
.\"0 Broken locations in MPEG files might cause sharp, loud pops or
.\"0 clicks, which might damage your speakers if played too loud.
入力ファイルでエラーが起きた場合に、再び同期を取ってデコートを継続しよ
うと試みます。ヘッダが特定の壊れ方をしている場合にも回復を試みます。
このオプションは、
.B mpg123
が通常 `Illegal header' と表示して処理をあきらめる壊れた MPEG ファイル
がある場合に役に立ちます。ただし、このオプションは慎重に使ってください。
MPEG ファイルに壊れた位置情報があると鋭い音や激しい音が鳴ることがある
ので、ボリュームが大きすぎるとスピーカーを傷めてしまうかもしれません。
.TP
.BR \-0 ", " \-\^\-single0 "; " \-1 ", " \-\^\-single1
.\"0 Decode only channel 0 (left) or channel 1 (right),
.\"0 respectively.  These options are available for
.\"0 stereo MPEG streams only.
チャンネル 0 (左)またはチャンネル 1 (右)だけをデコードします。
これらのオプションが使えるのは、ステレオの MPEG ストリームの場合だけで
す。
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\^\-singlemix
.\"0 Mix both channels.  This option is available for
.\"0 stereo MPEG layer-3 streams only.  It takes less
.\"0 CPU time than full stereo decoding.
両方のチャンネルを合成します。このオプションが使えるのは、ステレオの 
MPEG レイヤ-3 ストリームの場合だけです。CPU に負荷がかかる負荷は
フルステレオでデコードするよりも小さくなります。
.TP
.BR \-2 ", " \-\^\-2to1 "; " \-4 ", " \-\^\-4to1
.\"0 Performs a downsampling of ratio 2:1 (22 kHz) or 4:1 (11 kHz) 
.\"0 on the output stream, respectively. Saves some CPU cycles, but 
.\"0 at least the 4:1 ratio sounds ugly.
2:1 (22kHz) または 4:1 (11kHz) の割合で出力ストリームの
ダウンサンプリングを行います。CPU の負担は小さくなりますが、少なくとも 
4:1 のダウンサンプリングを行うとまともに聞けない音になります。
.TP
\fB\-b \fIsize\fR, \fB\-\^\-buffer \fIsize
.\"0 Use an audio output buffer of
.\"0 .I size
.\"0 Kbytes.  This is useful to bypass short periods of heavy
.\"0 system activity, which would normally cause the audio output 
.\"0 to be interrupted.  
オーディオの出力バッファを
.I size
K バイト使用します。これは一時的にシステム動作が重くなった時の影響を回
避する際に便利です。というのも、このような状況ではオーディオ出力に割り
込みが入ることが通常だからです。
.\"0 You should specify a buffer size of at least 1024 
.\"0 (i.e. 1 Mb, which equals about 6 seconds of audio data) or more; 
.\"0 less than about 300 does not make much sense.  The default is 0, 
.\"0 which turns buffering off.
バッファのサイズには少なくとも 1024 (つまり 1MB。これは 6 秒分のオーディ
オデータに相当します)を指定すべきです。300 以下だとほとんど意味があり
ません。
デフォルト値は 0 (バッファリングが無効)です。
.TP
\fB\-k \fInum\fR, \fB\-\^\-skip \fInum
.\"0 Skip first
.\"0 .I num
.\"0 frames.  By default the decoding starts at the first frame.
最初の
.I num
フレームを飛ばします。デフォルトではデコードは最初のフレームから行われ
ます。
.TP
\fB\-n \fInum\fR, \fB\-\^\-frames \fInum
.\"0 Decode only
.\"0 .I num
.\"0 frames.  By default the complete stream is decoded.
.I num
フレームだけをデコードします。デフォルトでは、フレーム全てをデコードし
ます。
.TP
\fB\-f \fIfactor\fR, \fB\-\^\-scale \fIfactor
.\"0 Change scale factor (default: 32768).
スケール係数を変更します(デフォルト値は 32768)。
.TP
\fB\-r \fIrate\fR, \fB\-\^\-rate \fIrate
.\"0 Set sample rate (default: automatic).  You may want to
.\"0 change this if you need a constant bitrate independed of
.\"0 the mpeg stream rate. mpg123 automagically converts the
.\"0 rate. You should then combine this with \-\-stereo or \-\-mono.
サンプリングレートを設定します(デフォルトでは自動設定)。MPEG の
ストリームレートとは独立の固定のビットレートが必要ならば、この設定を変
更するとよいでしょう。mpg123 は自動的にレートを変換します。
このオプションは \-\-stereo または \-\-mono と組み合わせるべきでしょう。

.TP
\fB\-g \fIgain\fR, \fB\-\^\-gain \fIgain
.\"0 Set audio hardware output gain (default: don't change).
オーディオハードウェアの出力ゲインを設定します
(デフォルトでは変更を行いません)。
.TP
\fB\-a \fIdev\fR, \fB\-\^\-audiodevice \fIdev
.\"0 Specify the audio device to use.  The default is
.\"0 system-dependent (usually /dev/audio or /dev/dsp).
.\"0 Use this option if you have multiple audio devices and
.\"0 the default is not what you want.
使用するオーディオデバイスを指定します。デフォルト値はシステム依存です
(普通は /dev/audio または /dev/dsp)。複数のオーディオデバイスがあり、
デフォルトのデバイスを使いたくない場合にこのオプションを使ってください。
.TP
.BR "\-o s" ", " \-\^\-speaker
.\"0 Direct audio output to the speaker.
オーディオ出力をスピーカーに送ります。
.TP
.BR "\-o h" ", " \-\^\-headphones
.\"0 Direct audio output to the headphone connector.
オーディオ出力をヘッドフォン端子に送ります。
.TP
.BR "\-o l" ", " \-\^\-lineout
.\"0 Direct audio output to the line-out connector.
オーディオ出力をラインアウト端子に送ります。
.TP
\fB\-d \fIn\fR, \fB\-\^\-doublespeed \fIn
.\"0 Only play every
.\"0 .IR n 'th
.\"0 frame.  This will cause the MPEG stream
.\"0 to be played
.\"0 .I n
.\"0 times faster, which can be used for special
.\"0 effects.  Can also be combined with the
.\"0 .B \-\^\-halfspeed
.\"0 option to play 3 out of 4 frames etc.  Don't expect great
.\"0 sound quality when using this option.
.IR n
フレームおきにしか再生を行いません。これにより MPEG ストリームの再生は
.I n
倍速になり、特殊な効果を出すことができます。
.B \-\^\-halfspeed
オプションと組み合わせて 4 フレーム中の 3 フレームを演奏するといったこ
ともできます。ただし、このオプションを使う時は音質には期待しないでくだ
さい。
.TP
\fB\-h \fIn\fR, \fB\-\^\-halfspeed \fIn
.\"0 Play each frame
.\"0 .I n
.\"0 times.  This will cause the MPEG stream
.\"0 to be played at
.\"0 .RI 1 / n 'th
.\"0 speed (n times slower), which can be
.\"0 used for special effects. Can also be combined with the
.\"0 .B \-\^\-doublespeed
.\"0 option to double every third frame or things like that.
各フレームを
.I n
回演奏します。これにより、MPEG ストリームの再生速度は
.IR 1 / n
になります(n 倍遅くなります)。これを使って特殊な効果を出すことができま
す。
.B \-\^\-doublespeed
オプションと組み合わせて 3 つごとのフレームの長さを倍にするといったこ
とが可能です。
.\"0 Don't expect great sound quality when using this option.
ただし、このオプションを使う時は音質には期待しないでください。
.TP
\fB\-p \fIURL \fR| \fBnone\fR, \fB\-\^\-proxy \fIURL \fR| \fBnone
.\"0 The specified
.\"0 .I proxy
.\"0 will be used for HTTP requests.  It
.\"0 should be specified as full URL (``http://host.domain:port/''),
.\"0 but the ``http://'' prefix, the port number and the trailing
.\"0 slash are optional (the default port is 80).  Specifying
.\"0 .B none
.\"0 means not to use any proxy, and to retrieve files directly
.\"0 from the respective servers.  See also the
.\"0 ``HTTP SUPPORT'' section.
HTTP のリクエストの際に、指定された
.I proxy
を用います。
これは完全な URL (``http://ホスト名.ドメイン:ポート番号/'' の形式)で指
定しなければなりませんが、``http://'' プレフィックスとポート番号、最後
のスラッシュは省略してもかまいません(ポート番号のデフォルト値は 80)。
.B none
を指定すると、プロキシを使わずにそれぞれのサーバから直接ファイルを取得
します。``HTTP のサポート'' セクションも参照してください。
.TP
\fB\-u \fIauth\fR, \fB\-\^\-auth \fIauth
.\"0 HTTP authentication to use when recieving files via HTTP.
.\"0 The format used is user:password.
HTTP 経由でファイルを取得する際に用いる HTTP 認証を指定します。
指定は「ユーザ名:パスワード」の形式で行います。
.TP
\fB\-@ \fIfile\fR, \fB\-\^\-list \fIfile
.\"0 Read filenames and/or URLs of MPEG audio streams from the specified
.\"0 .I file
.\"0 in addition to the ones specified on the command line (if any).
コマンドラインで指定したファイルまたは URL (もしあれば)に加え、
.I file
に記述されているファイルや URL のオーディオストリームを読み込みます。
.\"0 Note that
.\"0 .I file
.\"0 can be either an ordinary file, a dash ``\-'' to indicate that
.\"0 a list of filenames/URLs is to be read from the standard input,
.\"0 or an URL pointing to a an appropriate list file.  Note: only
.\"0 one
.\"0 .B \-@
.\"0 option can be used (if more than one is specified, only the
.\"0 last one will be recognized).
.I file
は通常ファイルでも適切なリストファイルを指す URL でも構いませんし、
ファイル名や URL のリストを標準入力から読み込むことを示す ``\-'' を指
定することもできます。
注意:
.B \-@ 
オプションは 1 回しか指定することができません(複数回指定すると、最後に
行った指定だけが認識されます)。
.TP
.BR \-z ", " \-\^\-shuffle
.\"0 Shuffle play.  Randomly shuffles the files specified on the command line
.\"0 and in the list file.
シャッフル演奏を行います。コマンドラインとリストファイルで指定された
ファイルをランダムにシャッフルします。
.TP
.BR \-\-stereo
.\"0 Force stereo output
強制的にステレオ出力にします。
.TP
.BR \-\-reopen
.\"0 Forces reopen of the audiodevice after ever song
1 曲ごとにオーディオデバイスをオープンし直します。
.TP
.BR \-\-8bit
.\"0 Forces 8bit output
強制的に 8 ビット出力にします。
.TP
.BR \-Z ", " \-\-random
.\"0 Full random play
完全にランダムな演奏を行います。
.\"0 .SH OPERANDS
.SH オペランド
.\"0 The following operands are supported:
.B mpg123
は以下のオペランドをサポートしています:
.TP 8
.\"0 .IR file (s)
.IR file (複数可)
.\"0 The path name(s) of one or more input files.  They must be
.\"0 valid MPEG-1/2 audio layer-1, -2 or -3 bit streams.
入力ファイルのパス名(複数個指定することもできます)。これは
MPEG-1/2 オーディオのレイヤ-1, 2, 3 の正しいビットストリームでなければ
なりません。
.\"0 If a dash ``\-'' is specified, MPEG data will
.\"0 be read from the standard input.  Furthermore, any name
.\"0 starting with ``http://'' is recognized as
.\"0 .I URL
.\"0 (see next section).
``\-'' を指定すると MPEG データは標準入力から読み込まれます。また、
``http://'' で始まる名前は全て
.I URL
として認識されます(次のセクションを参照してください)。
.\"0 .SH HTTP SUPPORT
.SH HTTP のサポート
.\"0 In addition to reading MPEG audio streams from ordinary
.\"0 files and from the standard input,
.\"0 .B mpg123
.\"0 supports retrieval of MPEG audio files via the HTTP protocol, 
.\"0 which is used in the World Wide Web (WWW).  Such files are
.\"0 specified using a so-called URL (universal resource
.\"0 location), which starts with ``http://''.  When a file with
.\"0 that prefix is encountered,
.\"0 .B mpg123
.\"0 attempts to open an HTTP connection to the server in order to
.\"0 retrieve that file to decode and play it.
.B mpg123
は通常ファイルや標準入力から MPEG オーディオストリームを読み込むだけで
なく、HTTP プロトコル経由での MPEG オーディオファイルの取得もサポート
しています。このプロトコルは World Wide Web (WWW)で使われています。こ
のようなファイルはいわゆる URL (Universal Resource Locator) を用いて指
定します。URL は ``http://'' で始まります。このプレフィックスを持つ
ファイルがあると、
.B mpg123
はこのファイルを取得してデコードおよび再生を行うために、サーバに対する
HTTP 接続をオープンしようとします。
.P
.\"0 It is often useful to retrieve files through a WWW cache or
.\"0 so-called proxy.  To accomplish this,
.\"0 .B mpg123
.\"0 examines the environment for variables named
.\"0 .BR MP3_HTTP_PROXY ", " http_proxy " and " HTTP_PROXY ,
.\"0 in this order.  The value of the first one that is set will
.\"0 be used as proxy specification.  To override this, you can
.\"0 use the
.\"0 .B \-p
.\"0 command line option (see the ``OPTIONS'' section).  Specifying
.\"0 .B "\-p none"
.\"0 will enforce contacting the server directly without using
.\"0 any proxy, even if one of the above environment variables
.\"0 is set.
WWW のキャッシュ、つまりいわゆるプロキシを通してファイルを取得すると便
利なこともよくあります。これを行うために、
.B mpg123
は環境変数
.BR MP3_HTTP_PROXY ", " http_proxy ", " HTTP_PROXY 
をここに挙げた順番で調べます。設定されている最初の変数の値がプロキシの
指定として使われます。これを上書きするには、コマンドラインオプションの
.B \-p
を用います(``オプション'' セクションを参照)。
.B "\-p none"
を指定すると、たとえ先に述べた環境変数が設定されていても、プロキシを全
く使わずに直接サーバと接続します。
.P
.\"0 Note that, in order to play MPEG audio files from a WWW
.\"0 server, it is necessary that the connection to that server
.\"0 is fast enough.  For example, a 128 kbit/s MPEG file
.\"0 requires the network connection to be at least 128 kbit/s
.\"0 (16 kbyte/s) plus protocol overhead.  If you suffer from
.\"0 short network outages, you should try the
.\"0 .B \-b
.\"0 option (buffer) to bypass such outages.  If your network
.\"0 connection is generally not fast enough to retrieve MPEG
.\"0 audio files in realtime, you can first download the files
.\"0 to your local harddisk (e.g. using
.\"0 .BR lynx (1))
.\"0 and then play them from there.
WWW サーバから取り寄せた MPEG オーディオを再生するには、サーバとの接続
が十分高速でなければならない点に注意してください。例えば
128k ビット/秒 の MPEG ファイルは、プロトコルのオーバーヘッドに加えて
少なくとも 128k ビット/秒(16k バイト/秒)のネットワーク接続を必要としま
す。ネットワークが一時的に止まることが原因で問題が起きる場合には、
.B \-b
オプション(バッファ容量設定)でネットワーク停止を避けてみましょう。
ネットワーク接続の全体的な速度が MPEG オーディオファイルのリアルタイム
演奏に十分でなければ、最初に(
.BR lynx (1)
等を用いて)ファイルをローカルのハードディスクにダウンロードしてからファ
イルを再生してください。
.P
.\"0 If authentication is needed to access the file it can be
.\"0 specified with the
.BR "\-u user:pass".
WWW サーバ上のファイルにアクセスするために認証が必要ならば、
.BR "\-u ユーザ名:パスワード"
を使って指定することができます。
.\"0 .SH INTERRUPT
.SH 割り込み
.\"0 You can abort
.\"0 .B mpg123
.\"0 at any time by pressing Ctrl-C.  If you are playing multiple
.\"0 files, this will stop the current file and begin playing the
.\"0 next one.  If you want to abort playing immediately instead
.\"0 of skipping to the next file, press Ctrl-C twice in short
.\"0 succession (within about one second).
.B mpg123
は Ctrl-C を押すことにより、いつでも中断させることができます。複数のファ
イルの再生中であれば、現在のファイルの再生が止まり、次のファイルの再生
が始まります。次のファイルにスキップせずに即座に全ての再生を終えるには、
Ctrl-C を (約 1 秒以内に)2 回連続で押します。
.P
.\"0 Note that the result of pressing Ctrl-C might not be audible
.\"0 immediately, due to audio data buffering in the audio device.
.\"0 This delay is system dependent, but it is usually not more
.\"0 than one or two seconds.
Ctrl-C を押しても聞こえる音がすぐ変わるわけではない点に注意してくださ
い。これはオーディオデバイス内にオーディオデータがバッファリングされて
いるためです。この遅れはシステムによって違いますが、普通は 1, 2 秒以内
です。
.\"0 .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連情報
.BR lynx (1),
.BR sox (1),
.BR intro (1)
.\"0 .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"0 MPEG audio decoding requires a good deal of CPU performance,
.\"0 especially layer-3.  To decode it in realtime, you should
.\"0 have at least a Pentium, Alpha, SuperSparc or equivalent
.\"0 processor.  You can also use the
.\"0 .B -singlemix
.\"0 option to decode mono only, which reduces the CPU load
.\"0 somewhat for layer-3 streams.  See also the
.\"0 .BR \-2 " and " \-4
.\"0 options.
MPEG オーディオ(特にレイヤ-3)のデコードにはかなりの CPU 性能が必要です。
これをリアルタイムでデコードするには、少なくとも Pentium, Alpha,
SuperSparc あるいはこれらと同等のプロセッサでなければなりません。
ですが、
.B -singlemix
オプションを用いてモノラルのみの再生を行う方法もあります。このオプショ
ンを使うとレイヤ-3 ストリームに対する CPU 負荷がある程度小さくなります。
.BR \-2 " オプションと " \-4
オプションも参照してください。
.P
.\"0 If everything else fails, use the
.\"0 .B \-s
.\"0 option to decode to standard output, direct it into a file
.\"0 and then use an appropriate utility to play that file.
.\"0 You might have to use a tool such as
.\"0 .BR sox (1)
.\"0 to convert the output to an audio format suitable for
.\"0 your audio player.
これ以外の問題が起きた場合には、
.B \-s
オプションを使ってデコード結果を標準出力に出力し、これをファイルに
リダイレクトしてください。そしてこのファイルを適切なユーティリティを使っ
て再生してください。
.B mpg123
の出力をお使いのオーディオプレイヤーで再生できるように変換するには、
.BR sox (1)
等のツールが必要となるかもしれません。
.P
.\"0 Also note that
.\"0 .B mpg123
.\"0 always generates 16 bit stereo data (if one of the
.\"0 .BR \-single *
.\"0 options is used, two identical stereo channels are
.\"0 generated).  If your hardware requires some other
.\"0 format, for example 8 bit mono, you also have
.\"0 to use a converter such as
.\"0 .BR sox (1).
.B mpg123
は必ず 16 ビットステレオのデータを生成する点にも注意してください(
.BR \-single *
オプション群のいずれかを使った場合でも、全く同じステレオチャンネルが 2 
つ生成されます)。お使いのハードウェアがこれ以外のフォーマット(例えば 8 
ビットモノラル)を要求するのなら、やはり
.BR sox (1)
等のコンバータが必要となります。
.P
.\"0 If your system is generally fast enough to decode in 
.\"0 realtime, but there are sometimes periods of heavy 
.\"0 system load (such as cronjobs, users logging in remotely, 
.\"0 starting of ``big'' programs etc.) causing the 
.\"0 audio output to be interrupted, then you should use
.\"0 the
.\"0 .B \-b
.\"0 option to use a buffer of at least 1000 Kbytes.
お使いのシステムが普段は十分リアルタイム再生ができる速さでも、一時的に
システム負荷が高くなり(cron のジョブやユーザのリモートログイン、
「巨大な」プログラムの起動など)、オーディオ出力に割り込みがかかるよう
な場合には、
.B \-b
オプションを使って最低 1000K バイトのバッファを確保すべきです。
.\"0 .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.TP
.\"0 Known bugs and limitations:
既知のバグと制限事項:
.br
.\"0 MPEG-2, Layer 1 and 2 not tested. May not work. (Layer 3 should work.)
MPEG-2 のレイヤ 1, 2 のテストは行っていません。動作しないかもしれませ
ん。(レイヤ 3 は動作するはずです。)
.br
.\"0 Free format streams are not supported.
フリーフォーマットのストリームには対応していません。
.br
.\"0 Layer-1 support is not heavily tested.
レイヤ 1 対応のテストは十分ではありません。
.br
.\"0 No CRC error checking is performed.
CRC エラーのチェックは行っていません。
.br
.\"0 There is currently no support for audio hardware on
.\"0 DEC Digital Unix, Ultrix and IBM AIX, therefore the
.\"0 .B \-s
.\"0 option has to be used on those platforms.
現在は DEC Digital Unix, Ultrix, IBM AIX のオーディオハードウェアには
対応していません。したがって、これらのプラットフォームでは
.B \-s
オプションを使わなければなりません。
.\"0 .SH AUTHORS
.SH 作者
.TP
.\"0 Main author:
リーダー:
.br
Michael Hipp <hippm@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de>
.TP
.\"0 Uses code (or at least ideas) from:
以下のコード(または少なくともアイディア)を利用しています:
.br
.\"0 MPEG Software Simulation Group (Base package)
MPEG Software Simulation Group (基本パッケージ)
.br
.\"0 Philipp Knirsch <phil@mpik-tueb.mpg.de> (DCT36/manual unroll)
Philipp Knirsch <phil@mpik-tueb.mpg.de> (DCT36/manual の展開)
.\"0 この訳はウソくさい…
.br
.\"0 Tobias Bading <bading@cs.tu-berlin.de> (subband synthesis)
Tobias Bading <bading@cs.tu-berlin.de> (副バンドの合成)
.br
Jeff Tsay <ctsay@pasteur.eecs.berkeley.edu> (DCT36)
.br
.\"0 Thomas Woerner (SGI Audio)
Thomas Woerner (SGI のオーディオへの対応)
.br
.\"0 Damien Clermonte <clermond@esiee.fr> (HP-UX audio fixes)
Damien Clermonte <clermond@esiee.fr> (HP-UX のオーディオ用の修正)
.br
Oliver Fromme <oliver.fromme@heim3.tu-clausthal.de>
.P
.\"0 Internet references:
インターネット上での参照ページ:
.br
http://www.sfs.nphil.uni-tuebingen.de/~hipp/mpg123.html
.br
http://www.heim3.tu-clausthal.de/~olli/mpg123/
.br
.\"0 (includes information about the mpg123 mailing list)
(mpg123 メーリングリストに関する情報があります)
.P
.\"0 The latest version is also available from here:
最新版は以下の場所からも入手できます:
.br
ftp.tu-clausthal.de:/pub/unix/audio/mpg123
.br
http://ftp.tu-clausthal.de/pub/unix/audio/mpg123
