.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:00:12 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996,1997,1998 ISHIKAWA Mutsumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 6 16:42:51 JST 1997
.\"         by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Last Modified Sun Jan 11 04:04:34 JST 1998
.\"	by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	special file	スペシャルファイル
.\" WORD:	end of file	end of file
.\" WORD:	\0 character	\0 文字(null 文字)
.\" WORD:	device		デバイス
.\"
.TH NULL 4 1992-11-21 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
null, zero \- データの掃きだめ
.SH 説明
\fBnull\fP または \fBzero\fP スペシャルファイル(special file)に
書かれたデータは捨てられる。
.PP
\fBnull\fP スペシャルファイルを読むと常に end of file が返され (つまり、
.BR read (2)
は 0 を返す)、対照的
に \fBzero\fP を読むと常にバイト数 0 (\e0 文字) が返される。
.LP
\fBnull\fP と \fBzero\fP は一般的に次のようにして作られる:
.RS
.sp
mknod \-m 666 /dev/null c 1 3
.br
mknod \-m 666 /dev/zero c 1 5
.br
chown root:root /dev/null /dev/zero
.RE
.SH ファイル
.I /dev/null
.br
.I /dev/zero
.SH 注意
これらのデバイスが全てのユーザに対して読み書き可能でない場合、
多くのプログラムの動作がおかしくなるだろう。
.SH 関連項目
.BR chown (1),
.BR mknod (1),
.BR full (4)
.\" .SH 翻訳者
.\" 石川 睦 <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
