.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"     Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:01:11 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996,1997,1998 ISHIKAWA Mutsumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Dec 28 17:23:13 JST 1996
.\"         by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\" Japanese Version Last Modified Sun Jan 11 03:55:54 1998
.\"	by ISHIKAWA Mutsumi <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	ram disk		ラムディスク
.\" WORD:	raw mode		ローモード
.\" WORD:	block device		ブロックデバイス
.TH RAM 4 1992-11-21 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
ram \- RAM ディスクデバイス
.SH 説明
\fIram\fP デバイスは RAM ディスクにローモード (raw mode) でアクセスするための
ブロックデバイス (block device) である。
.LP
典型的には次のようにして作られる。:
.RS
.sp
mknod \-m 660 /dev/ram b 1 1
.br
chown root:disk /dev/ram
.RE
.SH ファイル
/dev/ram
.SH 関連項目
.BR chown (1),
.BR mknod (1),
.BR mount (8)
.\" .SH 翻訳者
.\" 石川 睦 <ishikawa@linux.or.jp>
