.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" i82365.4 1.34 2000/04/03 20:04:01
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Aug 19 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH I82365 4 "2000/04/03 20:04:01" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O i82365 \- Intel i82365sl PCMCIA controller driver
.SH 名前
i82365 \- Intel i82365sl PCMCIA コントローラのドライバ
.\"O 
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B insmod i82365.o
.RB [ pc_debug=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ i365_base=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ ignore=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ extra_sockets=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ do_scan=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ irq_list=\c
.IR i,j,... ]
.RB [ cs_irq=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ poll_interval=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ cycle_time=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ do_pci_probe=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ cb_write_post=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ pci_csc=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ pci_int=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ pci_irq_list=\c
.IR i,j,... ]
.RB [ has_dma=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ has_led=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ has_ring=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ freq_bypass=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ setup_time=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ cmd_time=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ recov_time=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ wakeup=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ fast_pci=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ async_clock=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ cable_mode=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ irq_mode=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ p2cclk=\c
.IR n ]
.\"O 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This is the low-level driver for the Intel i82365sl PCMCIA host
.\"O controller, and many derivative controllers.  It also implements the
.\"O Intel "Yenta" register specification for CardBus bridges.  Common
.\"O clones of the i82365sl include controllers made by Cirrus Logic, IBM, 
.\"O O2Micro, Omega Micro, Ricoh, SMC, Texas Instruments, Toshiba, Vadem,
.\"O and VLSI.  The overwhelming majority of current PCMCIA controllers,
.\"O and all CardBus bridges, are register compatible with the i82365sl.
.\"O This driver is used by Card Services for configuring the host
.\"O controller, and for monitoring card status change events.
これは Intel i82365sl PCMCIA ホストコントローラと、
その多くの派生コントローラの低レベルドライバである。
このドライバは CardBus ブリッジに対する Intel の "Yenta"
レジスタ規格も実装している。 i82365sl のクローンとしては、
Cirrus Logic, IBM, O2Micro, Omega Micro, Ricoh, SMC, Texas Instruments,
Toshiba, Vadem, VLSI らによるコントローラが出まわっている。
現在のほとんどすべて PCMCIA コントローラと、全ての CardBus ブリッジは、
i82365sl とレジスタ互換である。このドライバはカードサービスから用いられ、
ホストコントローラを設定したり、カードの状態変更イベントを監視したりする。
.PP
.\"O An ISA i82365-compatible controller normally sits at the IO addresses
.\"O 0x3e0-0x3e1.  Two ISA controllers can cooperate to share the same IO
.\"O ports, supporting a total of four sockets.  A second pair of
.\"O controllers can be located at 0x3e2-0x3e3.  Probing at this position
.\"O is controlled by the \fBextra_sockets\fR parameter.  This only affects
.\"O ISA bridges: the PCI bridge probe handles multiple controllers
.\"O automatically.  The driver will support a maximum of eight sockets. 
ISA の i82365 互換コントローラは、通常 I/O アドレス
0x3e0-0x3e1 を利用し、 4 つのソケットすべてをサポートする。
コントローラの 2 番のペアは 0x3e2-0x3e3 を利用する。
この位置をプローブするかどうかは
\fBextra_sockets\fR パラメータによって制御できる。
これは ISA ブリッジにのみ影響する。 PCI ブリッジのプローブは
複数のコントローラを自動的に取り扱う。
このドライバは最大で 8 つのソケットまでをサポートする。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH CardBus interrupt delivery
.SH CardBus 割り込みの受け渡し
.\"O CardBus bridges generally support both PCI and ISA interrupt signals,
.\"O and multiple methods of deliving interrupt events to the host system.
.\"O The system BIOS is partly responsible for correctly configuring the
.\"O bridge to match the implemented interrupt hardware at boot time.  This
.\"O module provides several parameters for overriding this default
.\"O interrupt configuration.  The \fBpci_int\fR and \fBpci_csc\fR settings
.\"O can be used to control use of PCI interrupts for card interrupts or
.\"O card status changes.  The \fBirq_mode\fR setting, for bridges that
.\"O support it, can be used to select an interrupt delivery method.
CardBus ブリッジは、基本的に PCI と ISA の両方の割り込みシグナルを
サポートしており、割り込みイベントをホストシステムに受け渡す手法も
複数存在する。ブート時にブリッジを正しく設定し、
割り込みハードウェアの実装にマッチさせる作業の一部は、
システム BIOS の役割である。
このモジュールではいくつかのパラメータを用意しており、
デフォルトの割り込み設定を上書きすることが可能になっている。
\fBpci_int\fR と \fBpci_csc\fR を用いると、
カードの割り込みやカードの状態変更に PCI 割り込みを使うかどうかを制御できる。
\fBirq_mode\fR を使えば、ブリッジがサポートしていれば、
割り込みの受け渡し方法を変更できる。
.PP
.\"O When the \fBi82365\fR module is loaded, it performs a scan of free
.\"O ISA interrupts to determine which ones appear to be usable for PCMCIA
.\"O events.  The interrupt scan results are reported in the system log.  A
.\"O successful scan will report a list of interrupts as ``scanned''; if no
.\"O interrupts appear to work, then a ``default'' list is reported.  Some
.\"O bridges (Cirrus non-CardBus bridges, some Toshiba bridges) do not
.\"O support the software interrupt test and will always report a
.\"O ``default'' list.  In other cases, this may be a sign of an incorrect
.\"O \fBirq_mode\fR.
.B i82365
モジュールがロードされると、フリーな ISA 割り込みをスキャンし、
PCMCIA イベントに利用できる割り込みを決定する。
割り込みスキャンの結果はシステムのログに報告される。
スキャンが成功すると、割り込みのリストが "scanned" と報告され、
利用できる割り込みがない場合には、 "default" のリストが報告される。
ブリッジによってはソフトウェア割り込みのテストをサポートしておらず、
常に "default" のリストを返すものもある (Cirrus の non-CardBus ブリッジや
Toshiba のある種のブリッジなど)。
他の場合は、 \fBirq_mode\fP が不正であることを示しているのかもしれない。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH PARAMETERS
.SH パラメータ
.TP
.BI pc_debug= n
.\"O Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
.\"O if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
.\"O enables debugging.
PCMCIA のデバッグレベルを選択する。
このパラメータは、モジュールがデバッグを有効にしてコンパイルした場合にのみ
利用できる。 0 以外の値を指定するとデバッグモードが有効になる。
.TP
.BI i365_base= n
.\"O Sets the base I/O port address of the i82365sl chip.  The default is
.\"O 0x3e0.  Applies only to ISA-to-PCMCIA bridges.
i82365sl チップのベース I/O ポートを指定する。
デフォルトは 0x3e0 である。
ISA-to-PCMCIA ブリッジにのみ適用される。
.TP
.BI ignore= n
.\"O Causes the driver to ignore a single socket.  Sockets are numbered
.\"O starting at 0.  The socket will be left in whatever state it was
.\"O already in, so it can be used for cards with point enablers that do
.\"O not cooperate with Card Services.
指定した一つのソケットをドライバに無視させる。
ソケットは 0 から番号付けされる。
ソケットはドライバ起動前の状態に保たれるので、
このオプションはカードサービスと共存できない
ポイントイネーブラを持つカードに用いるとよいだろう。
.\"nakano: point enabler?
.TP
.BI extra_sockets= n
.\"O A flag indicating if the driver should probe for as many as eight ISA
.\"O sockets, or stop after checking for four sockets.  The default is
.\"O 0 (stop at four sockets).  Systems with two independent ISA-to-PCMCIA
.\"O controllers (say, one internal and one in a docking station) may
.\"O require this flag to be set, even though they have a total of only
.\"O four sockets.  If this flag is set, then
.\"O .BR poll_interval
.\"O will automatically be enabled.
ドライバのプローブを 8 つの ISA ソケットに対して行わせるか、
4 つのソケットに対して行ったところで終了させるかを示すフラグ。
デフォルトは 0 (4 つのソケットで終了)。
2 つの独立な ISA-to-PCMCIA コントローラを有するシステム
(例えばひとつは内蔵で、
もうひとつはドッキングステーションにある場合など) では、
仮にソケットの合計が 4 だったとしても、
このフラグをセットしておかなければならないかもしれない。
このフラグをセットすると、
.B poll_interval
が自動的に有効になる。
.TP
.BI do_scan= n
.\"O This flag specifies that all free ISA interrupts should be tested to
.\"O see if they can be triggered by the PCMCIA controller.  The default is
.\"O 1 (true).
空いている全ての ISA 割り込みをテストして、
PCMCIA コントローラからトリガできるか調べるかどうかを指定するフラグ。
デフォルトは 1 (真)。
.TP
.BI irq_list= i,j,...
.\"O Specifies the set of interrupts that may be allocated by this driver,
.\"O if they are otherwise available.
.\"O The default list is 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, and 15.
他の条件が許す場合に、
このドライバが割り当て可能な割り込み番号をセットで指定する。
デフォルトのリストは 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 である。
.TP
.BI cs_irq= n
.\"O Sets the interrupt line to use for monitoring card status changes.
.\"O The default is 0, which means pick the highest-numbered legal
.\"O interrupt not already in use.  Legal values are 15, 14, 12, 11,
.\"O 10, 9, 7, 5, 4, and 3.
カードの状態変化のモニターに用いる割り込みラインを設定する。
デフォルトは 0 で、未使用の「正当な」番号のうち、
もっとも高位の番号を使う。
正当な番号は 15, 14, 12, 11, 10, 9, 7, 5, 4, 3 である。
.TP
.BI poll_interval= n
.\"O Sets the card status polling delay, in 1/100 second increments.  If
.\"O this parameter is set, card status interrupts will be disabled.  A
.\"O reasonable value is 100.  Polling only affects detection of card
.\"O insert and eject events.
カード状態のポーリング遅延を 1/100 秒単位で設定する。
このパラメータをセットすると、カード状態の割り込みは無効になる。
100 程度の値が良いだろう。ポーリングは
カードの挿抜イベントの検知にのみ関係する。
.TP
.BI cycle_time= n
.\"O Sets the length of a host bus cycle, in nanoseconds.  The default is
.\"O 210 ns, corresponding to a standard 4.77 MHz clock.
ホストバスのサイクル長をナノ秒単位で設定する。
デフォルトは 210 ns で、クロック 4.77MHz に対応する。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH Options for CardBus controllers
.SH CardBus コントローラのオプション
.TP
.BI do_pci_probe= n
.\"O This flag indicates if the PCI bus should be probed for PCI-to-PCMCIA
.\"O and/or PCI-to-CardBus bridges.  The default is 1 (true).
PCI バスに対して PCI-to-PCMCIA ブリッジや PCI-to-CardBus ブリッジの
プローブを行うかどうかを決めるフラグ。デフォルトは 1 (真)。
.TP
.BI cb_write_post= n
.\"O A flag indicating if write posting (a performance feature) should be
.\"O enabled.  The default is 1 (true), except on certain TI 1130 bridges.
(性能向上のための) 遅延書き込みを有効にするかどうかのフラグ。
デフォルトは 1 (真) (ただし TI 1130 ブリッジの特定のものを除く)。
.TP
.BI pci_csc= n
.\"O Specifies that card status change interrupts should be routed to PCI
.\"O interrupts, for CardBus controllers.  The default is 1 (true).
CardBus コントローラに対して、
カードの状態変更割り込みが PCI 割り込みを生じさせるかどうかを指定するフラグ。
デフォルトは 1 (真)。
.TP
.BI pci_int= n
.\"O Specifies that functional interrupts for IO cards should be routed to
.\"O PCI interrupts, for CardBus controllers.  The default is 1 (true),
.\"O except on systems that require use of PCI interrupts.
CardBus コントローラに対して、
IO カードへの関数割り込みが PCI 割り込みを生じさせるかどうかを指定するフラグ。
デフォルトは 1 (真) (ただし PCI 割り込みを必要とするシステムを除く)。
.\"nakano: functional interrupts って「機能割り込み」?
.TP
.BI pci_irq_list = i,j,...
.\"O The Linux kernel sometimes cannot deduce the PCI interrupt assignments
.\"O for CardBus sockets.  If this information can be determined some other
.\"O way, it can be entered here.  The Nth socket will get the Nth
.\"O interrupt number from the list. 
Linux カーネルは、 CardBus ソケットに対する
PCI 割り込みの割り当てを自動的に検知できないことがある。
他の方法でこの情報が決定できない場合、
ここで与えることもできる。 N 番目のソケットは、
リストの N 番目の割り込み番号を取得する。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH Options specific for Cirrus controllers
.SH Cirrus のコントローラに特有のオプション
.\"O When the
.\"O .B i82365
.\"O driver is loaded, it will try to determine what interrupts can safely
.\"O be allocated for use by PCMCIA devices.  Cirrus controllers support
.\"O some optional features that interfere with the use of certain
.\"O interrupt lines.  Cirrus chips also lack the functionality needed to
.\"O detect whether or not an interrupt can be used.  The
.\"O .BR has_dma ,
.\"O .BR has_ring ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B has_led
.\"O options are used to specify if these features are implemented.
.B i82365
ドライバは、ロードされるとまず、
どの割り込みを
PCMCIA デバイスに安全に割り当てできるかを決定しようとする。
Cirrus のコントローラは他にも追加機能を持っていて、
これらによって特定の割り込み線が利用できないことがある。
また Cirrus のチップには、
割り込みを使えるかどうかの検知に必要な機能がない。
.BR has_dma ", " has_ring ", " has_led
オプションは、
これらの機能が実装されているかどうかの指定に用いられる。
.TP
.BI has_dma= n
.\"O A flag indicating if the controller has DMA support.
.TP
.BI has_led= n
.\"O A flag indicating if the controller is wired for a disk status LED.
.\"O This is set by default.
コントローラがディスクステータス LED に接続されているかどうかを示すフラグ。
デフォルトではセットされている。
.TP
.BI has_ring= n
.\"O A flag indicating if the controller's "ring indicate" signal is
.\"O implemented.  This is set by default.
コントローラの「ビープ通知 (ring indicate)」シグナルが実装されているか
同化を示すフラグ。デフォルトではセットされている。
.TP
.BI freq_bypass= n
.\"O A flag indicating that the controller should be set up in "frequency
.\"O bypass" mode.  This disables the normal 7/4 clock multiplier, and
.\"O slows down all PCMCIA bus access, for systems with fast system clocks.
コントローラを "frequency bypass" モードに設定するかどうかを示すフラグ。
これは高速なシステムクロックのシステムに対して
通常の 7/4 クロック分周を無効にし、
PCMCIA バスへのアクセスを減速する。
.TP
.BI setup_time= n
.\"O Sets the bus setup time, in internal clock cycles. The default is 1.
バスのセットアップ時間を内部クロックサイクルの単位で設定する。
デフォルトは 1。
.TP
.BI cmd_time= n
.\"O Sets the bus command time, in internal clock cycles. The default is 6.
バスのコマンド時間を内部クロックサイクルの単位で設定する。
デフォルトは 6。
.TP
.BI recov_time= n
.\"O Sets the bus recovery time, in internal clock cycles. The default is 0.
バスの復帰時間を内部クロックサイクルの単位で設定する。
デフォルトは 0。
.TP
.BI wakeup= n
.\"O A flag indicating if the probe function should attempt to wake up a
.\"O suspended controller chip.  The default is 0.
プローブ機能によって、サスペンド状態のコントローラチップを
目覚めさせるかどうかを示すフラグ。デフォルトは 0。
.TP
.BI fast_pci= n
.\"O A flag for the PD6729 PCI controller, indicating that the PCI bus
.\"O speed exceeds 25 MHz.
PCI バススピードが 25 MHz を越えるかどうかを示す、
PD6729 PCI コントローラのためのフラグ。
.TP
.BI irq_mode= n
.\"O For the PD6729 PCI controller, specifies the interrupt delivery mode.
.\"O The default is to use ISA bus interrupts; a value of 1 selects PCI
.\"O interrupts.  This must be set for correct operation of some PCI card
.\"O readers.
割り込み配送モードを指定する、
PD6729 PCI コントローラのためのフラグ。
デフォルトは ISA バスの割り込みを用いる。
1 を指定すると PCI 割り込みを用いる。
PCI カードリーダによっては、
正しく動作させるためにこの指定が必要になることもある。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH Options specific for Ricoh CardBus controllers
.SH Ricoh の CardBus コントローラに特有のオプション
.TP
.BI irq_mode= n
.\"O Selects the interrupt routing method.  A value of 1 selects ISA
.\"O interrupt routing, and 2 selects interrupt routing via an external
.\"O serial interrupt controller.  The default is to use whatever routing
.\"O method is already enabled.
割り込みの配送方法を選ぶ。 1 を指定すると ISA 割り込みに配送され、
2 を指定すると外部シリアルの割り込みコントローラ経由で配送される。
デフォルトでは、既に有効になっている配送方法を用いる。
.\"nakano: 最後の文ちょっと怪しい...
.TP
.BI setup_time= n
.\"O Sets the bus setup time, in internal clock cycles. The default is 3.
バスのセットアップ時間を内部クロックサイクルの単位で設定する。
デフォルトは 3。
.TP
.BI cmd_time= n
.\"O Sets the bus command time, in internal clock cycles. The default is 6.
バスのコマンド時間を内部クロックサイクルの単位で設定する。
デフォルトは 6。
.TP
.BI hold_time= n
.\"O Sets the bus hold time, in internal clock cycles. The default is 1.
バスの停止 (hold) 時間を内部クロックサイクルの単位で設定する。
デフォルトは 1。
.\"nakano: hold →停止? 保持? 占有?
.\"O 
.\"O .SH Options specific for Vadem ISA controllers
.SH Vadem の ISA コントローラに特有のオプション
.TP
.BI async_clock= n
.\"O This flag specifies that PCMCIA bus cycles should be clocked
.\"O asynchronously from host bus cycles.  It effectively adds a wait state
.\"O to some operations.
PCMCIA バスのサイクルを、ホストバスのサイクルと
非同期的にするかどうかを指定する。
いくつかの操作に wait 状態を追加することになる。
.\"nakano: effectively は訳さないほうが良いかと思いましたが、どうかな。
.TP
.BI cable_mode= n
.\"O For the VG469, this flag adjusts certain socket signals for driving a
.\"O socket connected via a cable.
VG469 に対してこのフラグを指定すると、
ケーブル経由で接続されたソケットの駆動に用いるソケットシグナルを調整する。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH Options specific for TI CardBus controllers
.SH TI の CardBus コントローラに特有のオプション
.\"O Normally, a system's BIOS will configure these options appropriately,
.\"O so all these options default to leaving these features configured the
.\"O way the driver finds them.
通常はシステムの BIOS がこれらのオプションを適切に設定するので、
これらのオプションをデフォルトにすると、
これらの機能はドライバが検知した状態の設定のままで用いられる。
.TP
.BI has_ring= n
.\"O A flag indicating if the controller is wired for "ring indicate".
.\"O The default is to read the current setting from the controller.
コントローラが「ビープ通知 (ring indicate)」の接続を持っているかを示すフラグ。
デフォルトでは現在の設定をコントローラから読み込む。
.TP
.BI irq_mode= n
.\"O Selects the interrupt routing method.  A value of 0 selects only PCI
.\"O interrupts; 1 selects ISA interrupt routing; 2 selects ISA interrupt
.\"O routing via an external serial interrupt controller; and 3 selects
.\"O serial routing for both PCI and ISA interrupts.  The default is to use
.\"O whatever routing  method is already active, or ISA routing if no
.\"O method is enabled.
割り込みの配送方法を指定する。 0 を指定すると PCI 割り込みだけを用いる。
1 を指定すると ISA 割り込みを用いて配送する。 2 を指定すると
外部シリアルの割り込みコントローラを用いて ISA 割り込みに配送する。
3 を指定すると PCI と ISA 割り込みの両方を用いてシリアルに配送する。
.\"nakano serial routing?
デフォルトは、現在有効になっている配送方法があれば、それを用いる。
どれも有効になっていない場合は ISA 経由で配送する。
.TP
.BI p2cclk= n
.\"O A flag, indicating if the P2CCLK pin should be configured as an input
.\"O (0) or an output (1).  This signal is used for communicating with a
.\"O socket power controller; if set incorrectly, the bridge will be unable
.\"O to power up cards.  The default is to use the BIOS setting.
P2CCLK ピンを入力 (0) または 出力(1) として設定するかどうかを示すフラグ。
このシグナルはソケットの電力コントローラと通信するときに用いる。
間違った指定をすると、ブリッジはカードに電力を供給できなくなる。
デフォルトでは BIOS の設定を用いる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5).
.BR cardmgr (8),
.BR pcmcia (5)

