.\"                                                                            
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999-2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Fri Sep 17 03:26:44 JST 1999
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Sat Sep  2 06:03:58 JST 2000
.\"	    by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Oct 10 22:29:13 JST 2000
.\"	    by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Wed Nov 22 05:02:20 JST 2000
.\"	    by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Fri Dec  1 18:58:22 JST 2000
.\"	    by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	caret		キャレット
.\"WORD:	curly bracket	中括弧
.\"WORD:	parentheses	小括弧
.\"WORD:	square bracket	大括弧
.\"WORD:	pound sign	シャープ記号
.\"WORD:	window		ウインドウ
.\"WORD:	screen		画面
.\"WORD:	terminal	端末
.\"WORD:	overstruck	重ね打ちされた
.\"
.TH LESS 1 "Version 358: 08 Jul 2000"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O less \- opposite of more
less \- more の反対 (more のようなページャー)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "less -?"
.br
.B "less --help"
.br
.B "less -V"
.br
.B "less --version"
.br
.B "less [-[+]aBcCdeEfgGiImMnNqQrsSuUVWwXZ]"
.br
.B "     [-b \fIbufs\fP] [-h \fIlines\fP] [-j \fIline\fP] [-k \fIkeyfile\fP]"
.br
.B "     [-K \fIcharacter set\fP] [-{oO} \fIlogfile\fP]"
.br
.B "     [-p \fIpattern\fP] [-P \fIprompt\fP] [-t \fItag\fP]"
.br
.B "     [-T \fItagsfile\fP] [-x \fItab\fP] [-y \fIlines\fP] [-[z] \fIlines\fP]"
.br
.B "     [+[+]\fIcmd\fP] [--] [\fIfilename\fP]..."
.br
.\"O (See the OPTIONS section for alternate option syntax with long option names.)
(長いオプション名を使う別の書式については、
オプションのセクションを参照すること。)

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I Less
.\"O is a program similar to 
.\"O .I more
.\"O (1), but which allows backward movement
.\"O in the file as well as forward movement.
.\"O Also,
.\"O .I less
.\"O does not have to read the entire input file before starting,
.\"O so with large input files it starts up faster than text editors like
.\"O .I vi
.\"O (1).
.\"O .I Less
.\"O uses termcap (or terminfo on some systems),
.\"O so it can run on a variety of terminals.
.\"O There is even limited support for hardcopy terminals.
.\"O (On a hardcopy terminal, lines which should be printed at the top
.\"O of the screen are prefixed with a caret.)
.I less
は
.I more
(1) と同様なプログラムであるが、
ファイル内での前方移動と同様に後方移動も可能となっている。
また、
.I less
は起動時に入力ファイル全体を読み込む必要がないため、
大きな入力ファイルの場合には
.I vi
(1)
のようなテキストエディタより起動が速い。
.I less
は termcap (システムによっては terminfo) を使用するため、
多くの端末で実行できる。
ハードコピー端末では、まだサポートが限定されている
(ハードコピー端末では、画面の一番上に表示されるべき行に
キャレット (^) が付く)。
.PP
.\"O Commands are based on both
.\"O .I more
.\"O and
.\"O .I vi.
.\"O Commands may be preceded by a decimal number, 
.\"O called N in the descriptions below.
.\"O The number is used by some commands, as indicated.
コマンドは
.I more
と
.I vi
の両方を基本にしている。
(以下の説明において N で表す) 10 進数の後に続けて使用できるコマンドもある。

.\"O .SH COMMANDS
.SH コマンド
.\"O In the following descriptions, ^X means control-X.
.\"O ESC stands for the ESCAPE key; for example ESC-v means the
.\"O two character sequence "ESCAPE", then "v".
以降の説明で ^X は control-X を意味する。
ESC は ESCAPE キーである。例えば、ESC-v は "ESCAPE" を押した後に "v" を
押すという意味である。
.\"O .IP "h or H"
.\"O Help: display a summary of these commands.
.\"O If you forget all the other commands, remember this one.
.IP "h または H"
ヘルプ。コマンドの概要を表示する。
もし、他のコマンドを忘れた時は、このコマンドを思い出すこと。
.\"O .IP "SPACE or ^V or f or ^F"
.\"O Scroll forward N lines, default one window (see option -z below).
.\"O If N is more than the screen size, only the final screenful is displayed.
.\"O Warning: some systems use ^V as a special literalization character.
.IP "SPACE または ^V または f または ^F"
前方に 1 ウインドウ分 (N 行) 進む (-z オプションを参照)。
行数 N が画面サイズより大きい場合は、
最後の行から画面に入りきる分だけを表示する。
警告: ^V が特殊なリテラル化文字として使われているシステムもある。
.\"O .IP "z"
.\"O Like SPACE, but if N is specified, it becomes the new window size.
.IP "z"
SPACE と似ているが、行数 N を指定すると N が新しいウインドウのサイズになる。
.\"O .IP "ESC-SPACE"
.\"O Like SPACE, but scrolls a full screenful, even if it reaches
.\"O end-of-file in the process.
.IP "ESC-SPACE"
SPACE と似ているが、ファイルの終端に達した場合でも
画面いっぱいにスクロールする。
.\"O .IP "RETURN or ^N or e or ^E or j or ^J"
.\"O Scroll forward N lines, default 1.
.\"O The entire N lines are displayed, even if N is more than the screen size.
.IP "RETURN または ^N または e または ^E または j または ^J"
前方に 1 行 (N 行) 進む。
N が画面サイズより大きい場合でも、N 行全てを表示する。
.\"O .IP "d or ^D"
.\"O Scroll forward N lines, default one half of the screen size.
.\"O If N is specified, it becomes the new default for 
.\"O subsequent d and u commands.
.IP "d または ^D"
前方に半画面 (N 行) 進む。
行数 N を指定すると、その後の d コマンドと u コマンドの
新しいデフォルトサイズになる。
.\"O .IP "b or ^B or ESC-v"
.\"O Scroll backward N lines, default one window (see option -z below).
.\"O If N is more than the screen size, only the final screenful is displayed.
.IP "b または ^B または ESC-v"
後方に 1 ウインドウ分 (N 行) 戻る (-z オプションを参照)。
N が画面サイズより大きい場合は、
最後の行から画面に入りきる分だけを表示する。
.\"O .IP "w"
.\"O Like ESC-v, but if N is specified, it becomes the new window size.
.IP "w"
ESC-v と似ているが、N を指定すると、N が新しいウインドウのサイズになる。
.\"O .IP "y or ^Y or ^P or k or ^K"
.\"O Scroll backward N lines, default 1.
.\"O The entire N lines are displayed, even if N is more than the screen size.
.\"O Warning: some systems use ^Y as a special job control character.
.IP "y または ^Y または ^P または k または ^K"
後方に 1 行 (N 行) 戻る。
N が画面サイズより大きい場合でも、N 行全てを表示する。
警告: ^Y が特殊なジョブ制御文字として使われているシステムもある。
.\"O .IP "u or ^U"
.\"O Scroll backward N lines, default one half of the screen size.
.\"O If N is specified, it becomes the new default for 
.\"O subsequent d and u commands.
.IP "u または ^U"
後方に半画面 (N 行) 戻る。
N を指定すると、その後の d コマンドと u コマンドの
新しいデフォルトサイズになる。
.\"O .IP "ESC-) or RIGHTARROW"
.\"O Scroll horizontally right N characters, default half the screen width
.\"O (see the -# option).
.\"O While the text is scrolled, it acts as though the -S option
.\"O (chop lines) were in effect.
.\"O Note that if you wish to enter a number N, you must use ESC-), not RIGHTARROW,
.\"O because the arrow is taken to be a line editing command
.\"O (see the LINE EDITING section).
.IP "ESC-) または RIGHTARROW"
画面を右方向に画面幅の半分 (N 文字分) スクロールする (-# オプションを参照)。
テキストがスクロールしている間は、
(行を切り取る) -S オプションが有効になっているように動作する。
文字数 N を入力する場合は、
右矢印キーが行編集コマンド (行編集のセクションを参照) で使われるため、
ESC-) を使用しなければならない。
.\"O .IP "ESC-( or LEFTARROW"
.\"O Scroll horizontally left N characters, default half the screen width
.\"O (see the -# option).
.IP "ESC-( または LEFTARROW"
画面を左方向に画面幅の半分 (N 文字分) スクロールする (-# オプションを参照)。
.\"O .IP "r or ^R or ^L"
.\"O Repaint the screen.
.IP "r または ^R または ^L"
画面を再描画する。
.\"O .IP R
.\"O Repaint the screen, discarding any buffered input.
.\"O Useful if the file is changing while it is being viewed.
.IP R
画面を再描画し、バッファされた入力は破棄する。
ファイルを閲覧中に、ファイルが変更された場合に有効である。
.\"O .IP "F"
.\"O Scroll forward, and keep trying to read when the
.\"O end of file is reached.
.\"O Normally this command would be used when already at the end of the file.
.\"O It is a way to monitor the tail of a file which is growing
.\"O while it is being viewed.
.\"O (The behavior is similar to the "tail -f" command.)
.IP "F"
前方にスクロールし、ファイルの終端に達しても読み続ける。
通常このコマンドは、既にファイルの終端に達している場合に使われる。
閲覧中に大きくなり続けるファイルの末尾をモニターすることができる
("tail -f" コマンドと同じような動作をする)。
.\"O .IP "g or < or ESC-<"
.\"O Go to line N in the file, default 1 (beginning of file).
.\"O (Warning: this may be slow if N is large.)
.IP "g または < または ESC-<"
ファイルの第 1 行目 (第 N 行目) に移動する
(警告: N が大きいと遅くなる)。
.\"O .IP "G or > or ESC->"
.\"O Go to line N in the file, default the end of the file.
.\"O (Warning: this may be slow if N is large,
.\"O or if N is not specified and
.\"O standard input, rather than a file, is being read.)
.IP "G または > または ESC->"
ファイルの最終行 (第 N 行目) に移動する
(警告: N が大きい場合や、N が指定されない場合、
また、ファイルではなく標準入力を読み込んでいる場合に遅くなる)。
.\"O .IP "p or %"
.\"O Go to a position N percent into the file.
.\"O N should be between 0 and 100.
.IP "p または %"
ファイルの N パーセント目の位置に移動する。
N は 0 から 100 の間でなければならない。
.\"O .IP "{"
.\"O If a left curly bracket appears in the top line displayed
.\"O on the screen,
.\"O the { command will go to the matching right curly bracket.
.\"O The matching right curly bracket is positioned on the bottom
.\"O line of the screen.
.\"O If there is more than one left curly bracket on the top line,
.\"O a number N may be used to specify the N-th bracket on the line.
.IP "{"
画面に表示されている先頭行に左中括弧がある場合、
{ コマンドを使うと対応する右中括弧の位置に移動する。
対応する右中括弧は画面の最終行に表示される。
2 つ以上の左中括弧が画面の先頭行にある場合、
数字 N は第 N 個目の括弧を指定するために使われる。
.\"O .IP "}"
.\"O If a right curly bracket appears in the bottom line displayed
.\"O on the screen,
.\"O the } command will go to the matching left curly bracket.
.\"O The matching left curly bracket is positioned on the top
.\"O line of the screen.
.\"O If there is more than one right curly bracket on the top line,
.\"O a number N may be used to specify the N-th bracket on the line.
.IP "}"
画面に表示されている最終行に右中括弧がある場合、
} コマンドを使うと対応する左中括弧の位置に移動する。
対応した左中括弧は画面の先頭行に表示される。
2 つ以上の右中括弧が画面の最終行にある場合、
数字 N は第 N 個目の括弧を指定するために使われる。
.\"O .IP "("
.\"O Like {, but applies to parentheses rather than curly brackets.
.IP "("
{ コマンドと似ているが、中括弧ではなく小括弧に適用される。
.\"O .IP ")"
.\"O Like }, but applies to parentheses rather than curly brackets.
.IP ")"
} コマンドと似ているが、中括弧ではなく小括弧に適用される。
.\"O .IP "["
.\"O Like {, but applies to square brackets rather than curly brackets.
.IP "["
{ コマンドと似ているが、中括弧ではなく大括弧に適用される。
.\"O .IP "]"
.\"O Like }, but applies to square brackets rather than curly brackets.
.IP "]"
} コマンドと似ているが、中括弧ではなく大括弧に適用される。
.\"O .IP "ESC-^F"
.\"O Followed by two characters,
.\"O acts like {, but uses the two characters as open and close brackets,
.\"O respectively.
.\"O For example, "ESC ^F < >" could be used to 
.\"O go forward to the > which matches the < in the top displayed line.
.IP "ESC-^F"
2 つの文字を続けて入力することで、{ コマンドと同様の動作をする。
2 つの文字はそれぞれ開括弧と閉括弧として使われる。
例えば、"ESC ^F < >" を実行すると、
画面の先頭行に表示されている < に対応する > に進むことができる。
.\"O .IP "ESC-^B"
.\"O Followed by two characters,
.\"O acts like }, but uses the two characters as open and close brackets,
.\"O respectively.
.\"O For example, "ESC ^B < >" could be used to 
.\"O go backward to the < which matches the > in the bottom displayed line.
.IP "ESC-^B"
2 つの文字を続けて入力することで、} コマンドと同様の動作をする。
2 つの文字はそれぞれ開括弧と閉括弧として使われる。
例えば、"ESC ^B < >" を実行すると、
画面の最終行に表示されている > に対応する < に戻ることができる。
.\"O .IP m
.\"O Followed by any lowercase letter, 
.\"O marks the current position with that letter.
.IP m
任意の小文字を続けて入力することで、現在の位置を入力した文字でマークする。
.IP "'"
.\"O .IP "'"
.\"O (Single quote.)
.\"O Followed by any lowercase letter, returns to the position which
.\"O was previously marked with that letter.
.\"O Followed by another single quote, returns to the position at
.\"O which the last "large" movement command was executed.
.\"O Followed by a ^ or $, jumps to the beginning or end of the
.\"O file respectively.
.\"O Marks are preserved when a new file is examined,
.\"O so the ' command can be used to switch between input files.
(シングルクォート)。
任意の小文字を続けて入力することで、以前この文字でマークした位置に戻る。
もう 1 つのシングルクォートを続けることで、
シングルクォートコマンドで「大きく」移動する前の位置に戻る。
^, $ で、それぞれファイルの先頭行と最終行にジャンプする。
新しいファイルを読み込む場合も
前のファイルに付けたマークは保存されるので、' コマンドは
入力ファイルの切替えに使うことができる。
.\"O .IP "^X^X"
.\"O Same as single quote.
.IP "^X^X" 
シングルクォートと同じ。
.\"O .IP /pattern
.\"O Search forward in the file for the N-th line containing the pattern.
.\"O N defaults to 1.
.\"O The pattern is a regular expression, as recognized by
.\"O .I ed.
.\"O The search starts at the second line displayed
.\"O (but see the -a and -j options, which change this).
.\"O .sp
.\"O Certain characters are special
.\"O if entered at the beginning of the pattern;
.\"O they modify the type of search rather than become part of the pattern:
.IP /pattern
前方にあるパターンにマッチする 1 番目 (N 番目) の行を検索する。
このパターンは
.I ed
で認識される正規表現である。
検索は、画面に表示されている第 2 行から始まる
(変更する場合は、-a と -j オプションを参照すること)。
.sp
パターンの前に置く文字のうち、いくつかは特殊文字となる。
これはパターンの一部としてではなく、検索方法を変更するために使われる。
.RS
.\"O .IP "^N or !"
.\"O Search for lines which do NOT match the pattern.
.IP "^N または !"
パターンにマッチしない行を検索する。
.\"O .IP "^E or *"
.\"O Search multiple files.
.\"O That is, if the search reaches the END of the current file 
.\"O without finding a match,
.\"O the search continues in the next file in the command line list.
.IP "^E または *"
複数のファイルを検索する。
つまり、検索がマッチしないまま現在のファイルの終りに達した場合、
コマンドラインのファイルリストにある次のファイルに検索を続行する。
.\"O .IP "^F or @"
.\"O Begin the search at the first line of the FIRST file
.\"O in the command line list,
.\"O regardless of what is currently displayed on the screen
.\"O or the settings of the -a or -j options.
.IP "^F または @"
現在の画面表示や、-a または -j オプションの設定に関係なく、
コマンドラインのファイルリストにある最初のファイルの先頭行から
検索を開始する。
.\"O .IP "^K"
.\"O Highlight any text which matches the pattern on the current screen, 
.\"O but don't move to the first match (KEEP current position).
.IP "^K"
現在の画面中でマッチする全てのパターンをハイライト表示する。
その際、一番始めにマッチする位置へは移動しない (現在の位置を保持する)。
.\"O .IP "^R"
.\"O Don't interpret regular expression metacharacters;
.\"O that is, do a simple textual comparison.
.IP "^R"
正規表現のためのメタキャラクタを解釈しない。
つまり、単純な文字列比較を行う。
.RE
.\"O .IP ?pattern
.\"O Search backward in the file for the N-th line containing the pattern.
.\"O The search starts at the line immediately before the top line displayed.
.\"O .sp
.\"O Certain characters are special as in the / command:
.IP ?pattern
後方にあるパターンにマッチする 1 番目 (N 番目) の行を検索する。
検索は、画面の一番上に表示されている行の前の行から行う。
.sp
/ コマンドの時と同様に、一部の文字は特殊な役割をもつ。
.RS
.\"O .IP "^N or !"
.\"O Search for lines which do NOT match the pattern.
.IP "^N または !"
パターンにマッチしない行を検索する。
.\"O .IP "^E or *"
.\"O Search multiple files.
.\"O That is, if the search reaches the beginning of the current file 
.\"O without finding a match,
.\"O the search continues in the previous file in the command line list.
.IP "^E または *"
複数のファイルを検索する。
つまり、検索がマッチしないまま現在のファイルの先頭に達した場合、
コマンドラインのファイルリストにある前のファイルに検索を続行する。
.\"O .IP "^F or @"
.\"O Begin the search at the last line of the last file
.\"O in the command line list,
.\"O regardless of what is currently displayed on the screen
.\"O or the settings of the -a or -j options.
.IP "^F または @"
現在の画面表示や、-a または -j オプションの設定に関係なく、
コマンドラインのファイルリストにある最後のファイルの最終行から
検索を開始する。
.\"O .IP "^K"
.\"O As in forward searches.
.IP "^K"
前方検索の時と同じ。
.\"O .IP "^R"
.\"O As in forward searches.
.IP "^R"
前方検索の時と同じ。
.RE
.\"O .IP "ESC-/pattern"
.\"O Same as "/*".
.IP "ESC-/pattern"
"/*"と同じ。
.\"O .IP "ESC-?pattern"
.\"O Same as "?*".
.IP "ESC-?pattern"
"?*"と同じ。
.\"O .IP n
.\"O Repeat previous search, for N-th line containing the last pattern.
.\"O If the previous search was modified by ^N, the search is made for the
.\"O N-th line NOT containing the pattern.
.\"O If the previous search was modified by ^E, the search continues
.\"O in the next (or previous) file if not satisfied in the current file.
.\"O If the previous search was modified by ^R, the search is done
.\"O without using regular expressions.
.\"O There is no effect if the previous search was modified by ^F or ^K.
.IP n
前回の検索を繰り返す。
すなわち、前回使用した検索パターンにマッチする N 番目の行の検索する。
前の検索が ^N で変更されている場合、
パターンにマッチしない N 番目の行を検索する。
前の検索が ^E で変更されている場合、現在のファイルに条件を満たす行が
ないときは次の (あるいは前の) ファイルで検索を続ける。
前の検索が ^R で変更されている場合、正規表現を用いずに検索を行う。
前の検索が ^F または ^K で変更されている場合、何の変化も起きない。
.\"O .IP N
.\"O Repeat previous search, but in the reverse direction.
.IP N
前回の検索を逆方向に行う。
.\"O .IP "ESC-n"
.\"O Repeat previous search, but crossing file boundaries.
.\"O The effect is as if the previous search were modified by *.
.IP "ESC-n"
複数のファイルがあるとき、
ファイルを越えて直前の検索を繰り返す。
前の検索が、* によって変更された場合と同じ。
.\"O .IP "ESC-N"
.\"O Repeat previous search, but in the reverse direction
.\"O and crossing file boundaries.
.IP "ESC-N"
複数のファイルがあるとき、
ファイルを越えて逆方向に直前の検索を繰り返す。
.\"O .IP "ESC-u"
.\"O Undo search highlighting.
.\"O Turn off highlighting of strings matching the current search pattern. 
.\"O If highlighting is already off because of a previous ESC-u command,
.\"O turn highlighting back on.
.\"O Any search command will also turn highlighting back on.
.\"O (Highlighting can also be disabled by toggling the -G option;
.\"O in that case search commands do not turn highlighting back on.)
.IP "ESC-u"
検索結果のハイライトを元の状態に戻す。
現在の検索パターンにマッチした文字列のハイライトをオフにする。
もし既に、前の ESC-u コマンドによりハイライトがオフになっている場合は、
検索コマンドの実行によってもハイライトはオンに戻る。
(-G オプションでもハイライトをオフに切替えることができる。
この場合、検索コマンドでハイライトがオンにならない)。
.\"O .IP ":e [filename]"
.\"O Examine a new file.
.\"O If the filename is missing, the "current" file (see the :n and :p commands
.\"O below) from the list of files in the command line is re-examined.
.\"O A percent sign (%) in the filename is replaced by the name of the
.\"O current file.  
.\"O A pound sign (#) is replaced by the name of the previously examined file.
.\"O However, two consecutive percent signs are simply 
.\"O replaced with a single percent sign.  
.\"O This allows you to enter a filename that contains a percent sign
.\"O in the name.
.\"O Similarly, two consecutive pound signs are replaced with a single pound sign.
.\"O The filename is inserted into the command line list of files
.\"O so that it can be seen by subsequent :n and :p commands.
.\"O If the filename consists of several files, they are all inserted into
.\"O the list of files and the first one is examined.
.\"O If the filename contains one or more spaces,
.\"O the entire filename should be enclosed in double quotes
.\"O (also see the -" option).
.IP ":e [filename]"
新しいファイルを読み込む。
ファイル名の指定がない時は、コマンドラインのファイルリストから
「現在の」ファイル (:n と :p コマンドを参照) を再度読み込む。
ファイル名の中のパーセント記号 (%) は現在のファイル名で置き換えられる。
ファイル名の中のシャープ記号 (#) は前に読み込んだファイル名で置き換えられる。
しかし、2 つ続けたパーセント記号は、
単純に 1 つのパーセント記号に置き換えられる。
これは、パーセント記号を含むファイル名を入力できるようにするためである。
同様に、2 つ続けたシャープ記号は、
単純に 1 つのシャープ記号に置き換えられる。
このファイル名は、その後に続く :n コマンドと :p コマンドで閲覧できるように、
コマンドラインのファイルリストに挿入される。
複数のファイル名を指定した場合は、全てをファイルのリストに加え、
最初のファイルを閲覧する。
ファイル名が、1 個以上のスペースを含む場合、
ファイル名全体がダブルクォートで囲まれていなければならない
("-" オプションを参照)。
.\"O .IP "^X^V or E"
.\"O Same as :e.
.\"O Warning: some systems use ^V as a special literalization character.
.\"O On such systems, you may not be able to use ^V.
.IP "^X^V または E"
:e コマンドと同じ。
警告: ^V が特殊なリテラル化文字として使われているシステムもある。
そのようなシステムでは、^V を使うことはできない。
.\"O .IP ":n"
.\"O Examine the next file (from the list of files given in the command line).
.\"O If a number N is specified, the N-th next file is examined.
.IP ":n"
(コマンドラインで与えられたファイルリストから) 次のファイルを読み込む。
数字 N が指定されている時は、次の N 番目のファイルを読み込む。
.\"O .IP ":p"
.\"O Examine the previous file in the command line list.
.\"O If a number N is specified, the N-th previous file is examined.
.IP ":p"
コマンドラインのファイルリストにある 1 つ前のファイルを読み込む。
数字 N が指定されている時は、前の N 番目のファイルを読み込む。
.\"O .IP ":x"
.\"O Examine the first file in the command line list.
.\"O If a number N is specified, the N-th file in the list is examined.
.IP ":x"
コマンドラインのファイルリストにある一番最初のファイルを読み込む。
数字 N が指定されている時は、第 N 番目のファイルを読み込む。
.\"O .IP ":d"
.\"O Remove the current file from the list of files.
.IP ":d"
現在のファイルをファイルリストから取り除く。
.\"O .IP "= or ^G or :f"
.\"O Prints some information about the file being viewed,
.\"O including its name
.\"O and the line number and byte offset of the bottom line being displayed.
.\"O If possible, it also prints the length of the file,
.\"O the number of lines in the file
.\"O and the percent of the file above the last displayed line.
.IP "= または ^G または :f"
閲覧中のファイルについて、ファイル名・
表示中の最終行の行番号・バイトオフセットといった情報を表示する。
可能な場合には、ファイルの長さ・ファイルの行数・
表示されている最終行までのパーセントも表示する。
.\"O .IP "@"
.\"O Rotate the code recognition method of the current file.
.\"O Enhanced
.\"O .I less
.\"O has 7 methods for recognition, default (which is chosen
.\"O by the JLESSCHARSET environment variable), japanese, ujis, sjis,
.\"O iso8, noconv and none.
.IP "@"
現在のファイルについて、コード認識法を順番に変更する。
拡張した
.I less
には、(環境変数 JLESSCHARSET で選ばれる) デフォルト, japanese, ujis, sjis,
iso8, noconv, none という 7 種類のコード認識法がある。
.IP \-
.\"O Followed by one of the command line option letters (see OPTIONS below),
.\"O this will change the setting of that option
.\"O and print a message describing the new setting.
.\"O If a ^P (CONTROL-P) is entered immediately after the dash,
.\"O the setting of the option is changed but no message is printed.
.\"O If the option letter has a numeric value (such as -b or -h),
.\"O or a string value (such as -P or -t),
.\"O a new value may be entered after the option letter.
.\"O If no new value is entered, a message describing
.\"O the current setting is printed and nothing is changed.
コマンドラインオプション文字 (下記のオプションを参照) のうちの 1 つを
続けて入力することで、
オプション設定を変更し、新しい設定を解説するメッセージを表示する。
ダッシュのすぐ後に ^P (CONTROL-P) を入力すると、
オプションの設定は変更されるが、メッセージを何も表示しない。
オプション文字が、(-b や -h などの) 数値変数や
(-P や -t などの) 文字列変数の場合、
オプション文字の後に新しい値が入力できる。
値を入力しなかった場合、現在の設定を示すメッセージが
表示されるだけで設定は何も変わらない。
.IP \-\-
.\"O Like the \- command, but takes a long option name (see OPTIONS below)
.\"O rather than a single option letter.
.\"O You must press RETURN after typing the option name.
.\"O A ^P immediately after the second dash suppresses printing of a 
.\"O message describing the new setting, as in the \- command.
\- コマンドと似ているが、1 文字のオプションではなく、
長いオプション名 (下記のオプションを参照) が使われる。
オプション名を打ち込んだ後にリターンを押す必要がある。
2 個目のダッシュのすぐ後に ^P を入力すると、\- コマンドの場合と同じく、
新しい設定を説明するメッセージを表示しない。
.IP \-+
.\"O Followed by one of the command line option letters
.\"O this will reset the option to its default setting
.\"O and print a message describing the new setting.
.\"O (The "\-+\fIX\fP" command does the same thing
.\"O as "\-+\fIX\fP" on the command line.)
.\"O This does not work for string-valued options.
コマンドラインオプション文字のうちの 1 つを続けて入力することで、
オプションをデフォルト設定に戻して、新しい設定を表示する。
("\-+\fIX\fP" コマンドは、
コマンドラインで "\-+\fIX\fP" とするのと同等である。)
このコマンドは文字列の値を持つオプションには使えない。
.IP \-\-+
.\"O Like the \-+ command, but takes a long option name
.\"O rather than a single option letter.
\-+ コマンドと似ているが、1 文字のオプションではなく、
長いオプション名が使われる。
.IP \-!
.\"O Followed by one of the command line option letters,
.\"O this will reset the option to the "opposite" of its default setting
.\"O and print a message describing the new setting.
.\"O This does not work for numeric or string-valued options.
コマンドラインオプション文字のうちの 1 つを続けて入力することで、
オプションをデフォルト設定の「反対」にして、新しい設定を表示する。
このコマンドは数字あるいは文字列の値を持つオプションには使えない。
.IP \-\-!
.\"O Like the \-! command, but takes a long option name
.\"O rather than a single option letter.
\-! コマンドと似ているが、1 文字のオプションではなく、
長いオプション名が使われる。
.IP _
.\"O (Underscore.)
.\"O Followed by one of the command line option letters,
.\"O this will print a message describing the current setting of that option.
.\"O The setting of the option is not changed.
(アンダースコア)。
コマンドラインオプション文字のうちの 1 つを続けて入力することで、
そのオプションの現在設定を表示する。
オプションの設定は変化しない。
.IP __
.\"O (Double underscore.)
.\"O Like the _ (underscore) command, but takes a long option name
.\"O rather than a single option letter.
.\"O You must press RETURN after typing the option name.
(2 つのアンダースコア)。
_ (アンダースコア) コマンドと似ているが、
1 文字のオプションではなく、長いオプション名が使われる。
オプション名を打ち込んだ後にリターンを押す必要がある。
.IP +cmd
.\"O Causes the specified cmd to be executed each time a new file is examined.
.\"O For example, +G causes 
.\"O .I less
.\"O to initially display each file starting at the end 
.\"O rather than the beginning.
新しいファイルを読み込むたびに、指定したコマンド cmd を毎回実行する。
例えば、+G を実行すると
.I less
で各ファイルを開いた時に先頭からではなく終端から表示される。
.\"O .IP V
.\"O Prints the version number of 
.\"O .I less 
.\"O being run.
.IP V
現在起動している
.I less 
のバージョンを表示する。
.\"O .IP "q or Q or :q or :Q or ZZ"
.\"O Exits
.\"O .I less.
.IP "q または Q または :q または :Q または ZZ"
.I less
を終了する。
.PP
.\"O The following 
.\"O four
.\"O commands may or may not be valid, depending on your particular installation.
以下の 4 つのコマンドが使用できるかは、インストールした方法に依存する。
.PP
.IP v
.\"O Invokes an editor to edit the current file being viewed.
.\"O The editor is taken from the environment variable VISUAL if defined,
.\"O or EDITOR if VISUAL is not defined,
.\"O or defaults to "vi" if neither VISUAL nor EDITOR is defined.
.\"O See also the discussion of LESSEDIT under the section on PROMPTS below.
現在閲覧しているファイルを編集するためエディタを起動する。
エディタとして、環境変数 VISUAL で定義されている値が用いられる。
VISUAL が定義されていない場合、環境変数 EDITOR の値が使われる。
VISUAL も EDITOR も定義されていない場合、"vi" がデフォルトになる。
プロンプトセクションの LESSEDIT に関する話題も参照すること。
.IP "! shell-command"
.\"O Invokes a shell to run the shell-command given.
.\"O A percent sign (%) in the command is replaced by the name of the
.\"O current file.  
.\"O A pound sign (#) is replaced by the name of the previously examined file.
.\"O "!!" repeats the last shell command.
.\"O "!" with no shell command simply invokes a shell.
.\"O On Unix systems, the shell is taken from the environment variable SHELL,
.\"O or defaults to "sh".
.\"O On MS-DOS and OS/2 systems, the shell is the normal command processor.
.\"O .IP "| <m> shell-command"
.\"O <m> represents any mark letter.
.\"O Pipes a section of the input file to the given shell command.
.\"O The section of the file to be piped is between the first line on
.\"O the current screen and the position marked by the letter.
.\"O <m> may also be ^ or $ to indicate beginning or end of file respectively.
.\"O If <m> is . or newline, the current screen is piped.
指定されたシェルコマンドを実行するため、シェルを起動する。
コマンド中のパーセント記号 (%) は、現在のファイル名で置き換えられる。
コマンド中のシャープ記号 (#) は、前に読み込んだファイル名で置き換えられる。
"!!" は、直前のシェルコマンドを繰り返す。
シェルコマンドを伴わない "!" は、単にシェルを起動する。
Unix では、シェルは環境変数 SHELL で設定されたものが使われる。
設定されていない場合、デフォルトは "sh" である。
MS-DOS と OS/2 では、シェルは通常のコマンドプロセッサである。
.IP "| <m> shell-command"
.\"O <m> represents any mark letter.
.\"O Pipes a section of the input file to the given shell command.
.\"O The section of the file to be piped is between the first line on
.\"O the current screen and the position marked by the letter.
.\"O <m> may also be ^ or $ to indicate beginning or end of file respectively.
.\"O If <m> is . or newline, the current screen is piped.
<m> は任意のマーク文字である。
入力ファイルのセクションを与えられたシェルコマンドに渡す。
渡されるファイルのセクションは、現在の画面の一番上の行から
文字でマークされた所までである。
ファイルの先頭行と最終行を示すために、<m> をそれぞれ ^ と $ にしてもよい。
<m> が . または改行の場合、現在の画面が渡される。
.IP "s filename"
.\"O Save the input to a file.
.\"O This only works if the input is a pipe, not an ordinary file.
入力をファイルに保存する。
このコマンドは入力が一般のファイルでなく、パイプの時のみ有効である。
.PP
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O Command line options are described below.
.\"O Most options may be changed while
.\"O .I less 
.\"O is running, via the "\-" command.
コマンドラインオプションを以下に説明する。
大部分のオプションは
.I less 
の実行中に "\-" コマンドを用いて変更することが可能である。
.PP
.\"O Options are also taken from the environment variable "LESS" and "JLESS".
.\"sato: 2 段落先に同じような表現があるので、ここ (↑) は無視する。
.\"O .PP
.\"O Most options may be given in one of two forms: 
.\"O either a dash followed by a single letter,
.\"O or two dashes followed by a long option name.
.\"O A long option name may be abbreviated as long as
.\"O the abbreviation is unambiguous.
.\"O For example, --quit-at-eof may be abbreviated --quit, but not
.\"O --qui, since both --quit-at-eof and --quiet begin with --qui.
.\"O Some long option names are in uppercase, such as --QUIT-AT-EOF, as
.\"O distinct from --quit-at-eof.
.\"O Such option names need only have their first letter capitalized;
.\"O the remainder of the name may be in either case.
.\"O For example, --Quit-at-eof is equivalent to --QUIT-AT-EOF.
大部分のオプションは、「ダッシュと 1 文字のオプション」または
「2 つのダッシュと長いオプション名」のどちらかの形式で指定される。
長いオプション名は、他のものと区別がつく限り省略できる。
例えば、--quit-at-eof は --quit と省略できるが、
--qui のように省略することはできない。
なぜなら、--quit-at-eof と --quiet が --qui で始まっているからである。
大文字のオプション名もある。
例えば、--QUIT-AT-EOF のようなものがあり、--quit-at-eof とは区別される。
このようなオプション名は、始めの文字を大文字にするだけでよく、
それ以降の文字は大文字でも小文字でも構わない。
例えば、--Quit-at-eof は --QUIT-AT-EOF と等しい。
.PP
.\"O Options are also taken from the environment variable "LESS".
.\"O For example, 
.\"O to avoid typing "less -options ..." each time 
.\"O .I less 
.\"O is invoked, you might tell 
.\"O .I csh:
.\"O .sp
.\"O setenv LESS "-options"
.\"O .sp
.\"O or if you use 
.\"O .I sh:
.\"O .sp
.\"O LESS="-options"; export LESS
.\"O .sp
.\"O On MS-DOS, you don't need the quotes, but you should replace any 
.\"O percent signs in the options string by double percent signs.
.\"O .sp
環境変数 "LESS" と "JLESS" の値もオプションとして使われる。
例えば、
.I less
を起動するたびに "less -options ..." とタイプするのを避けるために、
.I csh
では、
.sp
setenv LESS "-options"
.sp
もし、
.I sh
を使っているならば、
.sp
LESS="-options"; export LESS
.sp
とすればよい。
MS-DOS では、クォーテーションは必要ないが、オプション文字列中の
パーセント記号を 2 つのパーセント記号に置き換える必要がある。
.sp
.\"O The environment variable is parsed before the command line,
.\"O so command line options override the LESS and JLESS environment variables.
.\"O If an option appears in the LESS and JLESS variables, it can be reset
.\"O to its default value on the command line by beginning the command
.\"O line option with "\-+".
環境変数はコマンドラインより先に解析されているので、
コマンドラインオプションは環境変数 LESS および JLESS を上書きする。
もし、あるオプションが環境変数 LESS または JLESS にあっても、
コマンドラインオプション "\-+" で起動すれば、
そのオプションをデフォルトの値にリセットすることができる。
.sp
.\"O For options like -P or -D which take a following string,
.\"O a dollar sign ($) must be used to signal the end of the string.
.\"O For example, to set two -D options on MS-DOS, you must have
.\"O a dollar sign between them, like this:
-P や -D オプションのように文字列を後に続けるオプションでは、
文字列の終りの印としてダラー記号 ($) を使わなくてはならない。
例えば、MS-DOS で 2 つの -D オプションを設定する場合は、
次のように間にダラー記号を入れなくてはならない。
.sp
LESS="-Dn9.1$-Ds4.1"
.sp
.\"O .IP "-? or --help"
.\"O This option displays a summary of the commands accepted by
.\"O .I less
.\"O (the same as the h command).
.\"O (Depending on how your shell interprets the question mark,
.\"O it may be necessary to quote the question mark, thus: "-\\?".)
.IP "-? または --help"
このオプションは、
.I less
が受け付けるコマンドの概要を表示する (h コマンドと同じ)。
(使用しているシェルが ? をどのように解釈するかにより、
"-\\?" というように ? を " で囲む必要があるかもしれない。) 
.\"O .IP "-a or --search-skip-screen"
.\"O Causes searches to start after the last line
.\"O displayed on the screen, 
.\"O thus skipping all lines displayed on the screen.
.\"O By default, searches start at the second line on the screen
.\"O (or after the last found line; see the -j option).
.IP "-a または --search-skip-screen"
画面に表示されている最終行の次の行から検索を開始する。
つまり、現在画面に表示されている行中の検索は行わない。
デフォルトでは、検索は画面中の第 2 行目
(もしくは最後に検索対象が見つかった行のあと。-j オプションを参照) 
から行われる。
.\"O .IP "-b\fIn\fP or --buffers=\fIn\fP"
.\"O Specifies the number of buffers
.\"O .I less
.\"O will use for each file.
.\"O Buffers are 1K, and by default 10 buffers are used for each file
.\"O (except if the file is a pipe; see the -B option).
.\"O The number \fIn\fP specifies a different number of buffers to use.
.IP "-b\fIn\fP または --buffers=\fIn\fP"
.I less
が各ファイルに対して使うバッファの数を指定する。
各バッファは 1KB で、
各ファイルに対してデフォルトでは 10 個のバッファを使う
(ただし、ファイルがパイプの場合は例外である。-B オプションを参照)。
数字 \fIn\fP で使用するバッファの数を指定する。
.\"O .IP "-B or --auto-buffers"
.\"O By default, when data is read from a pipe,
.\"O buffers are allocated automatically as needed.
.\"O If a large amount of data is read from the pipe, this can cause
.\"O a large amount of memory to be allocated.
.\"O The -B option disables this automatic allocation of buffers for pipes,
.\"O so that only the number of buffers specified by the -b option are used.
.\"O Warning: use of -B can result in erroneous display, since only the
.\"O most recently viewed part of the file is kept in memory; 
.\"O any earlier data is lost.
.IP "-B または --auto-buffers"
データがパイプから読み込まれる場合、
デフォルトではバッファは必要に応じて動的確保される。
そのため、大容量のデータがパイプから読み込まれる場合、
多くのメモリが確保されてしまう。
-B オプションが指定されると、-b オプションで指定されたバッファの数を
使うため、パイプに対するバッファの動的確保が行われない。
警告: -B オプションを使った場合、ファイルの最も最近閲覧している
部分のみしかメモリに保持されず、以前のデータが無くなっているため、
表示にエラーが起こる場合もある。
.\"O .IP "-c or --clear-screen"
.\"O Causes full screen repaints to be painted from the top line down.
.\"O By default,
.\"O full screen repaints are done by scrolling from the bottom of the screen.
.IP "-c または --clear-screen"
全画面の再描画を、先頭行から下に向かって行わせるようにする。
デフォルトでは、
全画面の再描画は、画面の最終行からのスクロールによって行われる。
.\"O .IP "-C or --CLEAR-SCREEN"
.\"O The -C option is like -c, but the screen is cleared before it is repainted.
.IP "-C または --CLEAR-SCREEN"
-C オプションは、-c オプションと似ているが、
再描画を行う前に画面をクリアする。
.\"O .IP "-d or --dumb"
.\"O The -d option suppresses the error message
.\"O normally displayed if the terminal is dumb;
.\"O that is, lacks some important capability,
.\"O such as the ability to clear the screen or scroll backward.
.\"O The -d option does not otherwise change the behavior of
.\"O .I less
.\"O on a dumb terminal).
.IP "-d または --dumb"
-d オプションは、端末がダムである場合に
通常表示されるエラーメッセージの表示させない。
ダムとは、画面のクリア、後方へのスクロールといった重要な機能がないことをいう。 
もしそれらの機能がある場合は、-d オプションでもダム端末上での
.I less
の動作は変更されない。
.\"O .IP "-D\fBx\fP\fIcolor\fP or --color=\fBx\fP\fIcolor\fP"
.\"O [MS-DOS only]
.\"O Sets the color of the text displayed.
.\"O \fBx\fP is a single character which selects the type of text whose color is 
.\"O being set: n=normal, s=standout, d=bold, u=underlined, k=blink.
.\"O \fIcolor\fP is a pair of numbers separated by a period.  
.\"O The first number selects the foreground color and the second selects 
.\"O the background color of the text.
.\"O A single number \fIN\fP is the same as \fIN.0\fP.
.IP "-D\fBx\fP\fIcolor\fP または --color=\fBx\fP\fIcolor\fP"
[MS-DOS のみ]
表示されるテキストの色を設定する。
\fBx\fP は設定するテキストのタイプを表す文字である。
n は標準、s は標準出力、d は太字、u は下線、k は点滅である。
\fIcolor\fP は、ピリオドで区切られた数値の組である。
1 つ目の数値で文字の前景色、2 つ目の数値で文字の背景色を選ぶ。
数値 \fIN\fP は、\fIN.0\fP と同じである。
.\"O .IP "-e or --quit-at-eof"
.\"O Causes 
.\"O .I less 
.\"O to automatically exit
.\"O the second time it reaches end-of-file.
.\"O By default, the only way to exit 
.\"O .I less
.\"O is via the "q" command.
.IP "-e または --quit-at-eof"
ファイルの終りに 2 度目に達した場合、自動的に
.I less 
を終了させる。
デフォルトでは、
.I less
を終了させる唯一の方法は、"q" コマンドである。
.\"O .IP "-E or --QUIT-AT-EOF"
.\"O Causes 
.\"O .I less
.\"O to automatically exit the first time it reaches end-of-file.
.IP "-E または --QUIT-AT-EOF"
ファイルの終りに 1 度目に達した場合、自動的に
.I less 
を終了させる。
.\"O .IP "-f or --force"
.\"O Forces non-regular files to be opened.
.\"O (A non-regular file is a directory or a device special file.)
.\"O Also suppresses the warning message when a binary file is opened.
.\"O By default,
.\"O .I less
.\"O will refuse to open non-regular files.
.IP "-f または --force"
通常のファイルでないものを強制的に開かせる
(通常のファイルでないものとは、ディレクトリまたは
デバイススペシャルファイルのことである)。
また、バイナリファイルを開く場合の警告メッセージも表示しない。
デフォルトでは、
.I less
は、通常のファイルでないものを開かない。
.\"O .IP "-F or --quit-if-one-screen"
.\"O Causes
.\"O .I less
.\"O to automatically exit
.\"O if the entire file can be displayed on the first screen.
.IP "-F または --quit-if-one-screen"
最初の画面でファイル全体が表示できる場合、
.I less
を自動的に終了させる。
.\"O .IP "-g or --hilite-search"
.\"O Normally, 
.\"O .I less 
.\"O will highlight ALL strings which match the last search command.
.\"O The -g option changes this behavior to highlight only the particular string 
.\"O which was found by the last search command.
.\"O This can cause 
.\"O .I less 
.\"O to run somewhat faster than the default.
.IP "-g または --hilite-search"
通常、
.I less 
は、前回の検索とマッチする画面中全ての文字列をハイライト表示する。
-g オプションは、前回の検索にマッチした文字列のみを
ハイライト表示するように変更する。
このオプションは、
.I less 
の動作をデフォルトより多少速くする。
.\"O .IP "-G or --HILITE-SEARCH"
.\"O The -G option suppresses all highlighting of strings found by search commands.
.IP "-G または --HILITE-SEARCH"
-G オプションは、検索コマンドで見つかった文字列をハイライト表示させない。
.\"O .IP "-h\fIn\fP or ---max-back-scroll=\fIn\fP"
.\"O Specifies a maximum number of lines to scroll backward.
.\"O If it is necessary to scroll backward more than \fIn\fP lines,
.\"O the screen is repainted in a forward direction instead.
.\"O (If the terminal does not have the ability to scroll
.\"O backward, -h0 is implied.)
.IP "-h\fIn\fP または ---max-back-scroll=\fIn\fP"
後方に戻る最大行数を指定する。
もし、\fIn\fP 行を上回って後方に戻る必要がある場合は、
代わりに画面が前方に再描画される
(端末が後方に戻る機能を持たない場合は、-h0 を意味する)。
.\"O .IP "-i or --ignore-case"
.\"O Causes searches to ignore case; that is,
.\"O uppercase and lowercase are considered identical.
.\"O This option is ignored if any uppercase letters
.\"O appear in the search pattern; 
.\"O in other words,
.\"O if a pattern contains uppercase letters, then that search does not ignore case.
.IP "-i または --ignore-case"
大文字小文字の区別をせず、大文字と小文字は同一とみなして検索をする。
このオプションは、検索パターンに大文字が含まれていた場合には無視される。
つまり、検索パターンに大文字が含まれていた場合、
大文字小文字の区別をした検索をする。
.\"O .IP "-I or --IGNORE-CASE"
.\"O Like -i, but searches ignore case even if 
.\"O the pattern contains uppercase letters.
.IP "-I または --IGNORE-CASE"
-i コマンドと似ているが、検索パターンが大文字を含んでいた場合でも、
検索は大文字小文字の違いを無視して検索をする。
.\"O .IP "-j\fIn\fP or --jump-target=\fIn\fP"
.\"O Specifies a line on the screen where the "target" line
.\"O is to be positioned.
.\"O A target line is the object of a text search, 
.\"O tag search, jump to a line number,
.\"O jump to a file percentage, or jump to a marked position.
.\"O The screen line is specified by a number: the top line on the screen
.\"O is 1, the next is 2, and so on.
.\"O The number may be negative to specify a line relative to the bottom
.\"O of the screen: the bottom line on the screen is -1, the second
.\"O to the bottom is -2, and so on.
.\"O If the -j option is used, searches begin at the line immediately
.\"O after the target line.
.\"O For example, if "-j4" is used, the target line is the
.\"O fourth line on the screen, so searches begin at the fifth line
.\"O on the screen.
.IP "-j\fIn\fP または --jump-target=\fIn\fP"
「ターゲット」行とする画面上の行番号を指定する。
ターゲット行とは、テキスト検索、タグ検索、行番号へのジャンプ、
ファイルのパーセンテージでのジャンプ、マーク位置へのジャンプ、
の対象となる行である。
画面の行は数字 n で指定する。
画面の一番上の行を 1、その次の行を 2、...、と表す。
画面の最終行から何行目かを指定する場合は、数値を負に指定する。
画面の一番下の行は -1、下から 2 行目は -2、...、と指定する。
-j オプションが用いられている時、検索はターゲット行の直後の行から始まる。
例えば、"-j4" のとき、ターゲット行は画面の第 4 行目なので、
検索は画面の第 5 行目から始まる。
.\"O .IP "-J or --status-column"
.\"O Displays a status column at the left edge of the screen.
.\"O The status column is used only if the -w or -W option is in effect.
.IP "-J または --status-column"
ステータス欄を画面の左端に表示する。
ステータス欄は、-w または -W オプションが有効なときのみ使われる。
.\"O .IP "-k\fIfilename\fP or --lesskey-file=\fIfilename\fP"
.\"O Causes
.\"O .I less
.\"O to open and interpret the named file as a
.\"O .I lesskey
.\"O (1) file.
.\"O Multiple -k options may be specified.
.\"O If the LESSKEY or LESSKEY_SYSTEM environment variable is set, or
.\"O if a lesskey file is found in a standard place (see KEY BINDINGS),
.\"O it is also used as a 
.\"O .I lesskey
.\"O file.
.IP "-k\fIfilename\fP または --lesskey-file=\fIfilename\fP"
.I lesskey
(1) ファイルとして、指定したファイルを
.I less
に開かせて処理させる。
複数の -k オプションを指定してもよい。
環境変数 LESSKEY または LESSKEY_SYSTEM が設定された場合、もしくは、
lesskey ファイルが標準位置 (「キー割り当て」セクションを参照) に
見つかった場合、それも
.I lesskey
ファイルとして使われる。
.IP -K\fIcharset\fP
.I less
に、環境変数 JLESSCHARSET もしくは LESSCHARSET で定義されている
文字セットの代わりとして、指定した文字セットを使わせる。
.\"O .IP "-m or --long-prompt"
.\"O Causes 
.\"O .I less
.\"O to prompt verbosely (like \fImore\fP),
.\"O with the percent into the file.
.\"O By default,
.\"O .I less
.\"O prompts with a colon.
.IP "-m または --long-prompt"
.I less
に、(\fImore\fP のように) 詳細なパーセント表示のプロンプトを出させる。
デフォルトでは、
.I less
は、コロンをプロンプトとして表示する。
.\"O .IP "-M or --LONG-PROMPT"
.\"O Causes 
.\"O .I less
.\"O to prompt even more verbosely than 
.\"O .I more.
.IP "-M または --LONG-PROMPT"
.I more
より、さらに詳細なプロンプトを
.I less
に出させる。
.\"O .IP "-n or --line-numbers"
.\"O Suppresses line numbers.
.\"O The default (to use line numbers) may cause
.\"O .I less
.\"O to run more slowly in some cases, especially with a very large input file.
.\"O Suppressing line numbers with the -n option will avoid this problem.
.\"O Using line numbers means: the line number will be displayed in the verbose
.\"O prompt and in the = command,
.\"O and the v command will pass the current line number to the editor
.\"O (see also the discussion of LESSEDIT in PROMPTS below).
.IP "-n または --line-numbers"
行番号を表示させない。
(行番号を表示する) デフォルトの設定では、
特に、入力ファイルが非常に大きな場合に
.I less
の動作が遅くなることがある。
-n オプションで行番号非表示にすることで、この問題を避けられる。
行番号の使用とは「プロンプトと = コマンドで行番号が表示され、
v コマンドで現在の行番号がエディタに渡される」ということである
(「プロンプト」セクションにおける LESSEDIT に関する話題を参照すること)。
.\"O .IP "-N or --LINE-NUMBERS"
.\"O Causes a line number to be displayed at the beginning of
.\"O each line in the display.
.IP "-N または --LINE-NUMBERS"
画面の各行の先頭に行番号を表示する。
.\"O .IP "-o\fIfilename\fP or --log-file=\fIfilename\fP"
.\"O Causes
.\"O .I less
.\"O to copy its input to the named file as it is being viewed.
.\"O This applies only when the input file is a pipe,
.\"O not an ordinary file.
.\"O If the file already exists, 
.\"O .I less
.\"O will ask for confirmation before overwriting it.
.IP "-o\fIfilename\fP または --log-file=\fIfilename\fP"
.I less
の入力ファイルを指定した名前のファイルにコピーし閲覧する。
このオプションは、入力ファイルが一般のファイルではなく、
パイプである場合にのみ適用される。
ファイルが既に存在する時は、上書きする前に
.I less
が確認を求める。
.\"O .IP "-O\fIfilename\fP or --LOG-FILE=\fIfilename\fP"
.\"O The -O option is like -o, but it will overwrite an existing
.\"O file without asking for confirmation.
.\"O .sp
.\"O If no log file has been specified,
.\"O the -o and -O options can be used from within 
.\"O .I less
.\"O to specify a log file.
.\"O Without a file name, they will simply report the name of the log file.
.\"O The "s" command is equivalent to specifying -o from within
.\"O .I less.
.IP "-O\fIfilename\fP または --LOG-FILE=\fIfilename\fP"
-O オプションは -o に似ているが、
既にあるファイルを確認することなく上書きする。
.sp
ログファイルが指定されてない場合、
-o と -O オプションは、
.I less
のなかで、ログファイルを指定するために使うことができる。
ファイル名を指定しない時は、単にログファイル名を表示するだけである。
"s" コマンドは、
.I less
で、-o を指定するのと同じである。
.\"O .IP "-p\fIpattern\fP or --pattern=\fIpattern\fP"
.\"O The -p option on the command line is equivalent to 
.\"O specifying +/\fIpattern\fP;
.\"O that is, it tells
.\"O .I less
.\"O to start at the first occurrence of \fIpattern\fP in the file.
.IP "-p\fIpattern\fP または --pattern=\fIpattern\fP"
コマンドラインでの -p オプションは、
+/\fIpattern\fP を指定するのと同じである。つまり、
ファイル中で \fIpattern\fP が最初に現れるところを
.I less
の第 1 行目として表示する。
.\"O .IP "-P\fIprompt\fP or --prompt=\fIprompt\fP"
.\"O Provides a way to tailor the three prompt
.\"O styles to your own preference.
.\"O This option would normally be put in the LESS and JLESS environment
.\"O variables, rather than being typed in with each 
.\"O .I less
.\"O command.
.\"O Such an option must either be the last option in the LESS and JLESS variables,
.\"O or be terminated by a dollar sign.
.\"O -Ps followed by a string changes the default (short) prompt 
.\"O to that string.
.\"O -Pm changes the medium (-m) prompt.
.\"O -PM changes the long (-M) prompt.
.\"O -Ph changes the prompt for the help screen.
.\"O -P= changes the message printed by the = command.
.\"O All prompt strings consist of a sequence of 
.\"O letters and special escape sequences.
.\"O See the section on PROMPTS for more details.
.IP "-P\fIprompt\fP または --prompt=\fIprompt\fP"
3 つのプロンプトのスタイルを好みによって調整する方法を提供する。
このオプションは通常、
.I less
コマンドを呼び出すたびに打ち込んだりせずに、
環境変数 LESS および JLESS で指定する。
そのようなオプションは、環境変数 LESS および JLESS の中で
最後のオプションになっているか、
もしくは、ダラー記号で終了していなければならない。
-Ps の後に文字列を続けるオプションは、デフォルトの (短い) プロンプトを
その文字列に変更する。
-Pm は中間の (-m) プロンプトを変更する。
-PM は長い (-l) プロンプトを変更する。
-Ph はヘルプ画面のプロンプトを変更する。
-P= は = コマンドで表示されるメッセージを変更する。
全てのプロンプトの文字列は、
文字列と特別なエスケープシーケンスから構成される。
詳細は「プロンプト」セクションを参照すること。
.\"O .IP "-q or --quiet or --silent"
.\"O Causes moderately "quiet" operation:
.\"O the terminal bell is not rung 
.\"O if an attempt is made to scroll past the end of the file
.\"O or before the beginning of the file.
.\"O If the terminal has a "visual bell", it is used instead.
.\"O The bell will be rung on certain other errors,
.\"O such as typing an invalid character.
.\"O The default is to ring the terminal bell in all such cases.
.IP "-q または --quiet または --silent"
比較的「静かな」操作にする。
スクロールでファイルの終りを過ぎようとした場合や、
ファイルの始まりより前に行こうとした場合でも、
端末でベルを鳴らさない。
端末に「ビジュアルベル」がある場合は、代わりにそれを使う。
不正な文字を打った場合のような、その他のエラーに関してはベルを鳴らす。
デフォルトでは、全てのエラーに関して端末のベルが鳴る。
.\"O .IP "-Q or --QUIET or --SILENT"
.\"O Causes totally "quiet" operation:
.\"O the terminal bell is never rung.
.IP "-Q または --QUIET または --SILENT"
完全に「静かな」操作にする。
端末のベルは全く鳴らない。
.\"O .IP "-r or --raw-control-chars"
.\"O Causes "raw" control characters to be displayed.
.\"O The default is to display control characters using the caret notation;
.\"O for example, a control-A (octal 001) is displayed as "^A".
.\"O Warning: when the -r option is used,
.\"O .I less
.\"O cannot keep track of the actual appearance of the screen
.\"O (since this depends on how the screen responds to
.\"O each type of control character).
.\"O Thus, various display problems may result,
.\"O such as long lines being split in the wrong place.
.IP "-r または --raw-control-chars"
「そのままの」制御文字を表示させるようにする。
デフォルトでは、制御文字をキャレット表記を使って表示する。
例えば、control-A (8 進数 001) は "^A" と表示される。
警告: -r オプションが指定されると、
.I less
は (制御文字のタイプにどのように画面が反応するかに依存しているために) 
画面の実際の状況の経過を追うことができない。
よって多くの場合、長い行が誤った位置で分割されてしまうといった問題が生じる。
.\"O .IP "-R or --RAW-CONTROL-CHARS"
.\"O Like -r, but tries to keep track of the screen appearance where possible.
.\"O This works only if the input consists of normal text and possibly some
.\"O ANSI "color" escape sequences, which are sequences of the form:
.\"O .sp
.\"O 	ESC [ ... m
.\"O .sp
.\"O where the "..." is zero or more characters other than "m".
.\"O For the purpose of keeping track of screen appearance,
.\"O all control characters and all ANSI color escape sequences are
.\"O assumed to not move the cursor.
.\"O You can make
.\"O .I less
.\"O think that characters other than "m" can end ANSI color escape sequences
.\"O by setting the environment variable LESSANSIENDCHARS to the list of
.\"O characters which can end a color escape sequence.
.IP "-R または --RAW-CONTROL-CHARS"
-r と似ているが、可能な場合には画面表示を正しく維持しようとする。
このオプションが有効なのは、入力が通常のテキストの場合である。
入力には ANSI の「カラー」エスケープシーケンスが含まれていてもよい。
このシーケンスは
.sp
	ESC [ ... m
.sp
のような形式で、"..." は "m" 以外の 0 個以上の文字である。
画面の状況を保つため、
全ての制御文字と ANSI カラーシーケンスは
カーソルを移動させないと仮定している。
.I less
に "m" 以外の文字を
ANSI カラーエスケープシーケンスの終了文字として認識させることもできる。
そのためには、認識させたい終了文字のリストを
環境変数 LESSANSIENDCHARS に設定すればよい。
.\"O .IP "-s or --squeeze-blank-lines"
.\"O Causes consecutive blank lines to be squeezed into a single blank line.
.\"O This is useful when viewing
.\"O .I nroff
.\"O output.
.IP "-s または --squeeze-blank-lines"
連続した空白行を、1 行の空白行にまとめる。
.I nroff
の出力を閲覧するときに役立つ。
.\"O .IP "-S or --chop-long-lines"
.\"O Causes lines longer than the screen width to be
.\"O chopped rather than folded.
.\"O That is, the remainder of a long line is simply discarded.
.\"O The default is to fold long lines; that is, display the remainder
.\"O on the next line.
.IP "-S または --chop-long-lines"
画面幅より長い行を折り返さずに切ってしまう。
つまり、長い行の残りの部分を単純に捨ててしまう。
デフォルトでは長い行を折り返すので、残りが次の行に表示される。
.\"O .IP "-t\fItag\fP or --tag=\fItag\fP"
.\"O The -t option, followed immediately by a TAG,
.\"O will edit the file containing that tag.
.\"O For this to work, there must be a file called "tags" in the
.\"O current directory, which was previously built by the 
.\"O .I ctags
.\"O (1) command.
.\"O This option may also be specified from within 
.\"O .I less 
.\"O (using the \- command) as a way of examining a new file.
.\"O The command ":t" is equivalent to specifying -t from within
.\"O .I less.
.IP "-t\fItag\fP または --tag=\fItag\fP"
-t オプションの後にはタグ名が続き、そのタグを含むファイルを編集する。
このオプションを使うためには、
.I ctags
(1) コマンドであらかじめ作られた "tags" と呼ばれる
ファイルが現在のディレクトリになければならない。
このオプションは、
新しいファイルを読み込む場合に
.I less
のなかで (- コマンドを用いて) 指定することもできる。
コマンド ":t" は、
.I less
中で、-t を指定するのと同じである。
.\"O .IP "-T\fItagsfile\fP or --tag-file=\fItagsfile\fP"
.\"O Specifies a tags file to be used instead of "tags".
.IP "-T\fItagsfile\fP または --tag-file=\fItagsfile\fP"
"tags" の代わりに使用するタグファイル名を指定する。
.\"O .IP "-u or --underline-special"
.\"O Causes backspaces and carriage returns to be treated as printable characters;
.\"O that is, they are sent to the terminal when they appear in the input.
.IP "-u または --underline-special"
バックスペースとキャリッジリターンを印刷可能文字として扱う。
つまり、これらが入力に現れた場合は端末に送られる。
.\"O .IP "-U or --UNDERLINE-SPECIAL"
.\"O Causes backspaces, tabs and carriage returns to be 
.\"O treated as control characters;
.\"O that is, they are handled as specified by the -r option.
.\"O .sp
.\"O By default, if neither -u nor -U is given,
.\"O backspaces which appear adjacent to an underscore character
.\"O are treated specially:
.\"O the underlined text is displayed 
.\"O using the terminal's hardware underlining capability.
.\"O Also, backspaces which appear between two identical characters
.\"O are treated specially: 
.\"O the overstruck text is printed 
.\"O using the terminal's hardware boldface capability.
.\"O Other backspaces are deleted, along with the preceding character.
.\"O Carriage returns immediately followed by a newline are deleted.
.\"O other carriage returns are handled as specified by the -r option.
.\"O Text which is overstruck or underlined can be searched for
.\"O if neither -u nor -U is in effect.
.IP "-U または --UNDERLINE-SPECIAL"
バックスペース、タブ、キャリッジリターンを制御文字として扱う。
つまり、これらの文字は -r オプションで指定されたものとして扱う。
.sp
デフォルトで -u と -U のどちらも指定されていない場合、
下線文字の隣にあるバックスペースは特別な扱われ方をする。
下線された文字は、端末のハードウェア下線機能を使って表示される。
さらに、同一の 2 文字の間にあるバックスペースも特別な扱われ方をする。
重ね打ちされた文字が端末のハードウェア太字機能を使って表示される。
その他の文字に続くバックスペースは削除される。
その他のキャリッジリターンは -r オプションで指定されたように扱われる。
-u と -U のどちらも有効でない場合に、
重ね打ち、もしくは、下線された文字が検索される。
.\"O .IP "-V or --version"
.\"O Displays the version number of 
.IP "-V または --version"
.I less
のバージョンナンバーを表示する。
.\"O .IP "-w or --hilite-unread"
.\"O Temporarily highlights the first "new" line after a forward movement
.\"O of a full page.
.\"O The first "new" line is the line immediately following the line previously
.\"O at the bottom of the screen.
.\"O Also highlights the target line after a g or p command.
.\"O The highlight is removed at the next command which causes movement.
.\"O The entire line is highlighted, unless the -J option is in effect,
.\"O in which case only the status column is highlighted.
.IP "-w または --hilite-unread"
前方に 1 ページ進んだ場合、最初の「新しい」行を一時的にハイライト表示する。
最初の「新しい」行は、前の画面の最下行の次の行である。
g または p コマンドの対象となった行もハイライトする。
ハイライトは、移動させる次のコマンドがあったときに消される。
ステータス行だけをハイライトさせる -J オプションが有効でない限り、
行全体がハイライトされる。
.\"O .IP "-W or --HILITE-UNREAD"
.\"O Like -w, but temporarily highlights the first new line after any 
.\"O forward movement command larger than one line.
.IP "-W または --HILITE-UNREAD"
-w と似ているが、前方に 2 行以上移動した場合に
最初の新しい行を一時的にハイライトする。
.\"O .IP -XXX
.\"O Causes mark characters to be used to represent wrong characters.
.\"O By default, such wrong characters displayed as binary.
.IP "-XXX または --mark-wrong-char"
表示できない誤った文字を表示するために、
マーク文字 (〓) が使われるようにする。
デフォルトでは、そのような表示できない誤った文字は、バイナリとして表示される。
.\"O .IP "-x\fIn\fP or --tabs=\fIn\fP"
.\"O Sets tab stops every \fIn\fP positions.
.\"O The default for \fIn\fP is 8.
.IP "-x\fIn\fP または --tabs=\fIn\fP"
タブストップを \fIn\fP 文字に設定する。
\fIn\fP のデフォルトは 8 である。
.\"O .IP "-X or --no-init"
.\"O Disables sending the termcap initialization and deinitialization strings
.\"O to the terminal.
.\"O This is sometimes desirable if the deinitialization string does
.\"O something unnecessary, like clearing the screen.
.IP "-X または --no-init"
端末に、termcap 初期化文字列と非初期化文字列を送れないようにする。
これは、画面をクリアするときのように非初期化文字列が不必要な場合には、
望ましいことがある。
.\"O .IP "-y\fIn\fP or --max-forw-scroll=\fIn\fP"
.\"O Specifies a maximum number of lines to scroll forward.
.\"O If it is necessary to scroll forward more than \fIn\fP lines,
.\"O the screen is repainted instead.
.\"O The -c or -C option may be used to repaint from the top of
.\"O the screen if desired.
.\"O By default, any forward movement causes scrolling.
.IP "-y\fIn\fP または --max-forw-scroll=\fIn\fP"
前方に進む最大行数を指定する。
もし、\fIn\fP 行を上回って前方に進む必要がある場合は、
代わりに画面が再描画される。
もし必要であれば、-c と -C オプションは
画面の先頭から再描画するために使われる。
デフォルトでは、前方移動はスクロールになる。
.\"O .IP "-[z]\fIn\fP or --window=\fIn\fP"
.\"O Changes the default scrolling window size to \fIn\fP lines.
.\"O The default is one screenful.
.\"O The z and w commands can also be used to change the window size.
.\"O The "z" may be omitted for compatibility with
.\"O .I more.
.\"O If the number
.\"O .I n
.\"O is negative, it indicates 
.\"O .I n
.\"O lines less than the current screen size.
.\"O For example, if the screen is 24 lines, \fI-z-4\fP sets the 
.\"O scrolling window to 20 lines.  If the screen is resized to 40 lines,
.\"O the scrolling window automatically changes to 36 lines.
.IP "-[z]\fIn\fP または --window=\fIn\fP"
スクロールするウインドウのデフォルトの大きさを \fIn\fP 行に変更する。
デフォルトは 1 画面分の行数である。
z と w コマンドはウインドウの大きさを変更するために使われる。
z は、
.I more
との移植性のために省略してもよい。
.I n
が負の数の時は、現在の画面サイズより
.I n
行小さくウインドウサイズを設定することを意味している。
例えば、画面サイズが 24 行の場合、\fI-z-4\fP はスクロールする
ウインドウを 20 行に設定することを意味している。
さらに、画面サイズが 40 行に変更された場合には、
自動的にスクロールウインドウは 36 行に変更される。
.\"O .IP -Z
.\"O Causes to give priority to the SJIS over the UJIS if a "japanese" was selected
.\"O by the JLESSCHARSET environment variable.  The default value is
.\"O to give priority to the UJIS over the SJIS.
.IP -Z
環境変数 JLESSCHARSET で "japanese" が選択されている場合、
UJIS よりも SJIS の優先度を高くする。
デフォルトでは、SJIS よりも UJIS の優先度が高い。
.\"O .IP -"\fIcc\fP\ or\ --quotes=\fIcc\fP
.\"O Changes the filename quoting character.
.\"O This may be necessary if you are trying to name a file
.\"O which contains both spaces and quote characters.
.\"O Followed by a single character, this changes the quote character to that
.\"O character.
.\"O Filenames containing a space should then be surrounded by that character
.\"O rather than by double quotes.
.\"O Followed by two characters, changes the open quote to the first character,
.\"O and the close quote to the second character.
.\"O Filenames containing a space should then be preceded by the open quote
.\"O character and followed by the close quote character.
.\"O Note that even after the quote characters are changed, this option
.\"O remains -" (a dash followed by a double quote).
.IP -"\fIcc\fP\ or\ --quotes=\fIcc\fP
ファイル名を引用する文字を変更する。
このオプションは、スペースとダブルクォーテーションマークの両方を含む名前を
ファイルに付けようとする場合に必要となる。
-" の後に 1 文字を置いた場合、引用文字が指定した 1 文字に変更される。
このとき、スペースを含むファイル名はダブルクォーテーションではなく、
この 1 文字で囲まれる。
また、-" の後に 2 文字を置いた場合、
1 文字目が開クォーテーションで、2 文字目が閉クォーテーションになる。
このとき、スペースを含むファイル名の前には開クォーテーション文字を付け、
ファイル名の後には閉クォーテーション文字を付ける。
引用文字を変更した後でも、このオプションは -" 
(ダッシュの後にダブルクォーテーション) であることに注意すること。
.\"O .IP "-~ or --tilde"
.\"O Normally lines after end of file are displayed as a single tilde (~).
.\"O This option causes lines after end of file to be displayed as blank lines.
.IP "-~ または --tilde"
通常、ファイルの終端より後の行は 1 個のチルダ (~) を使って表示される。
このオプションを使うと、ファイルの終り以降の行は空行として表示される。
.\"O .IP "-# or --shift"
.\"O Specifies the default number of positions to scroll horizontally
.\"O in the RIGHTARROW and LEFTARROW commands.
.\"O If the number specified is zero, it sets the default number of
.\"O positions to one half of the screen width.
.IP "-# または --shift"
RIGHTARROW と LEFTARROW コマンドで水平方向にスクロールするときの
デフォルトの移動桁数を指定する。
この値を 0 にすると、デフォルトの値は画面幅の半分になる。
.\"O .IP --
.\"O A command line argument of "--" marks the end of option arguments.
.\"O Any arguments following this are interpreted as filenames.
.\"O This can be useful when viewing a file whose name begins with a "-" or "+".
.IP --
コマンドライン引き数 "--" は、オプション引き数の終りの印である。
この後の、いかなる引き数もファイル名として解釈される。
このオプションは、名前が"-" または "+" で始まるファイルを閲覧する場合に役立つ。
.\"O .IP +
.\"O If a command line option begins with \fB+\fP,
.\"O the remainder of that option is taken to be an initial command to
.\"O .I less.
.\"O For example, +G tells
.\"O .I less
.\"O to start at the end of the file rather than the beginning,
.\"O and +/xyz tells it to start at the first occurrence of "xyz" in the file.
.\"O As a special case, +<number> acts like +<number>g; 
.\"O that is, it starts the display at the specified line number
.\"O (however, see the caveat under the "g" command above).
.\"O If the option starts with ++, the initial command applies to
.\"O every file being viewed, not just the first one.
.\"O The + command described previously
.\"O may also be used to set (or change) an initial command for every file.
.IP +
あるコマンドラインオプションが \fB+\fP で始まる場合、
その残りは、
.I less
の初期化コマンドとして渡される。
例えば、+G では、ファイルの先頭ではなく終端を表示して
.I less
を起動させる。
そして、オプション +/xyz では、
ファイル中で "xyz" が始めて現れる場所から起動させる。
特殊な場合として、+<number> は +<number>g と同じ働きをする。
つまり、このオプションでは指定された行数から表示が始まる
(しかし、上の "g" コマンドの注意書きを参照すること)。
オプションが ++ で始まっている場合、初期化コマンドは
閲覧している一番始めのファイルだけでなく、全てのファイルに対して適用される。
以前説明した "+" コマンドも、
全てのファイルに対する初期化コマンドの設定 (および変更) に使われる。

.\"O .SH "LINE EDITING"
.SH "ラインエディット"
.\"O When entering command line at the bottom of the screen
.\"O (for example, a filename for the :e command,
.\"O or the pattern for a search command),
.\"O certain keys can be used to manipulate the command line.
.\"O Most commands have an alternate form in [ brackets ] which can be used if
.\"O a key does not exist on a particular keyboard. 
.\"O (The bracketed forms do not work in the MS-DOS version.)
.\"O Any of these special keys may be entered literally by preceding
.\"O it with the "literal" character, either ^V or ^A.
.\"O A backslash itself may also be entered literally by entering two backslashes.
画面の一番下で (例えば、:e コマンドのファイル名や、
検索コマンドのパターンといった) コマンドライン入力の場合、
いくつかキーがコマンドラインを編集するのに使われる。
大部分のコマンドには、[ 大括弧 ] 中の別形式がある。
これは、ある種のキーボードでキーが存在しない場合に使用できる
(大括弧の中の形式は、MS-DOS 版では機能しない)。
それらの特殊キーは、^V や ^A といった「リテラル化」文字を先に入力することで、
そのままの文字として入力することができる。
2 つのバックスラッシュを入力することで、
バックスラッシュ自身も文字として入力することができる。
.IP "LEFTARROW [ ESC-h ]"
.\"O Move the cursor one space to the left.
カーソルを 1 文字分左へ移動する。
.IP "RIGHTARROW [ ESC-l ]"
.\"O Move the cursor one space to the right.
カーソルを 1 文字分右へ移動する。
.\"O .IP "^LEFTARROW [ ESC-b または ESC-LEFTARROW ]"
.\"O (That is, CONTROL and LEFTARROW simultaneously.)
.\"O Move the cursor one word to the left.
.IP "^LEFTARROW [ ESC-b または ESC-LEFTARROW ]"
(CONTROL と LEFTARROW を同時に入力すると) 
カーソルを 1 単語分左へ移動する。
.\"O .IP "^RIGHTARROW [ ESC-w または ESC-RIGHTARROW ]"
.\"O (That is, CONTROL and RIGHTARROW simultaneously.)
.\"O Move the cursor one word to the right.
.IP "^RIGHTARROW [ ESC-w または ESC-RIGHTARROW ]"
(CONTROL と RIGHTARROW を同時に入力すると) 
カーソルを 1 単語分右へ移動する。
.IP "HOME [ ESC-0 ]"
.\"O Move the cursor to the beginning of the line.
カーソルを行頭へ移動する。
.IP "END [ ESC-$ ]"
.\"O Move the cursor to the end of the line.
カーソルを行末へ移動する。
.IP "BACKSPACE"
.\"O Delete the character to the left of the cursor,
.\"O or cancel the command if the command line is empty.
カーソルの左にある文字を消去する。
コマンドラインが空の場合は、コマンドをキャンセルする。
.\"O .IP "DELETE or [ ESC-x ]"
.\"O Delete the character under the cursor.
.IP "DELETE または [ ESC-x ]"
カーソルの下にある文字を消去する。
.IP "^BACKSPACE [ ESC-BACKSPACE ]"
.\"O (That is, CONTROL and BACKSPACE simultaneously.)
.\"O Delete the word to the left of the cursor.
(CONTROL と BACKSPACE を同時に入力すると) 
カーソルの左にある単語を消去する。
.\"O .IP "^DELETE [ ESC-X or ESC-DELETE ]"
.\"O (That is, CONTROL and DELETE simultaneously.)
.\"O Delete the word under the cursor.
.IP "^DELETE [ ESC-X または ESC-DELETE ]"
(CONTROL と DELETE を同時に入力すると) 
カーソルの下にある単語を消去する。
.IP "UPARROW [ ESC-k ]"
.\"O Retrieve the previous command line.
(ヒストリにある) 前のコマンドラインを呼び出す。
.IP "DOWNARROW [ ESC-j ]"
.\"O Retrieve the next command line.
(ヒストリにある) 次のコマンドラインを呼び出す。
.IP "TAB"
.\"O Complete the partial filename to the left of the cursor.
.\"O If it matches more than one filename, the first match
.\"O is entered into the command line.
.\"O Repeated TABs will cycle thru the other matching filenames.
.\"O If the completed filename is a directory, a "/" is appended to the filename.
.\"O (On MS-DOS systems, a "\\" is appended.)
.\"O The environment variable LESSSEPARATOR can be used to specify a 
.\"O different character to append to a directory name.
カーソルの左にある部分的なファイル名を補完する。
複数のマッチするファイル名がある時は、
最初にマッチしたファイル名がコマンドラインに出される。
TAB を繰り返し打つと、マッチしたファイル名が順番に表示される。
補完したファイル名がディレクトリの場合、"/" がファイル名に付加される
(MS-DOS では、"\\" が付加される)。
ディレクトリ名に付加する文字の指定するために、
環境変数 LESSSEPARATOR を使うことができる。
.IP "BACKTAB [ ESC-TAB ]"
TAB と同様であるが、マッチしたファイル名を逆順に表示する。
.IP "^L"
.\"O Complete the partial filename to the left of the cursor.
.\"O If it matches more than one filename, all matches are entered into
.\"O the command line (if they fit).
カーソルの左にある部分的なファイル名を補完する。
複数のマッチするファイル名がある時は、
全てのマッチしたファイル名が入力される。
.\"O .IP "^U (Unix) or ESC (MS-DOS)"
.\"O Delete the entire command line,
.\"O or cancel the command if the command line is empty.
.\"O If you have changed your line-kill character in Unix to something
.\"O other than ^U, that character is used instead of ^U.
.IP "^U (Unix) または ESC (MS-DOS)"
コマンドライン全体を消去する。
コマンドが空の場合は、コマンドをキャンセルする。
Unix において、一行消去のための文字を ^U 以外に変更している場合、
その文字が ^U の代わりに使われる。

.\"O .SH "KEY BINDINGS"
.SH "キー割り当て"
.\"O You may define your own 
.\"O .I less
.\"O commands by using the program 
.\"O .I lesskey
.\"O (1)
.\"O to create a lesskey file.
.\"O This file specifies a set of command keys and an action
.\"O associated with each key.
.\"O You may also use
.\"O .I lesskey
.\"O to change the line-editing keys (see LINE EDITING),
.\"O and to set environment variables.
lesskey ファイルを生成する
.I lesskey
(1) というプログラムを用いて、独自の
.I less
コマンドを定義できる。
このファイルは、コマンドキーとそれに関係づけられたアクションを指定する。
ラインエディットキー (「ラインエディット」セクションを参照) の変更や
環境変数の設定のために
.I lesskey
を使うこともできる。
.\"O If the environment variable LESSKEY is set,
.\"O .I less
.\"O uses that as the name of the lesskey file.
.\"O Otherwise, 
.\"O .I less
.\"O looks in a standard place for the lesskey file:
環境変数 LESSKEY が設定されている場合、
.I less
は lesskey ファイル名としてその値を使う。
設定されていない場合、
.I less
は、標準の位置にある lesskey ファイルを探す。
.\"O On Unix systems,
.\"O .I less
.\"O looks for a lesskey file called "$HOME/.less".
Unix の場合、
.I less
は "$HOME/.less" というファイルを探す。
.\"O On MS-DOS and Windows systems,
.\"O .I less
.\"O looks for a lesskey file called "$HOME/_less", and if it is not found there,
.\"O then looks for a lesskey file called "_less" in any directory specified
.\"O in the PATH environment variable.
MS-DOS と Windows の場合、
.I less
は "$HOME/_less" という lesskey ファイルを探す。
存在しない場合は、環境変数 PATH で指定されている全てのディレクトリの下にある
"_less" という lesskey ファイルを探す。
.\"O On OS/2 systems,
.\"O .I less
.\"O looks for a lesskey file called "$HOME/less.ini", and if it is not found,
.\"O then looks for a lesskey file called "less.ini" in any directory specified
.\"O in the INIT environment variable, and if it not found there,
.\"O then looks for a lesskey file called "less.ini" in any directory specified
.\"O in the PATH environment variable.
OS/2 の場合、
.I less
は "$HOME/less.ini" という lesskey ファイルを探す。
存在しない場合は、環境変数 INIT で指定されている全てのディレクトリの下にある
"less.ini" ファイルを探す。
それでもない場合は、環境変数 PATH で指定されている全てのディレクトリの下にある
"less.ini" ファイルを探す。
.\"O See the
.\"O .I lesskey
.\"O manual page for more details.
詳細は
.I lesskey
のマニュアルページを参照すること。
.P
.\"O A system-wide lesskey file may also be set up to provide key bindings.
.\"O If a key is defined in both a local lesskey file and in the
.\"O system-wide file, key bindings in the local file take precedence over 
.\"O those in the system-wide file.
.\"O If the environment variable LESSKEY_SYSTEM is set,
.\"O .I less
.\"O uses that as the name of the system-wide lesskey file.
.\"O Otherwise,
.\"O .I less 
.\"O looks in a standard place for the system-wide lesskey file:
.\"O On Unix systems, the system-wide lesskey file is /usr/local/bin/.sysless.
.\"O (However, if 
.\"O .I less 
.\"O was built with a different binary directory than /usr/local/bin,
.\"O that directory is where the .sysless file is found.)
.\"O On MS-DOS and Windows systems, the system-wide lesskey file is c:\\_sysless.
.\"O On OS/2 systems, the system-wide lesskey file is c:\\sysless.ini.
キー割り当てを提供するために、
システム共通の lesskey ファイルを設定することもできる。 
ローカルな lesskey ファイルとシステム共通の lesskey ファイルの両方で
キーが定義された場合、ローカルなファイルにあるキー割り当ての方が
システム共通のキー割り当てより優先される。
環境変数 LESSKEY_SYSTEM が設定されると、
.I less
はそれをシステム共通の lesskey ファイルの名前として使う。
この環境変数が設定されていない場合、
.I less
は次に示す場所を標準的なシステム共通の lesskey ファイルの場所として探す。
Unix では、システム共通の lesskey ファイルは /usr/local/bin/.sysless である。
(しかし、
.I less
バイナリ用ディレクトリが /usr/local/bin とは異なる場所にビルドされていた場合、
そのディレクトリに .sysless ファイルがある。)
MS-DOS と Windows では、システム共通の lesskey ファイルは c:\\_sysless である。
OS/2 では、システム共通の lesskey ファイルは c:\\_sysless.ini である。

.\"O .SH "INPUT PREPROCESSOR"
.SH 入力プリプロセッサ
.\"O You may define an "input preprocessor" for 
.\"O .I less.
.\"O Before
.\"O .I less
.\"O opens a file, it first gives your input preprocessor a chance to modify the
.\"O way the contents of the file are displayed.
.\"O An input preprocessor is simply an executable program (or shell script),
.\"O which writes the contents of the file to a different file,
.\"O called the replacement file.
.\"O The contents of the replacement file are then displayed 
.\"O in place of the contents of the original file.
.\"O However, it will appear to the user as if the original file is opened;
.\"O that is, 
.\"O .I less
.\"O will display the original filename as the name of the current file.
.I less
のための「入力プリプロセッサ」を定義することができる。
.I less
がファイルを開く前に、入力プリプロセッサで
入力ファイルの内容の表示の仕方を変更することができる。
入力プリプロセッサに渡される。
入力プリプロセッサは、ファイルの内容を
代替ファイルと呼ばれる別ファイルに書き出す
単純な実行可能プログラム (もしくは、シェルスクリプト) である。
代替ファイルの内容がオリジナルファイルの内容の代わりに表示される。
しかし、ユーザーにとってはオリジナルファイルが開かれているかのように見える。
.I less
は現在の代替ファイルの名前としてオリジナルファイルの名前を表示する。
.PP
.\"O An input preprocessor receives one command line argument, the original filename,
.\"O as entered by the user.
.\"O It should create the replacement file, and when finished,
.\"O print the name of the replacement file to its standard output.
.\"O If the input preprocessor does not output a replacement filename, 
.\"O .I less
.\"O uses the original file, as normal.
.\"O The input preprocessor is not called when viewing standard input.
.\"O To set up an input preprocessor, set the LESSOPEN environment variable
.\"O to a command line which will invoke your input preprocessor.
.\"O This command line should include one occurrence of the string "%s", 
.\"O which will be replaced by the filename
.\"O when the input preprocessor command is invoked.
入力プリプロセッサは、ユーザーによって入力される
オリジナルファイル名を 1 つのコマンドライン引き数として受け付ける。
そして、代替ファイルを生成し終えると、代替ファイル名を標準出力に表示する。
入力プリプロセッサが代替ファイル名を出力しない場合、
.I less
は標準としてオリジナルファイルを用いる。
入力プリプロセッサは、標準入力を閲覧する場合には呼び出されない。
入力プリプロセッサを設定するためには、
入力プリプロセッサを呼び出すコマンドラインを環境変数 LESSOPEN に設定する。
このコマンドラインには、入力プリプロセッサコマンドが呼び出されるときに、
ファイル名に置き換えられる文字列 "%s" を含んでいなければならない。
.PP
.\"O When 
.\"O .I less
.\"O closes a file opened in such a way, it will call another program,
.\"O called the input postprocessor,
.\"O which may perform any desired clean-up action (such as deleting the
.\"O replacement file created by LESSOPEN).
.\"O This program receives two command line arguments, the original filename
.\"O as entered by the user, and the name of the replacement file.
.\"O To set up an input postprocessor, set the LESSCLOSE environment variable 
.\"O to a command line which will invoke your input postprocessor.
.\"O It may include two occurrences of the string "%s"; 
.\"O the first is replaced with the original name of the file and 
.\"O the second with the name of the replacement file, 
.\"O which was output by LESSOPEN.
.I less
がそのようにして開いたファイルを閉じる時には、
入力ポストプロセッサと呼ばれるもう1つのプログラムが呼び出される。
このプログラムは、(LESSOPEN で開かれた代替ファイルを消去するといった) 
全ての必要な後処理をする。
このプログラムは、ユーザーによって入力されたオリジナルファイル名と
代替ファイル名の 2 つを引き数として受け付ける。
入力ポストプロセッサを設定するためには、
入力ポストプロセッサを呼び出すコマンドラインを環境変数 LESSCLOSE に設定する。
入力ポストプロセッサコマンドはファイル名に置き換えられる
文字列 "%s" を 2 つ含んでいる。1 つ目はファイルのオリジナルの
名前に置き換えられ、2 つ目は LESSOPEN の出力である
代替ファイルの名前に置き換えられる。
.PP
.\"O For example, on many Unix systems, these two scripts will allow you
.\"O to keep files in compressed format, but still let
.\"O .I less
.\"O view them directly:
例えば、次の 2 つのスクリプトにより、多くの Unix システムでは、
圧縮されているファイルを展開せずに
.I less
でファイルを閲覧することができる。
.PP
lessopen.sh:
.br
	#! /bin/sh
.br
	case "$1" in
.br
	*.Z)	uncompress -c $1  >/tmp/less.$$  2>/dev/null
.br
		if [ -s /tmp/less.$$ ]; then 
.br
			echo /tmp/less.$$
.br
		else
.br
			rm -f /tmp/less.$$
.br
		fi
.br
		;;
.br
	esac
.PP
lessclose.sh:
.br
	#! /bin/sh
.br
	rm $2
.PP
.\"O To use these scripts, put them both where they can be executed and
.\"O set LESSOPEN="lessopen.sh\ %s", and
.\"O LESSCLOSE="lessclose.sh\ %s\ %s".
.\"O More complex LESSOPEN and LESSCLOSE scripts may be written
.\"O to accept other types of compressed files, and so on.
このスクリプトを使うためには、2 つを実行可能な場所に置き、
LESSOPEN="lessopen.sh\ %s", LESSCLOSE="lessclose.sh\ %s\ %s"
というように環境変数を設定する。
他の圧縮ファイルを受け付けるような、
更に複雑な LESSOPEN と LESSCLOSE スクリプトを書くことも可能である。
.PP
.\"O It is also possible to set up an input preprocessor to
.\"O pipe the file data directly to 
.\"O .I less,
.\"O rather than putting the data into a replacement file.
.\"O This avoids the need to decompress the entire file before 
.\"O starting to view it.
.\"O An input preprocessor that works this way is called an input pipe.
.\"O An input pipe, instead of writing the name of a replacement file on
.\"O its standard output,
.\"O writes the entire contents of the replacement file on its standard output.
.\"O If the input pipe does not write any characters on its standard output,
.\"O then there is no replacement file and 
.\"O .I less
.\"O uses the original file, as normal.
.\"O To use an input pipe,
.\"O make the first character in the LESSOPEN environment variable a 
.\"O vertical bar (|) to signify that the input preprocessor is an input pipe.
ファイルのデータを代替ファイルに書き出さず、そのまま、
.I less
にパイプするような入力プリプロセッサを設定することも可能である。
こうすることにより、閲覧する前に圧縮ファイル全体を展開するのが避けられる。
このような働きをする入力プリプロセッサは、入力パイプと呼ばれる。
入力パイプは、代替ファイル名を標準出力に表示する代わりに、
代替ファイルの内容全てを標準出力に書き出す。
入力パイプが標準出力に何も書き出さない場合、代替ファイルは生成されず、
.I less
は普通にオリジナルファイルを使う。
入力パイプを使う場合は、
入力プリプロセッサが入力パイプであることを知らせるために、
環境変数 LESSOPEN の最初の文字を、縦棒 (|) に設定する。
.PP
.\"O For example, on many Unix systems, this script will work like the
.\"O previous example scripts:
例えば、多くの Unix システムで、
次のスクリプトは上で説明したサンプルスクリプトと同じ働きをする。
.PP
lesspipe.sh:
.br
	#! /bin/sh
.br
	case "$1" in
.br
	*.Z)	uncompress -c $1  2>/dev/null
.br
		;;
.br
	esac
.br
.PP
.\"O To use this script, put it where it can be executed and set
.\"O LESSOPEN="|lesspipe.sh %s".
.\"O When an input pipe is used, a LESSCLOSE postprocessor can be used,
.\"O but it is usually not necessary since there is no replacement file
.\"O to clean up.
.\"O In this case, the replacement file name passed to the LESSCLOSE
.\"O postprocessor is "-".
このスクリプトを使うためには、実行可能な場所に置いて、
LESSOPEN="| lesspipe.sh %s" と設定する。
入力パイプが使われる場合も、ポストプロセッサ LESSCLOSE を使っても良いが、
削除する代替ファイルがないので多くの場合必要ない。
このスクリプトで、LESSCOLSE のポストプロセッサに渡される
代替ファイル名は "-" である。

.\"O .SH "NATIONAL CHARACTER SETS"
.SH "国際化文字セット"
.\"O There are three types of characters in the input file:
.\"O .IP "normal characters"
.\"O can be displayed directly to the screen.
.\"O .IP "control characters"
.\"O should not be displayed directly, but are expected to be found
.\"O in ordinary text files (such as backspace and tab).
.\"O .IP "binary characters"
.\"O should not be displayed directly and are not expected to be found
.\"O in text files.
入力ファイルには、3 タイプの文字が含まれている。
.IP "ノーマル文字"
画面に直接表示できる文字。
.IP "制御文字"
画面には直接表示すべきでないが、(バックスペースやタブのように) 
普通のテキストファイル中にある文字。
.IP "バイナリ文字"
画面には直接表示すべきでなくテキストファイル中にはない文字。
.PP
.\"O A "character set" is simply a description of which characters are to
.\"O be considered normal, control, and binary.
.\"O The JLESSCHARSET and LESSCHARSET environment variables may be used to select
.\"O a character set.  There is no difference between them in program of
.\"O .I less.
.\"O But I suppose you should use the JLESSCHARSET environment variable
.\"O because not enhanced
.\"O .I less
.\"O will make errors if you use enhanced character set in 
.\"O your LESSCHARSET environment variable.
.\"O Possible values for them are:
「文字セット」とは、簡潔にいうと、どの文字がノーマル文字・制御文字・バイナリ
文字とされるか、ということである。
環境変数 JLESSCHARSET と LESSCHARSET が文字セットを選択するのに使われる。
.I less
のプログラム中で、この 2 つの環境変数に違いはないが、
環境変数 JLESSCHARSET を使うことを勧める。
なぜなら、環境変数 LESSCHARSET に拡張文字セットを設定していると、
拡張文字セットの使えない
.I less
がエラーを起こすからである。
この環境変数に設定できる値を以下に示す。
.IP ascii
.\"O BS, TAB, NL, CR, and formfeed are control characters,
.\"O all chars with values between 32 and 126 are normal,
.\"O and all others are binary.
BS, TAB, NL, CR, formfeed が制御文字である。
32 から 126 の値を持つ文字がノーマルで、その他がバイナリである。
.IP iso8859
.\"O Selects an ISO 8859 character set.
.\"O This is the same as ASCII, except characters between 160 and 255 are
.\"O treated as normal characters.
ISO 8859 文字セットを選択する。
160 から 255 までの文字がノーマルとして扱われる以外は、ASCII と同じである。
.IP latin1
.\"O Same as iso8859.
iso8859 と同じ。
.IP dos
.\"O Selects a character set appropriate for MS-DOS.
MS-DOS 用の文字セットを選択する。
.IP ebcdic
.\"O Selects an EBCDIC character set.
EBCDIC 文字セットを選択する。
.IP koi8-r
.\"O Selects a Russian character set.
ロシア語文字セットを選択する。
.IP next
.\"O Selects a character set appropriate for NeXT computers.
NeXT 計算機用の文字セットを選択する。
.IP utf-8
.\"O Selects the UTF-8 encoding of the ISO 10646 character set.
ISO 10646 文字セットの UTF-8 エンコーディングを選択する。
.PP
.\"O And possible values for only JLESSCHARSET are:
JLESSCHARSET にのみ設定可能な値を以下に示す。
.IP iso7
.\"O Multi character sets with the ISO 2022 code extension techniques
.\"O in 7 bits are assumed.
.\"O Characters with values between 128 and 255 are treated as binary.
.\"O The level of implementation of
.\"O .I Less
.\"O is level 3 of ISO 2022.
7 ビットを仮定した ISO 2022 コード拡張による複数文字セット。
128 から 225 の値を持つ文字がバイナリとして扱われる。
.I less
の実装レベルは、ISO 2022 の level 3 である。
.IP iso8
.\"O Multi character sets with the ISO 2022 code extension techniques
.\"O in 8 bits are assumed.
.\"O The level of implementation of
.\"O .I Less
.\"O is level 3 of ISO 2022.
8 ビットを仮定した ISO 2022 コード拡張による複数文字セット。
.I less
の実装レベルは、ISO 2022 の level 3 である。
.IP jis
.\"O Only Japanese character sets with the ISO 2022 code extension
.\"O techniques in 7 bits are assumed.
7 ビットを仮定した ISO 2022 コード拡張による日本語文字セットのみ。
.IP ujis
.\"O If characters has values between 32 and 127,
.\"O the ASCII character set are assumed.
.\"O If characters has values between 162 and 254,
.\"O the JISX 0208 character set,
.\"O a right half of the JISX 0201 character set and
.\"O the JISX 0212 character set with the UJIS coding are assumed.
.\"O Otherwise, characters are treated as binary.
文字が 32 から 127 の値を持つ場合、ASCII 文字列を仮定する。
文字が 162 から 254 の値を持つ場合、JISX 0208 文字セット・
JISX 0201 文字セットの右半分・UJIS コーディングをした
JISX 0212 文字セットを仮定する。
それ以外の文字はバイナリとして扱われる。
.IP euc
.\"O Same as ujis.
ujis と同じ。
.IP sjis
.\"O If characters has values between 32 and 127,
.\"O the ASCII character set are assumed.
.\"O If characters has values between 128 and 252,
.\"O the JISX 0208 character set and
.\"O a right half of the JISX 0201 character set are assumed.
.\"O Otherwise, characters are treated as binary.
文字が 32 から 127 の値を持つ場合、ASCII 文字列を仮定する。
文字が 128 から 252 の値を持つ場合、
JISX 0208 文字セットと JISX 0201 文字セットの右半分を仮定する。
それ以外の文字はバイナリとして扱われる。
.IP japanese
.\"O All Japanese character sets, jis, ujis and sjis, are assumed.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the jis.
入力は全ての日本語文字セット、jis, ujis, sjis を仮定する。
.I less
は jis のみを出力する。
.PP
.\"O Japanese has several code sets (not character sets).
.\"O Thus
.\"O .I less
.\"O must convert among them to display them correctly.
.\"O Possible values with this conversion for only JLESSCHARSET are:
日本語には、いくつかのコードセット (文字セットではない) が存在する。
よって、
.I less
は、それを正しく表示するためにコードセット間の変換をしなければならない。
変換をさせるために設定できる JLESSCHARSET の値を以下に示す。
.IP ujis-iso7
.\"O The ujis and iso7 are assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the iso7.
入力は ujis と iso7 を仮定する。
.I less
は iso7 のみを出力する。
.IP euc-iso7
.\"O Same as ujis-iso7.
ujis-iso7 と同じ。
.IP sjis-iso7
.\"O The sjis and iso7 are assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the iso7.
入力は sjis と iso7 を仮定する。
.I less
は iso7 のみを出力する。
.IP ujis-jis
.\"O The ujis and jis are assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the jis.
入力は ujis と jis を仮定する。
.I less
は jis のみを出力する。
.IP euc-jis
.\"O Same as ujis-jis.
ujis-jis と同じ。
.IP sjis-jis
.\"O The sjis and jis are assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the jis.
入力は sjis と jis を仮定する。
.I less
は jis のみを出力する。
.IP jis-ujis
.\"O The jis and ujis are assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the ujis.
入力は jis と ujis を仮定する。
.I less
は ujis のみを出力する。
.IP jis-euc
.\"O Same as jis-ujis.
jis-ujis と同じ。
.IP jis-sjis
.\"O The jis and sjis are assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the sjis.
入力は jis と sjis を仮定する。
.I less
は sjis のみを出力する。
.IP japanese-iso7
.\"O The japanese and iso7 are assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the iso7.
入力は japanese と iso7 を仮定する。
.I less
は iso7 のみを出力する。
.IP japanese-jis
.\"O The japanese is assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the jis.
.\"O Same as japanese.
入力は japanese を仮定する。
.I less
は jis のみを出力する。
japanese と同じ。
.IP japanese-ujis
.\"O The japanese is assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the ujis.
入力は japanese を仮定する。
.I less
は ujis のみを出力する。
.IP japanese-euc
.\"O Same as japanese-ujis.
japanese-ujis と同じ。
.IP japanese-sjis
.\"O The japanese is assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the sjis.
入力は japanese を仮定する。
.I less
は sjis のみを出力する。
.IP ujis-sjis
.\"O The ujis is assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the sjis.
入力は ujis を仮定する。
.I less
は sjis のみを出力する。
.IP euc-sjis
.\"O Same as ujis-sjis.
ujis-sjis と同じ。
.IP sjis-ujis
.\"O The sjis is assumend.  But
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only the ujis.
入力は sjis を仮定する。
.I less
は ujis のみを出力する。
.IP sjis-euc
.\"O Same as sjis-ujis.
sjis-ujis と同じ。
.PP
.\"O Other way to select a character set is to use the LANG environment variable.
.\"O If it start with "ja_JP" or "japan",
.\"O .I less
.\"O read all Japanese coded characters as some Japanese character set,
.\"O and a rest of the LANG environment variable specify output coding.
文字セットを設定するもう一つ方法は、環境変数 LANG を使うことである。
"ja_JP" または、"japan" で始まる環境変数 LANG であるとき、
.I less
は、全ての日本語コード文字を日本語文字セットとして読み、
環境変数 LANG の残りの部分で出力のコーディングを指定する。
.PP
.\"O The ISO 2022 code extension techniques define
.\"O 4 planes to display many character sets easy.
.\"O Default setting of planes is selected by
.\"O the JLESSPLANESET environment variable.
.\"O If the JLESSPLANESET vriable is equal to "japanese", "ujis" or "euc",
.\"O .I less
.\"O treat g1 plane as JISX 0208, g2 plane as JISX 0201 right half, g3 plane
.\"O as JISX 0212.  If it is equal to "latin1", "latin2", "latin3", "latin4",
.\"O "greek", "alabic", "hebrew", "cyrillic" or "latin5",
.\"O .I less
.\"O treat g1 plane as one of ISO 8859.
.\"O Otherwise,
.\"O .I less
.\"O try to parse the JLESSPLANESET variable as 
.\"O real escape sequences for setting up, and "\\e" in JLESSPLANESET
.\"O is treated as escape code when parsing.
ISO 2022 コード拡張テクニックでは、多くの文字セットを
簡単に表示させるために4つのプレーンを定義している。
環境変数 JLESSPLANESET によりデフォルトのプレーンを設定する。
環境変数 JLESSPLANESET が、"japanese", "ujis", "euc" のとき、
.I less
は、g1 プレーンを JISX 0208、g2 プレーンを JISX 0201 の右半分、
g3 プレーンを JISX 0212 として扱う。
環境変数 JLESSPLANESET が、"latin1", "latin2", "latin3", "latin4",
"greek", "alabic", "hebrew", "cyrillic", "latin5" のとき、
.I less 
は、g1 プレーンを ISO 8859 の一つとして扱う。
それ以外の場合、
.I less 
は、環境変数 JLESSPLANESET を
設定のための実際のエスケープシーケンスとして解析しようと試みる。
解析の際、JLESSPLANESET における "\\e" はエスケープコードとして扱われる。
.PP
.\"O .I Less
.\"O understand almost all escape sequence about character set
.\"O in the ISO 2022 code extension techniques.  There are many escape sequences
.\"O to select the character set.  On the one hand,
.\"O .I less
.\"O output only 6 escape sequences to select a character
.\"O set: '^[(', '^[-', '^[$(', '^[$-', '^N' and '^O'.
.\"O It means
.\"O .I less
.\"O is friendly to a terminal and a terminal emulator.
.I less
は、ISO 2022 コード拡張テクニックに含まれる文字セットの
ほとんど全てのエスケープシーケンスを理解する。
文字セットを選択するためのエスケープシーケンスは多数存在する。
一方で、
.I less
は、文字列セットを選択するために、
'^[(', '^[-', '^[$(', '^[$-', '^N', '^O' という、
6 つのエスケープシーケンスしか出力しない。
これは、
.I less
が端末と端末エミュレーターにとって使いやすいということである。
.PP
.\"O And there is special "character set" for keyboard inputs.
.\"O The JLESSKEYCHARSET environment variable is used
.\"O for such purpose.  Possible values of it are equal
.\"O to the JLESSCHARSET environment variable.
キーボード入力のための特別な「文字セット」もある。
環境変数 JLESSKEYCHARSET は、この文字セットを設定するために使われる。
JLESSKEYCHARSET が持つことのできる値は、環境変数 JLESSCHARSET 
と同じである。
.PP
.\"O If the LESSCHARSET environment variable is not set,
.\"O the default character set is latin1.
.\"O However, if the string "UTF-8" is found in the LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE or LANG
.\"O environment variables, then the default character set is utf-8 instead.
LESSCHARSET 環境変数が設定されていない場合、
デフォルトの文字セットは latin1 である。
しかし、環境変数 LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE, LANG のいずれかに
"UTF-8" という文字列がある場合、デフォルトの文字セットは utf-8 になる。
.PP
.\"O In special cases, it may be desired to tailor
.\"O .I less
.\"O to use a character set other than the ones definable by LESSCHARSET.
.\"O In this case, the environment variable LESSCHARDEF can be used
.\"O to define a character set.
.\"O It should be set to a string where each character in the string represents
.\"O one character in the character set.
.\"O The character "." is used for a normal character, "c" for control,
.\"O and "b" for binary.
.\"O A decimal number may be used for repetition.
.\"O For example, "bccc4b." would mean character 0 is binary,
.\"O 1, 2 and 3 are control, 4, 5, 6 and 7 are binary, and 8 is normal.
.\"O All characters after the last are taken to be the same as the last,
.\"O so characters 9 through 255 would be normal.
.\"O (This is an example, and does not necessarily 
.\"O represent any real character set.)
特殊なケースとして、
LESSCHARSET で指定できる限定された文字セットではなく、
他の文字セットを使うように
.I less
を調整したいという場合もある。
このようなとき、環境変数  LESSCHARDEF が文字セットを定義するのに使われる。
この変数の定義において、文字 "." はノーマルキャラクタ、
文字 "c" は制御文字、文字 "b" はバイナリキャラクタを表す。
また、10進数は定義文字の繰り返しを示す。
例を挙げると、"bccc4b." は値 0 の文字がバイナリ、
1, 2, 3 はコントロール、4, 5, 6 はバイナリ、
8 はノーマルキャラクタという意味である。
最後に文字タイプが指定された文字より後の全ての文字は、
最後の文字と同じタイプとみなされるので、9 から 255 までの
値を持つ文字はノーマルとなる。
(これは 1 つの例であるので、
必ずしも実際の文字セットを表しているわけではない。) 
.PP
.\"O This table shows the value of LESSCHARDEF which is equivalent
.\"O to each of the possible values for LESSCHARSET:
下の表は、各 LESSCHARSET と等しい LESSCHARDEF の値を示している。
.sp
	ascii\ 	8bcccbcc18b95.b
.br
	dos\ \ \ 	8bcccbcc12bc5b95.b.
.br
	ebcdic	5bc6bcc7bcc41b.9b7.9b5.b..8b6.10b6.b9.7b
.br
	\ \ \ \ \ \ 	9.8b8.17b3.3b9.7b9.8b8.6b10.b.b.b.
.br
	iso8859	8bcccbcc18b95.33b.
.br
	koi8-r	8bcccbcc18b95.b128.
.br
	latin1	8bcccbcc18b95.33b.
.br
	next\ \ 	8bcccbcc18b95.bb125.bb
.PP
.\"O If neither LESSCHARSET nor LESSCHARDEF is set, 
.\"O but your system supports the 
.\"O .I setlocale
.\"O interface,
.\"O .I less
.\"O will use setlocale to determine the character set.
.\"O setlocale is controlled by setting the LANG or LC_CTYPE environment variables.
LESSCHARSET と LESSCHARDEF のどちらも設定されていない場合でも、
システムが
.I setlocale
インターフェースをサポートしていれば、
.I less
は文字セットを決定するのに setlocale を使用する。
setlocale は環境変数 LANG もしくは LC_CTYPE で制御される。
.PP
.\"O Control and binary characters are displayed in standout (reverse video).
.\"O Each such character is displayed in caret notation if possible
.\"O (e.g. ^A for control-A).  Caret notation is used only if 
.\"O inverting the 0100 bit results in a normal printable character.
.\"O Otherwise, the character is displayed as a hex number in angle brackets.
.\"O This format can be changed by 
.\"O setting the LESSBINFMT environment variable.
.\"O LESSBINFMT may begin with a "*" and one character to select 
.\"O the display attribute:
.\"O "*k" is blinking, "*d" is bold, "*u" is underlined, "*s" is standout,
.\"O and "*n" is normal.
.\"O If LESSBINFMT does not begin with a "*", normal attribute is assumed.
.\"O The remainder of LESSBINFMT is a string which may include one
.\"O printf-style escape sequence (a % followed by x, X, o, d, etc.).
.\"O For example, if LESSBINFMT is "*u[%x]", binary characters
.\"O are displayed in underlined hexadecimal surrounded by brackets.
.\"O The default if no LESSBINFMT is specified is "*s<%X>".
制御文字とバイナリキャラクタは目立たせて (反転して) 表示される。
これらの文字は、可能であるならば (control-A を ^A というように) 
キャレット表記で表示される。
キャレット表記は、0100 ビットを反転した結果が
印刷可能文字になるときのみ使われる。
キャレット表記できないときは、角型括弧 <> で囲まれた 16 進数で表す。
このフォーマットは、環境変数 LESSBINFMT を設定することで変えられる。
LESSBINFMT は "*"で始まり、もう 1 つの文字が表示属性を選択する。
"*k" は点滅、"*d" は太字、"*u" は下線、
"*s" は反転、"*n" は標準である。
LESSBINFMT が "*" で始まっていないときは、標準の属性を仮定する。
LESSBINFMT の残りの部分は、1 つの printf スタイルのエスケープシーケンス
(% と x, X, o, d など) を含む文字列である。
LESSBINFMT が "*u[%x]" の場合、バイナリキャラクタは
大括弧で囲まれた 16 進数に下線をして表示される。
LESSBINFMT が指定されていないときのデフォルトは、"*s<%X>" に指定されている。

.\"O .SH "PROMPTS"
.SH "プロンプト"
.\"O The -P option allows you to tailor the prompt to your preference.
.\"O The string given to the -P option replaces the specified prompt string.
.\"O Certain characters in the string are interpreted specially.
.\"O The prompt mechanism is rather complicated to provide flexibility,
.\"O but the ordinary user need not understand the details of constructing
.\"O personalized prompt strings.
-P オプションにより、プロンプトを自分の好みに調整することができる。
-P オプションに与えられた文字列は、指定したプロンプト文字列を置き換える。
文字列中のある文字は特殊文字として解釈される。
プロンプト機構は柔軟性を持たせるために少々複雑になっているが、
一般のユーザーは、個人用プロンプト文字列の作り方を詳細に理解する必要はない。
.sp
.\"O A percent sign followed by a single character is expanded
.\"O according to what the following character is:
パーセント記号は、その後に何の文字が続くかによって展開される。
.IP "%b\fIX\fP"
.\"O Replaced by the byte offset into the current input file.
.\"O The b is followed by a single character (shown as \fIX\fP above)
.\"O which specifies the line whose byte offset is to be used.
.\"O If the character is a "t", the byte offset of the top line in the
.\"O display is used,
.\"O an "m" means use the middle line,
.\"O a "b" means use the bottom line,
.\"O a "B" means use the line just after the bottom line,
.\"O and a "j" means use the "target" line, as specified by the -j option.
現在の入力ファイルへのバイトオフセットで置き換えられる。
b の後には、(\fIX\fP で示される) 1 文字が続き、どの行のバイトオフセットを
使うかを指定する。"t" のときは、画面の先頭行のバイトオフセットが使われる。
"m" は真中の行、"b" は最終行、
"B" は最終行のすぐ次の行のバイトオフセットを使うことを意味する。
そして、"j" の場合には -j オプションで指定したターゲット行の
バイトオフセットを使うことを意味している。
.IP "%B"
.\"O Replaced by the size of the current input file.
現在の入力ファイルの大きさに置き換えられる。
.IP "%c"
.\"O Replaced by the column number of the text appearing in the first
.\"O column of the screen.
画面左端に現れるテキストのカラム番号に置き換えられる。
.IP "%d\fIX\fP"
.\"O Replaced by the page number of a line in the input file.
.\"O The line to be used is determined by the \fIX\fP, as with the %b option.
対象となる行が入力ファイルにおいて何ページ目であるかに置き換えられる。
%b オプションと同じように、\fIX\fP で対象とする行を決定する。
.IP "%D"
.\"O Replaced by the number of pages in the input file,
.\"O or equivalently, the page number of the last line in the input file.
入力ファイルのページ数に置き換えられる。
つまり、入力ファイルの最終行のページ番号に等しい。
.IP "%E"
.\"O Replaced by the name of the editor (from the VISUAL environment variable,
.\"O or the EDITOR environment variable if VISUAL is not defined).
.\"O See the discussion of the LESSEDIT feature below.
エディタの名前 (環境変数 VISUAL、VISUAL が定義されていないときは
環境変数 EDITOR) に置き換えられる。
以降の、JLESSEDIT の特徴に関する話題を参照。
.IP "%f"
.\"O Replaced by the name of the current input file.
現在の入力ファイル名に置き換えられる。
.IP "%i"
.\"O Replaced by the index of the current file in the list of
.\"O input files.
入力ファイルのリスト中における現在のファイルのインデックスで置き換えられる。
.IP "%l\fIX\fP"
.\"O Replaced by the line number of a line in the input file.
.\"O The line to be used is determined by the \fIX\fP, as with the %b option.
入力ファイルで何行目にいるかで置き換えられる。
対象となる行は、%b オプションと同じく \fIX\fP で決定される。
.IP "%L"
.\"O Replaced by the line number of the last line in the input file.
入力ファイルの最終行の行番号で置き換えられる。
.IP "%m"
.\"O Replaced by the total number of input files.
入力ファイルの合計数で置き換えられる。
.IP "%p\fIX\fP"
.\"O Replaced by the percent into the current input file, based on byte offsets.
.\"O The line used is determined by the \fIX\fP as with the %b option.
バイトオフセットで計算して、現在の入力ファイルで
何パーセントの場所にいるかで置き換えられる。
対象となる行は、%b オプションと同じく \fIX\fP で決定される。
.IP "%P\fIX\fP"
.\"O Replaced by the percent into the current input file, based on line numbers.
.\"O The line used is determined by the \fIX\fP as with the %b option.
行番号で計算して、現在の入力ファイルで
何パーセントの場所にいるかで置き換えられる。
対象となる行は、%b オプションと同じく \fIX\fP で決定される。
.IP "%s"
.\"O Same as %B.
%B と同じ。
.IP "%t"
.\"O Causes any trailing spaces to be removed.
.\"O Usually used at the end of the string, but may appear anywhere.
後に続くスペースを取り除かせる。
通常は文字列の後に使われるが、どこに置いてもよい。
.IP "%x"
.\"O Replaced by the name of the next input file in the list.
ファイルリストのうちの次の入力ファイル名で置き換えられる。
.IP "%K"
.\"O Replaced by the name of the last non ASCII character set or code set.
入力ファイルの中で最も最近現れた、非 ASCII 文字セットまたは
非 ASCII コードセットで置き換えられる。
.PP
.\"O If any item is unknown (for example, the file size if input
.\"O is a pipe), a question mark is printed instead.
もし、(入力がパイプのためファイルサイズが分からない場合など) 
項目が不明のときは、代わりにクエスチョンマークが表示される。
.PP
.\"O The format of the prompt string can be changed
.\"O depending on certain conditions.
.\"O A question mark followed by a single character acts like an "IF":
.\"O depending on the following character, a condition is evaluated.
.\"O If the condition is true, any characters following the question mark
.\"O and condition character, up to a period, are included in the prompt.
.\"O If the condition is false, such characters are not included.
.\"O A colon appearing between the question mark and the
.\"O period can be used to establish an "ELSE": any characters between
.\"O the colon and the period are included in the string if and only if
.\"O the IF condition is false.
.\"O Condition characters (which follow a question mark) may be:
プロンプト文字列のフォーマットは、ある条件に応じて変更することができる。
クエスチョンマークとその後に続く 1 文字で、"IF" のように働き、
どのような文字が続くかで、条件文が評価される。
条件文が真ならば、クエスチョンマークと条件文字の後に続く文字列から
ピリオドまでがプロンプトの中に表示される。
条件文が偽なら、文字列はプロンプトに表示されない。
クエスチョンマークとピリオドの間にあるコロンは、"ELSE" として働き、
コロンとピリオドの間にある文字列は、IF 文が偽のときのみ
プロンプト文字列に組み入れられる。
(クエスチョンマークの後の) 条件文字は次のようなものがある。
.IP "?a"
.\"O True if any characters have been included in the prompt so far.
プロンプトに既に文字列が含まれているときに真。
.IP "?b\fIX\fP"
.\"O True if the byte offset of the specified line is known.
指定した行のバイトオフセットが既知の場合に真。
.IP "?B"
.\"O True if the size of current input file is known.
現在の入力ファイルの大きさが既知の場合に真。
.IP "?c"
.\"O True if the text is horizontally shifted (%c is not zero).
水平方向にテキストがシフトしている (%c が 0 でない) 場合に真。
.IP "?d\fIX\fP"
.\"O True if the page number of the specified line is known.
指定された行のページ番号が既知の場合に真。
.IP "?e"
.\"O True if at end-of-file.
ファイルの終りのときに真。
.IP "?f"
.\"O True if there is an input filename
.\"O (that is, if input is not a pipe).
入力ファイル名があるとき (入力がパイプでないとき) に真。
.IP "?l\fIX\fP"
.\"O True if the line number of the specified line is known.
指定した行の行番号が既知の場合に真。
.IP "?L"
.\"O True if the line number of the last line in the file is known.
ファイルの最終行の行番号が既知の場合に真
.IP "?m"
.\"O True if there is more than one input file.
2 つ以上の入力ファイルがある場合に真。
.IP "?n"
.\"O True if this is the first prompt in a new input file.
新しい入力ファイルの最初のプロンプトのとき真。
.IP "?p\fIX\fP"
.\"O True if the percent into the current input file, based on byte offsets,
.\"O of the specified line is known.
指定した行の現在の入力ファイルでの
バイトオフセットで計算したパーセントが既知のとき真。
.IP "?P\fIX\fP"
.\"O True if the percent into the current input file, based on line numbers,
.\"O of the specified line is known.
指定した行の現在の入力ファイルでの
行番号で計算したパーセントが既知のとき真。
.IP "?s"
.\"O Same as "?B".
"?B" と同じ。
.IP "?x"
.\"O True if there is a next input file
.\"O (that is, if the current input file is not the last one).
次の入力ファイルがあるとき (現在の入力ファイルが最後のファイルでないとき) 真。
.PP
.\"O Any characters other than the special ones
.\"O (question mark, colon, period, percent, and backslash)
.\"O become literally part of the prompt.
.\"O Any of the special characters may be included in the prompt literally
.\"O by preceding it with a backslash.
特殊文字 (クエスチョンマーク、コロン、ピリオド、
パーセント、バックスラッシュ) 以外の
全ての文字がプロンプトの実際に表示される部分になる。
特殊文字をプロンプトに表示させるには、
その文字の前にバックスラッシュを置けばよい。
.PP
.\"O Some examples:
プロンプトの例をいくつか挙げる。
.sp
?f%f:Standard input.
.sp
.\"O This prompt prints the filename, if known;
.\"O otherwise the string "Standard input".
このプロンプトは、ファイル名が既知であれば表示する。
わからないときは "Standard input" と表示する。
.sp
?f%f .?ltLine %lt:?pt%pt\\%:?btByte %bt:-...
.sp
.\"O This prompt would print the filename, if known.
.\"O The filename is followed by the line number, if known,
.\"O otherwise the percent if known, otherwise the byte offset if known.
.\"O Otherwise, a dash is printed.
.\"O Notice how each question mark has a matching period,
.\"O and how the % after the %pt
.\"O is included literally by escaping it with a backslash.
このプロンプトは、ファイル名が既知であれば、ファイル名を表示する。
行番号が既知のときには、ファイル名に続けて行番号を表示する。
もし行番号が既知でなく、パーセントが既知のときは、パーセントを表示する。
パーセントも既知でなく、バイトオフセットが既知のときは、
バイトオフセットを表示する。
バイトオフセットも既知でないときは、ダッシュを表示する。
各クエスチョンマークにピリオドがどのように対応しているかに注意すること。
また、%pt の後の % を実際に表示させるために、
バックスラッシュでエスケープしていることにも注意すること。
.sp
?n?f%f\ .?m(file\ %i\ of\ %m)\ ..?e(END)\ ?x-\ Next\\:\ %x..%t
.sp
.\"O This prints the filename if this is the first prompt in a file,
.\"O followed by the "file N of N" message if there is more
.\"O than one input file.
.\"O Then, if we are at end-of-file, the string "(END)" is printed
.\"O followed by the name of the next file, if there is one.
.\"O Finally, any trailing spaces are truncated.
.\"O This is the default prompt.
.\"O For reference, here are the defaults for
.\"O the other two prompts (-m and -M respectively).
.\"O Each is broken into two lines here for readability only.
このプロンプトがファイルにおける最初のプロンプトのときファイル名を表示する。
さらに、2 つ以上のファイルがあるときは、
"file N of N" というメッセージを加える。
そして、ファイルの終りに達したときは、文字列 "(END)" を表示し、
引き続いて次のファイルがあるときはそのファイル名を表示する。
最後に、後に続くスペースを切り詰める。
これはデフォルトで使われているプロンプトである。
参考として、(-m と -M オプションに対応する) 
2 つのデフォルトプロンプトを挙げる。
ここで 2 行に分けたのは、読みやすさの為だけで実際は分けない。
.nf
.sp
?n?f%f\ .?m(file\ %i\ of\ %m)\ ..?e(END)\ ?x-\ Next\\:\ %x.:
	?pB%pB\\%:byte\ %bB?s/%s...%t
.sp
?f%f\ .?n?m(file\ %i\ of\ %m)\ ..?ltlines\ %lt-%lb?L/%L.\ :
	byte\ %bB?s/%s.\ .?e(END)\ ?x-\ Next\\:\ %x.:?pB%pB\\%..%t
.sp
.fi
.\"O And here is the default message produced by the = command:
そして、次に挙げるのは、= コマンドで出されるデフォルトのメッセージである。
.nf
.sp
?f%f\ .?m(file\ %i\ of\ %m)\ .?ltlines\ %lt-%lb?L/%L.\ .
	byte\ %bB?s/%s.\ ?e(END)\ :?pB%pB\\%..%t
.fi
.PP
.\"O The prompt expansion features are also used for another purpose:
.\"O if an environment variable LESSEDIT is defined, it is used
.\"O as the command to be executed when the v command is invoked.
.\"O The LESSEDIT string is expanded in the same way as the prompt strings.
.\"O The default value for LESSEDIT is:
プロンプト展開の機能は、他の目的でも使われる。
環境変数 LESSEDIT が定義されている場合、
この変数は v コマンドで実行されるコマンドとして使われる。
LESSEDIT の文字列は、プロンプト文字列と同じ方法で展開される。
LESSEDIT のデフォルトの値を以下に示す。
.nf
.sp
	%E\ ?lm+%lm.\ %f
.sp
.fi
.\"O Note that this expands to the editor name, followed by a + and the
.\"O line number, followed by the file name.
.\"O If your editor does not accept the "+linenumber" syntax, or has other
.\"O differences in invocation syntax, the LESSEDIT variable can be 
.\"O changed to modify this default.
この文字列は、「エディタ名」・「+ と行数」・「ファイル名」に展開される。
指定したエディタが、"+行数" という書式を受け付けない場合や、
呼び出しの書式が違う場合は、このデフォルトの LESSEDIT を修正することができる。

.\"O .SH SECURITY
.SH セキュリティ
.\"O When the environment variable LESSSECURE is set to 1,
.\"O .I less
.\"O runs in a "secure" mode.
.\"O This means these features are disabled:
環境変数 LESSSECURE が 1 に設定されている場合、
.I less
は「安全な」モードで実行される。この場合、次のことができない。
.RS
.\"O .IP "!"
.\"O the shell command
.\"O .IP "|"
.\"O the pipe command
.\"O .IP ":e"
.\"O the examine command.
.\"O .IP "v"
.\"O the editing command
.\"O .IP "s  -o"
.\"O log files
.\"O .IP "-k"
.\"O use of lesskey files
.\"O .IP "-t"
.\"O use of tags files
.\"O .IP " "
.\"O metacharacters in filenames, such as *
.\"O .IP " "
.\"O filename completion (TAB, ^L)
.IP "!"
シェルコマンド
.IP "|"
パイプコマンド
.IP ":e"
ファイルの読み込みコマンド
.IP "v"
編集コマンド
.IP "s  -o"
ログファイル
.IP "-k"
lesskey ファイルを使う
.IP "-t"
タグファイルを使う
.IP " "
ファイル名の中の、* といった、メタキャラクタ
.IP " "
ファイル名補完 (TAB, ^L) 
.RE
.PP
.\"O Less can also be compiled to be permanently in "secure" mode.
less をいつも「安全な」モードでしか実行できないように
コンパイルすることも可能である。

.\"O .SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.SH 環境変数
.\"O Environment variables may be specified either in the system environment
.\"O as usual, or in a 
.\"O .I lesskey
.\"O (1) file.
環境変数は、通常と同じくシステム環境で設定でき、
.I lesskey
(1) ファイルでも指定できる。
.\"O If environment variables are defined in more than one place, 
.\"O variables defined in a local lesskey file take precedence over
.\"O variables defined in the system environment, which take precedence
.\"O over variables defined in the system-wide lesskey file.
環境変数が複数で指定されている場合、
ローカルな lesskey ファイルで定義されている変数は、
システム環境で定義されている変数より優先される。
また、システム環境で定義されている変数は、
システム共通の lesskey ファイルで定義されている変数より優先される。
.IP COLUMNS
.\"O Sets the number of columns on the screen.
.\"O Takes precedence over the number of columns specified by the TERM variable.
.\"O (But if you have a windowing system which supports TIOCGWINSZ or WIOCGETD,
.\"O the window system's idea of the screen size takes precedence over the
.\"O LINES and COLUMNS environment variables.)
画面の 1 行あたりの文字数を設定する。
環境変数 TERM で設定された値より優先される
(TIOCGWINSZ や WIOCGETD をサポートするウインドウシステムの場合、
ウインドウシステムが持つ画面サイズの方が、
環境変数 LINES と COLUMNS より優先される)。
.IP EDITOR
.\"O The name of the editor (used for the v command).
(v コマンドで使われる) エディタの名前。
.IP HOME
.\"O Name of the user's home directory (used to find a lesskey file on Unix systems).
(Unix で lesskey ファイルを探すのに使われる) ユーザーのホームディレクトリ名。
.IP "HOMEDRIVE, HOMEPATH"
.\"O Concatenation of the HOMEDRIVE and HOMEPATH environment variables is
.\"O the name of the user's home directory if the HOME variable is not set
.\"O (only in the Windows version).
環境変数 HOME が設定されていない場合、
環境変数 HOMEDRIVE と HOMEPATH を足したものが
ユーザーのホームディレクトリ名となる (Windows バージョンのみで有効)。
.IP INIT
.\"O Name of the user's init directory (used to find a lesskey file on OS/2 systems).
(OS/2 で lesskey ファイルを探すのに使われる) ユーザーの init ディレクトリ名。
.IP LANG
.\"O Language for determining the character set.
文字セットを決定するための言語。
.IP LC_CTYPE
.\"O Language for determining the character set.
文字セットを決定するための言語。
.IP LESS
.\"O Options which are passed to 
.\"O .I less
.\"O automatically.
.I less
に自動的に渡されるオプション。
.IP JLESS
環境変数 LESS と同じ。
.IP LESSANSIENDCHARS
.\"O Characters which are assumed to end an ANSI color escape sequence
.\"O (default "m").
ANSI カラーシーケンスの終りとして使われる文字 (デフォルトは "m")。
.IP LESSBINFMT
.\"O Format for displaying non-printable, non-control characters.
印字可能文字でもなく、制御文字でもない文字を表示する際のフォーマット。
.IP LESSCHARDEF
.\"O Defines a character set.
文字セットを定義する。
.IP JLESSCHARSET
.\"O Selects a predefined character set.
あらかじめ定義された文字セットを選択する。
.IP LESSCHARSET
.\"O Selects a predefined character set if JLESSCHARSET is not defined.
JLESSCHARSET が定義されていない場合に、
あらかじめ定義された文字セットを選択する。
.IP JLESSKEYCHARSET
.\"O Selects a predefined character set for keyboard inputs.
キーボート入力のためのあらかじめ定義された文字セットを選択する。
.IP JLESSPLANESET
.\"O Selects a predefined plane set of the ISO 2022 code extension techniques.
あらかじめ定義された ISO 2022 コード拡張テクニックのプレーンセットを選択する。
.IP LESSCLOSE
.\"O Command line to invoke the (optional) input-postprocessor.
(オプションの) 入力ポストプロセッサを呼び出すためのコマンドライン。
.IP LESSECHO
.\"O Name of the lessecho program (default "lessecho").
.\"O The lessecho program is needed to expand metacharacters, such as * and ?,
.\"O in filenames on Unix systems.
lessecho プログラムの名前 (デフォルトは、"lessecho")。
lessecho プログラムは、Unix システム上のファイル名を、* や ? といった
メタキャラクタで展開するのに必要である。
.IP LESSEDIT
.\"O Editor prototype string (used for the v command).
.\"O See discussion under PROMPTS.
(v コマンドで使われる) エディタのプロトタイプ文字列。
「プロンプト」セクションでの話題を参照。
.IP LESSKEY
.\"O Name of the default lesskey(1) file.
デフォルトの lesskey(1) ファイルの名前。
.IP LESSKEY_SYSTEM
.\"O Name of the default system-wide lesskey(1) file.
デフォルトで使われるシステム共通の lesskey(1) ファイルの名前。
.IP LESSMETACHARS
.\"O List of characters which are considered "metacharacters" by the shell.
シェルに「メタキャラクタ」として解釈される文字のリスト。
.IP LESSMETAESCAPE
.\"O Prefix which less will add before each metacharacter in a
.\"O command sent to the shell.
.\"O If LESSMETAESCAPE is an empty string, commands containing
.\"O metacharacters will not be passed to the shell.
less がシェルにコマンドを送る際にメタキャラクタの前に付加するプレフィックス。
LESSMETAESCAPE が空の文字列であるとき、
メタキャラクタを含むコマンドはシェルに送られない。
.IP LESSOPEN
.\"O Command line to invoke the (optional) input-preprocessor.
(オプションの) 入力プリプロセッサを起動するためのコマンドライン。
.IP LESSSECURE
.\"O Runs less in "secure" mode.
.\"O See discussion under SECURITY.
less を「安全な」モードで実行させる。
「セキュリティ」セクションでの話題を参照すること。
.IP LESSSEPARATOR
.\"O String to be appended to a directory name in filename completion.
ファイル名補完においてディレクトリ名に付加される文字列。
.IP LINES
.\"O Sets the number of lines on the screen.
.\"O Takes precedence over the number of lines specified by the TERM variable.
.\"O (But if you have a windowing system which supports TIOCGWINSZ or WIOCGETD,
.\"O the window system's idea of the screen size takes precedence over the
.\"O LINES and COLUMNS environment variables.)
画面の行数を設定する。
環境変数 TERM で指定された行数より優先される。
(TIOCGWINSZ や WIOCGETD をサポートするウインドウシステムの場合、
ウインドウシステムが持つ画面サイズの方が、
環境変数 LINES と COLUMNS より優先される)。
.IP PATH
.\"O User's search path (used to find a lesskey file 
.\"O on MS-DOS and OS/2 systems).
(MS-DOS と OS/2 で lesskey ファイルを探すのに使われる) ユーザーの検索パス。
.IP SHELL
.\"O The shell used to execute the ! command, as well as to expand filenames.
! コマンドを実行したり、ファイル名を補完するのに使われるシェル。
.IP TERM
.\"O The type of terminal on which
.\"O .I less
.\"O is being run.
.I less
が実行される端末のタイプ。
.IP VISUAL
.\"O The name of the editor (used for the v command).
(v コマンドで使われる) エディタの名前。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
lesskey(1)

.\"O .SH WARNINGS
.SH 警告
.\"O The = command and prompts (unless changed by -P)
.\"O report the line numbers of the lines at the top and bottom of the screen,
.\"O but the byte and percent of the line after the one at the bottom of the screen.
(-P オプションで変更されない限り) = コマンドとプロンプトは、
画面の先頭行と最終行の行番号を表示する。
しかし、バイト数とパーセントは画面最終行の次行について表示する。
.PP
.\"O If the :e command is used to name more than one file,
.\"O and one of the named files has been viewed previously,
.\"O the new files may be entered into the list in an unexpected order.
:e コマンドが 2 つ以上のファイルに対して使われ、
ファイルのうちの1つが既に閲覧されている場合、
新しいファイルが予期しない順番でリストに入れられる。
.PP
.\"O On certain older terminals (the so-called "magic cookie" terminals),
.\"O search highlighting will cause an erroneous display.
.\"O On such terminals, search highlighting is disabled by default 
.\"O to avoid possible problems.
ある種の古い端末 (いわゆる「マジッククッキー」端末) では、
検索のときのハイライトが表示エラーを起こす。
そのような端末では、この問題を避けるため、
検索の際のハイライトがデフォルトで不可に設定されている。
.PP
.\"O In certain cases, when search highlighting is enabled and 
.\"O a search pattern begins with a ^,
.\"O more text than the matching string may be highlighted.
.\"O (This problem does not occur when less is compiled to use the POSIX
.\"O regular expression package.)
検索の際のハイライト表示が設定されている場合に、
検索パターンが ^ で始まっていると、
マッチした文字列以外の部分までハイライトされることがある
(POSIX 正規表現パッケージを使って less がコンパイルされていれば、
この問題は起こらない)。
.PP
.\"O On some systems,
.\"O .I setlocale
.\"O claims that ASCII characters 0 thru 31 are control characters 
.\"O rather than binary characters.
.\"O This causes 
.\"O .I less 
.\"O to treat some binary files as ordinary, non-binary files.
.\"O To workaround this problem, set the environment variable
.\"O LESSCHARSET to "ascii" (or whatever character set is appropriate).
.I setlocale
が 0 から 31 の値を持つ ASCII 文字をバイナリキャラクタでなく
制御文字とするシステムもある。
そのため、
.I less 
がある種のバイナリファイルをバイナリでない通常のファイルとして扱かってしまう。
この問題を解決するには、環境変数 LESSCHARSET を "ascii" 
(もしくは、何か適切な文字セット) に設定すればよい。
.PP
.\"O See http://www.flash.net/~marknu/less for the latest list of known bugs in this
.\"O version of less.
このバージョンの less に関する既知のバグの最新リストは、
http://www.flash.net/~marknu/less を参照すること。

.\"O .SH COPYRIGHT
.SH 著作権
Copyright (C) 2000  Mark Nudelman
.PP
less is part of the GNU project and is free software.
You can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of either
(1) the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; or (2) the Less License.
See the file README in the less distribution for more details
regarding redistribution.
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License 
along with the source for less; see the file COPYING.
If not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place,
Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307, USA.
You should also have received a copy of the Less License;
see the file LICENSE.
.PP
less is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY
or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
See the GNU General Public License for more details.

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.PP
.\"O Mark Nudelman <marknu@flash.net>
.\"O .br
.\"O Send bug reports or comments to the above address or to bug-less@gnu.org.
Mark Nudelman <marknu@flash.net>
.br
バグの報告やコメントは、上のアドレスか bug-less@gnu.org へ送って下さい。

.\"O .SH PATCH
.SH パッチ
Copyright (c) 1994-2000  Kazushi (Jam) Marukawa, Japanized routines only
.br
Comments about this part to: jam@pobox.com
.br
You may distribute under the terms of the Less License.
.PP
[参考訳]
.br
Copyright (c) 1994-2000  Kazushi (Jam) Marukawa, 日本語化ルーチンのみ。
.br
この部分に関するコメントは jam@pobox.com へ送って下さい。
.br
このパッチは Less ライセンスの下で配布できる。
