.TH REPQUOTA 8
.UC 4
.SH NAME
repquota \- summarize quotas for a filesystem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/sbin/repquota
[
.B \-vsiug
] [
.B \-c
|
.B \-C
] [
.B \-t
|
.B \-n
] [
.B \-F
.I format-name
]
.IR filesystem .\|.\|.
.LP
.B /usr/sbin/repquota
[
.B \-avtsiug
] [
.B \-c
|
.B \-C
] [
.B \-t
|
.B \-n
] [
.B \-F
.I format-name
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "user quotas"  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "disk quotas"  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "quotas"  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "filesystem"  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "summarize filesystem quotas repquota"  ""  "summarize filesystem quotas \(em \fLrepquota\fP"
.IX  "report filesystem quotas repquota"  ""  "report filesystem quotas \(em \fLrepquota\fP"
.IX  display "filesystem quotas \(em \fLrepquota\fP"
.LP
.B repquota
prints a summary of the disc usage and quotas for the specified file
systems.  For each user the current number of files and amount of space
(in kilobytes) is printed, along with any quotas created with
.BR edquota (8).
As
.B repquota
has to translate ids of all users/groups to names (unless option
.B -n
was specified) it may take a while to
print all the information. To make translating as fast as possible
.B repquota
tries to detect (by reading
.BR /etc/nsswitch.conf )
whether entries are stored in standard plain text file or in database and either
translates chunks of 1024 names or each name individually. You can override this
autodetection by
.B -c
or
.B -C
options.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a
Report on all filesystems indicated in
.B /etc/mtab
to be read-write with quotas.
.TP
.B \-v
Report all quotas, even if there is no usage. Be also more verbose about quotafile
information.
.TP
.B \-c
Cache entries to report and translate uids/gids to names in big chunks by scanning
all users (default). This is good (fast) behaviour when using /etc/passwd file.
.TP
.B \-C
Translate individual entries. This is faster when you have users stored in database.
.TP
.B \-t
Truncate user/group names longer than 9 characters. This results in nicer output when
there are such names.
.TP
.B \-n
Don't resolve UIDs/GIDs to names. This can speedup printing a lot.
.TP
.B \-s
Try to report used space, number of used inodes and limits in more appropriate units
than the default ones.
.TP
.B \-i
Ignore mountpoints mounted by automounter.
.TP
.B \-F \f2format-name\f1
Report quota for specified format (ie. don't perform format autodetection).
Possible format names are:
.B vfsold
(version 1 quota),
.B vfsv0
(version 2 quota),
.B xfs
(quota on XFS filesystem)
.TP
.B \-g
Report quotas for groups.
.TP
.B \-u
Report quotas for users. This is the default.
.LP
Only the super-user may view quotas which are not their own.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 20
.BR aquota.user " or " aquota.group
quota file at the filesystem root (version 2 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
.TP
.BR quota.user " or " quota.group
quota file at the filesystem root (version 1 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
.TP
.B /etc/mtab
default filesystems
.TP
.B /etc/passwd
default set of users
.TP
.B /etc/group
default set of groups
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR quota (1),
.BR quotactl (2),
.BR edquota (8),
.BR quotacheck (8),
.BR quotaon (8)
