.\"
.\" Manpage Copyright 1994 Olaf Kirch, <okir@monad.swb.de>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Hirohisa AMAN, 
.\"     <aman@soft.comp.kyutech.ac.jp> all right reserved.
.\"
.TH YPPASSWD 1 "11 May 1997" "NYS YP Server" ""
.\"O
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O
.\"O yppasswd, ypchfn, ypchsh \- NIS password update clients
yppasswd, ypchfn, ypchsh \- NIS パスワード アップデート クライアント
.\"O
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "yppasswd [-l] [-f] [-p] [user]"
.br
.B "ypchfn [-l] [-f] [-p] [user]"
.br
.B "ypchsh [-l] [-f] [-p] [user]"
.\"O
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O
.\"O When distributing your users' passwords over NIS (a.k.a. YP), the standard
.\"O \fBpasswd\fP, \fBchfn\fP and \fBchsh\fP utilities cannot be used anymore to
.\"O let a user change her password, because they only modify the password file
.\"O on the local host.  They are usually replaced by their YP counterparts,
.\"O \fByppasswd\fP, \fBypchfn\fP and \fBypchsh\fP.
.\"O .P
ユーザーのパスワードを NIS (別名 YP) 上に配布している場合、標準の \fBpasswd\fP, \fBchfn\fP, \fBchsh\fP ユーティリティではパスワードを変更できない。というのも、これらのユーティリティはローカルホスト上のパスワードファイルを変更するだけだからである。
これらは通常、\fByppasswd\fP, \fBypchfn\fP, \fBypchsh\fP に置き換えられる。
.P
.\"O
.\"O These commands are in fact the very same program, linked to different names.
.\"O Using the command line switches, you can choose whether to update your
.\"O password (\fB-p\fP), your login shell (\fB-l\fP), or your GECOS field
.\"O information (\fB-f\fP), or a combination of them. \fByppasswd\fP implies
.\"O the \fB-p\fP option, \fBypchfn\fP the \fB-f\fP option, and so on.
.\"O .P
これらのコマンドは、実際には全く同じプログラムであり、それぞれ別の名前でリンクされているだけである。
コマンドラインスイッチによって、パスワード (\fB-p\fP)、ログインシェル (\fB-l\fP)、GECOS フィールド情報 (\fB-f\fP) のうちどれを(複数選択可)変更するか選択できる。\fByppasswd\fP は \fB-p\fP オプションが伴うことを意味し、同様に \fBypchfn\fP は \fB-f\fP オプションを、\fBypchsh\fP は \fB-l\fP オプションをそれぞれ意味する。
.P
.\"O
.\"O When invoked without the \fIuser\fP argument, the account information for
.\"O the invoking user will be updated, otherwise that of \fIuser\fP will be
.\"O updated.  This option is only available to the superuser. If the yppasswdd
.\"O daemon on the server supports it, you can give the root password of the
.\"O server instead of the users [old] password.
.\"O .P
引数 \fIuser\fP が省略されたときは、コマンドを実行しているユーザーのアカウント情報が変更され、さもなくば \fIuser\fP のアカウント情報が変更される。
この \fIuser\fP オプションは、スーパーユーザーのみ利用可能である。
もしサーバー上の yppasswdd デーモンがサポートしていれば、ユーザーの [元の] パスワードの代わりに root パスワードを入力することもできる。
.\"O
.\"O All tools will first prompt the user for the current NIS password needed
.\"O for authentication with the \fByppasswdd\fP daemon. Subsequently, the
.\"O program prompts for the updated information:
いずれのツールもまず最初に、ユーザーに対して現在の NIS パスワードをたずねる。(これは \fByppasswdd\fP デーモンでの認証に必要とされる。) 次にプログラムは更新情報についてきいてくる :
.\"
.\"
.\"O .IP "\fByppasswd\fP or \fB-p\fP"
.\"O Change the user's NIS password.	The user is prompted for the new password.
.\"O While typing the password, echoing is turned off, so the password does not
.\"O appear on the screen. An empty password is rejected, as are passwords shorter
.\"O than six characters. The user will then be requested to retype the
.\"O password to make sure it wasn't	misspelled the first time.
.IP "\fByppasswd\fP or \fB-p\fP"
ユーザーの NIS パスワードを変更する。ユーザーは新しいパスワードをたずねられる。
パスワードの入力中は echo が off になっているため、画面上にパスワードが表示されることはない。空のパスワードや 6 文字より短いパスワードは却下される。 1 回目に入力したパスワードがタイプミスでないことを確認するため、ユーザーはパスワードの再入力を求められる。
.\"
.\"
.\"O .IP "\fBypchsh\fP or \fB-l\fP"
.\"O Change the user's login shell. The user is prompted for a new shell,
.\"O offering the old one as default:
.\"O .IP
.\"O .in +2n
.\"O .ft B
.\"O .nf
.\"O Login shell [/bin/bash]: _
.\"O .fi
.\"O .ft
.\"O .in
.\"O .IP
.\"O To accept the default, simply press return. To clear the shell field in
.\"O your \fBpasswd\fP file entry (so that the system's default shell is selected),
.\"O enter the string \fInone\fP.
.\"O
.IP "\fBypchsh\fP or \fB-l\fP"
ユーザーのログインシェルを変更する。ユーザーは(これまでのシェルをデフォルトとして)新しいシェルをたずねられる :
.IP
.in +2n
.ft B
.nf
Login shell [/bin/bash]: _
.fi
.ft
.in
.IP
デフォルトを採用するには、単にリターンを押す。\fBpasswd\fP ファイルからシェルのフィールドを消去する(そのため、システムのデフォルトシェルが選択される)には、\fInone\fP という文字列を入力する。
.\"
.\"
.\"O .IP "\fBypchfn\fP or \fB-f\fP"
.\"O Change the user's full name and related information. Traditionally, some
.\"O applications expect the GECOS field (field 4) of the \fBpasswd\fP file to
.\"O contain the user's real name (as opposed to the login name) plus some
.\"O additional information like the office phone number. This information is
.\"O displayed by \fBfinger(1)\fP and probably some other tools, too.
.\"O .IP
.\"O
.IP "\fBypchfn\fP or \fB-f\fP"
ユーザーのフルネームと関連情報を変更する。伝統的にいくつかのアプリケーションは、\fBpasswd\fP ファイルの GECOS フィールド(第 4 フィールド)にユーザーの(ログイン名に対して)実名と関連情報(オフィスの電話番号など)が含まれているものと期待している。この情報は \fBfinger(1)\fP で表示される。おそらく他にも表示するツールはあるだろう。
.IP
.\"O When setting the full name, \fBypchfn\fP displays the following prompts,
.\"O with the defaults in brackets:
.\"O .IP
.\"O .in +2n
.\"O .ft B
.\"O .nf
.\"O Name [Joe Doe]:
.\"O Location [2nd floor, bldg 34]:
.\"O Office Phone [12345]:
.\"O Home Phone []:
.\"O .fi
.\"O .ft
.\"O .in
.\"O .IP
.\"O To accept a default, simply press return. To clear a field, enter the string
.\"O \fInone\fP.
.\"O
フルネームを設定する際、\fBypchfn\fP は以下のプロンプトを表示する([ ] 内はデフォルト値) : 
.IP
.in +2n
.ft B
.nf
Name [Joe Doe]:
Location [2nd floor, bldg 34]:
Office Phone [12345]:
Home Phone []:
.fi
.ft
.in
.IP
デフォルトを採用するには単にリターンを押す。フィールドの内容を消去するには \fInone\fP という文字列を入力する。
.\"O .SH LICENSE
.SH ライセンス
.\"O This program is a heavily beefed-up version of Theo de Raadt's \fByppasswd\fP
.\"O client, which is covered by the BSD license.  Therefore, the BSD license
.\"O applies to this program as well.
.\"O
このプログラムは Theo de Raadt の \fByppasswd\fP クライアント(これは BSD ライセンスによって保護されている)の強化版である。それゆえ、このプログラムに対しても BSD ライセンスが適用される。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR finger(1) ,
.BR passwd(5) ,
.BR passwd(1) ,
.BR ypchfn(1) ,
.BR ypchsh(1) ,
.BR yppasswdd(8) .
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Theo de Raadt <deraadt@fsa.ca> (original client)
.\"O .br
.\"O Olaf Kirch <okir@monad.swb.de> (heavy modifications and manpages)
Theo de Raadt <deraadt@fsa.ca> (オリジナルクライアント)
.br
Olaf Kirch <okir@monad.swb.de> (変更及びマニュアルページ)





