.\" Copyright 1989 - 1993 John F. Haugh II
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\" This product includes software developed by John F. Haugh, II
.\"      and other contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of John F. Haugh, II nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOHN HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JOHN HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$Id: pwunconv.8,v 1.1 1999/07/30 07:44:49 nakano Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\"
.TH PWUNCONV 8
.SH 名前
pwunconv \- shadowパスワードファイルから古いパスワードファイルを復元する
.SH 書式
pwunconv
.SH 説明
\fIPwunconv\fRはshadowパスワードファイルからパスワードファイル情報をコピーし、
shadowファイルが存在する場合はそのエントリを付加する。
新規に作成されるパスワードファイルは\fBnpasswd\fRという名前で保存される。
このファイルは所有者のみにreadアクセスを許すモードに設定される。
shadowファイルは新規作成されない。
可能ならばパスワード期限情報が変換される。
パスワード期限情報の数値の精度はある程度失われる。
.SH ファイル
/etc/passwd \- 古い暗号化されたパスワード及びその有効期限
.br
/etc/shadow \- 以前に変換されたshadowパスワードファイル
.br
./npasswd \- 新規作成されるshadowパスワードファイル
.SH 関連項目
passwd(1),
passwd(4),
shadow(4),
pwconv(8)
.SH 翻訳者
古高和禎 <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
