.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de),
.\"         Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\" and Copyright (C) 2007 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:35:48 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" 2007-10-23 mtk: minor rewrites, and added paragraph on exit status
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-05-08, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-02-09, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.77
.\"
.TH INTRO 8 2007-10-23 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O intro \- Introduction to administration and privileged commands
intro \- 管理コマンドと特権コマンドの説明
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Section 8 of the manual describes commands
.\"O which either can be or are only used by the superuser,
.\"O like system-administration commands, daemons,
.\"O and hardware-related commands.
マニュアルの 8 章は、システム管理用のコマンド、デーモン (daemon)、
ハードウェア関連のコマンドといった、スーパー・ユーザーによってのみ
使用される/できるコマンドについて説明している。

.\"O As with the commands in described section 1, the commands described
.\"O in this section terminate with an exit status that indicates
.\"O whether the command succeeded or failed.
.\"O See
.\"O .BR intro (1)
.\"O for more information.
1 章で説明されているコマンドと同様、この章で説明されるコマンドは
コマンドの成功・失敗を示す終了ステータスで終了する。
さらなる情報は
.BR intro (1)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 備考
.\"O .SS Authors and Copyright Conditions
.SS 著者と著作権
.\"O Look at the header of the manual page source for the author(s) and copyright
.\"O conditions.
.\"O Note that these can be different from page to page!
著者と著作権 (copyright) に関しては各マニュアル・ページのソースのヘッダーを見ること。
これらはページごとに異っている。
