.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1999 SuSE GmbH Nuernberg, Germany
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the
.\" License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not,
.\" write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
.\" Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Modified, 6 May 2002, Michael Kerrisk, <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"   Change listed order of /usr/lib and /lib
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat May 23 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Sep 14 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Jun  4 20:13:57 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	verbose mode	詳細表示モード
.\"WORD:	quiet mode	メッセージ抑制モード
.\"
.TH LDCONFIG 8 2009-04-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O /sbin/ldconfig \- configure dynamic linker run-time bindings
/sbin/ldconfig \- 動的リンカによる実行時の結合関係を設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /sbin/ldconfig
[
.B \-nNvXV
]
[
.BR \-f\ conf
]
[
.BR \-C\ cache
]
[
.BR \-r\ root
]
.IR directory \ ...
.PD 0
.PP
.PD
.B /sbin/ldconfig
.B \-l
[
.B \-v
]
.IR library \ ...
.PD 0
.PP
.PD
.B /sbin/ldconfig
.B \-p
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ldconfig
.\"O creates the necessary links and cache to the most recent shared
.\"O libraries found in the directories specified on the command line,
.\"O in the file
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.conf ,
.\"O and in the trusted directories
.\"O .RI ( /lib
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /usr/lib ).
.B ldcofig
は最新の共有ライブラリに対して必要なリンクを作成したり、
ライブラリをキャッシュしたりする。
ライブラリは、コマンドラインや
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
ファイルで指定されたディレクトリや、共有ライブラリが
通常置かれるディレクトリ
.RI ( /lib " と " /usr/lib )
から検索される。
.\"O The cache is used by the run-time linker,
.\"O .I ld.so
.\"O or
.\"O .IR ld-linux.so .
キャッシュは実行時リンカ
.I ld.so
または
.I ld-linux.so
によって使われる。
.\"O .B ldconfig
.\"O checks the header and filenames of the libraries it encounters when
.\"O determining which versions should have their links updated.
.B ldconfig
は処理するライブラリのヘッダ部分とファイル名をチェックし、
どのバージョンに対してリンクを更新すべきかを判断する。
.PP
.\"O .B ldconfig
.\"O will attempt to deduce the type of ELF libs (i.e., libc5 or libc6/glibc)
.\"O based on what C libs, if any, the library was linked against.
.\"O .\" The following sentence looks suspect
.\"O .\" (perhaps historical cruft) -- MTK, Jul 2005
.\"O .\" Therefore, when making dynamic libraries,
.\"O .\" it is wise to explicitly link against libc (use \-lc).
.B ldconfig
は ELF ライブラリの種類 (libc5 か libc6/glibc か) を判断するとき、
そのライブラリがリンクしている C ライブラリを参考にする。
.\" 以下の文の内容は本当かどうか疑わしい
.\" (おそらく過去の遺物であろう) -- MTK, Jul 2005
.\" したがってダイナミックライブラリを作成するときには、
.\" libc に対するリンクを (\-lc をつかって) 明示しておくと良い。
.PP
.\"O Some existing libs do not contain enough information to allow the deduction of
.\"O their type.
.\"O Therefore, the
.\"O .I /etc/ld.so.conf
.\"O file format allows the specification of an expected type.
.\"O This is
.\"O .I only
.\"O used for those ELF libs which we can not work out.
.\"O The format
.\"O is "dirname=TYPE", where TYPE can be libc4, libc5, or libc6.
.\"O (This syntax also works on the command line.)
.\"O Spaces are
.\"O .I not
.\"O allowed.
.\"O Also see the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option.
すでに存在しているライブラリの中には、種類を区別するために充分な
情報が含まれていないものもある。
このため
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
ファイルでライブラリの形式を指定することができるようになっている。
これは区別不能な ELF ライブラリ「だけ」に用いるものである。
フォーマットは "dirname=TYPE" とする。
ここで TYPE は libc4, libc5, libc6 のいずれかである
(この書式はコマンドラインでも使える)。
「スペースを入れてはならない」。
.B \-p
オプションも見ておくこと。
.\"O .B ldconfig
.\"O should normally be run by the superuser as it may require write
.\"O permission on some root owned directories and files.
.B ldconfig
は通常スーパーユーザー権限で実行しなければならない。
root が所有しているディレクトリやファイルへの書き込み権限が
必要になるからである。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose mode.
.\"O Print current version number, the name of each directory as it
.\"O is scanned, and any links that are created.
.\"O Overrides quiet mode.
詳細表示モード。
現在のバージョン番号を表示する。
またそれぞれのディレクトリをスキャンし、
新しいリンクを生成するたびに、その内容を表示する。
メッセージ抑制モードを上書きする。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Only process directories specified on the command line.
.\"O Don't process the trusted directories
.\"O .RI ( /lib
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /usr/lib )
.\"O nor those specified in
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.conf .
.\"O Implies
.\"O .BR \-N .

コマンドラインで指定されたディレクトリのみを処理する。
通常共有ライブラリが置かれるディレクトリ
.RI ( /lib " と " /usr/lib )
や
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
で指定されたディレクトリは処理しない。
暗黙のうちに
.B \-N
が指定される。
.TP
.B \-N
.\"O Don't rebuild the cache.
.\"O Unless
.\"O .B \-X
.\"O is also specified, links are still updated.
キャッシュを再構成しない。
同時に
.B \-X
が同時に指定されなければ、リンクのほうは更新される。
.TP
.B \-X
.\"O Don't update links.
.\"O Unless
.\"O .B \-N
.\"O is also specified, the cache is still rebuilt.
リンクを更新しない。
.B \-N
が同時に指定されなければ、キャッシュのほうは再構成される。
.TP
.B \-f conf
.\"O Use
.\"O .B conf
.\"O instead of
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.conf .
.B conf
を
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
の代わりに用いる。
.TP
.B \-C cache
.\"O Use
.\"O .B cache
.\"O instead of
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.cache .
.B cache
を
.I /etc/ld.so.cache
の代わりに用いる。
.TP
.B \-r root
.\"O Change to and use
.\"O .I root
.\"O as the root directory.
.I root
にカレントディレクトリを変更し、ここをルートディレクトリとして用いる。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Library mode.
.\"O Manually link individual libraries.
.\"O Intended for use by experts only.
ライブラリモード。それぞれのライブラリを手動でリンクする。
熟練者のみが用いるべきである。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Print the lists of directories and candidate libraries stored in
.\"O the current cache.
現在のキャッシュに保存されているディレクトリのリストと、
ライブラリの候補を表示する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.I /lib/ld.so
.\"O run-time linker/loader
実行時リンカ/ローダー。
.TP 20
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
.\"O File containing a list of colon, space, tab, newline, or comma-spearated
.\"O directories in which to search for libraries.
コロン・スペース・タブ・改行・コンマで区切られたディレクトリのリスト。
それぞれのディレクトリでライブラリが検索される。
.TP 20
.I /etc/ld.so.cache
.\"O File containing an ordered list of libraries found in the directories
.\"O specified in
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.conf ,
.\"O as well as those found in
.\"O .I /lib
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /usr/lib .
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
で指定されたディレクトリにあるライブラリ、および
.I /lib
と
.I /usr/lib
にあるライブラリの順序付きリスト。
.PD
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR ldd (1),
.BR ld.so (8)
