.\" This page is in the public domain
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Aug 14 1999
.\"       by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Wed Apr 4 2001
.\"       by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Dec 23 08:41:42 JST 2001 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.\"WORD:	country code	国別コード
.\"
.TH TZSELECT 8 2007-05-18 "" "Linux System Administration"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O tzselect \- select a timezone
.SH 名前
tzselect \- タイムゾーンを選択する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B tzselect
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B tzselect
.\"O program asks the user for information about the current location,
.\"O and outputs the resulting timezone description to standard output.
.\"O The output is suitable as a value for the
.\"O .B TZ
.\"O environment variable.
.B tzselect
プログラムは、ユーザーが現在いる場所の情報を尋ねて、
その結果得られたタイムゾーンの表記を標準出力に表示する。
この出力は
.B TZ
環境変数の値にすると良い。
.PP
.\"O All interaction with the user is done via standard input and standard error.
ユーザとの対話は、全て標準入力と標準エラー出力とで行われる。
.\"O .SH "EXIT STATUS"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The exit status is zero if a timezone was successfully obtained
.\"O from the user, nonzero otherwise.
ユーザからの入力によってタイムゾーンが正しく取得できた場合は 0 を
返す。それ以外の場合は 0 以外を返す。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境
.TP
\fBAWK\fP
.\"O Name of a Posix-compliant
Posix 互換の
.I awk
.\"O program (default:
.\"O .BR awk ).
プログラム (デフォルトは
.BR awk )。
.TP
\fBTZDIR\fP
.\"O Name of the directory containing timezone data files (default:
.\"O .IR /usr/share/zoneinfo ).
.\"O .\" or perhaps /usr/local/etc/zoneinfo in some older systems.
タイムゾーンデータファイルが置かれているディレクトリの名前 (デフォルトは
.IR /usr/share/zoneinfo )。
.\" 古いシステムでは /usr/local/etc/zoneinfo だろう
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
\fBTZDIR\fP\fI/iso3166.tab\fP
.\"O Table of ISO 3166 2-letter country codes and country names.
2 文字の国別コード (countory code) と国の名前からなる ISO 3166 の表。
.TP
\fBTZDIR\fP\fI/zone.tab\fP
.\"O Table of country codes, latitude and longitude, TZ values, and
.\"O descriptive comments.
国別コード、経度・緯度、TZ の値、説明文からなる表。
.TP
\fBTZDIR\fP\fI/\fP\fITZ\fP
.\"O Time zone data file for timezone \fITZ\fP.
タイムゾーン \fITZ\fP に対するタイムゾーンデータのファイル。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR tzfile (5),
.BR zdump (8),
.BR zic (8)
.\" @(#)tzselect.8	1.3
