.\" This page is in the public domain
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Sep 14 1999
.\"       by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ZDUMP 8 2007-05-18 "" "Linux System Administration"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O zdump \- timezone dumper
.SH 名前
zdump \- タイムゾーンをダンプする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B zdump
[
.B \-v
] [
.B \-c
cutoffyear ] [ zonename ... ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I Zdump
.\"O prints the current time in each
.\"O .I zonename
.\"O named on the command line.
.I zdump
は
コマンドラインで指定した
.I zonename
それぞれにおける現在時刻を表示する。
.PP
.\"O These options are available:
以下のオプションを指定できる:
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O For each
.\"O .I zonename
.\"O on the command line,
.\"O print the time at the lowest possible time value,
.\"O the time one day after the lowest possible time value,
.\"O the times both one second before and exactly at
.\"O each detected time discontinuity,
.\"O the time at one day less than the highest possible time value,
.\"O and the time at the highest possible time value.
.\"O Each line ends with
.\"O .B isdst=1
.\"O if the given time is Daylight Saving Time or
.\"O .B isdst=0
.\"O otherwise.
コマンドラインで与えられた
.I zonename
それぞれに対して、指定可能な最低位の時刻値 (time value)、
最低位の時刻値の一日後の時刻、
見付かった時間不連続の一秒前と丁度その時刻、
最高位時刻値の一日前の時刻、
指定可能な最高位の時刻値、を表示する。
それぞれの行の末尾には、
与えられている時刻がサマータイム (Daylight Saving Time) なら
.B isdst=1
が、そうでなければ
.B isdst=0
が付加される。
.TP
.BI "\-c " cutoffyear
.\"O Cut off the verbose output near the start of the given year.
与えられた年の最初の頃における余計な出力を切り捨てる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR tzfile (5),
.BR zic (8)
.\" @(#)zdump.8	7.3
