.\"O .TH IFNAMES "1" "January 2021" "GNU Autoconf 2.71" "User Commands"
.TH IFNAMES 1 2021年1月 "GNU Autoconf 2.71" ユーザーコマンド
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ifnames \- Extract CPP conditionals from a set of files
.SH 名前
ifnames \- 一連のファイルから CPP 条件式を抽出します。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.\"O .B ifnames
.\"O [\fI\,OPTION\/\fR]... [\fI\,FILE\/\fR]...
.SH 書式
\fBifnames\fP [\fI\,OPTION\/\fP]... [\fI\,FILE\/\fP]...
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O Scan all of the C source FILES (or the standard input, if none are
.\"O given) and write to the standard output a sorted list of all the
.\"O identifiers that appear in those files in '#if', '#elif', '#ifdef', or
.\"O \&'#ifndef' directives.  Print each identifier on a line, followed by a
.\"O space\-separated list of the files in which that identifier occurs.
.SH 説明
C 言語ソースである FILES (あるいは未指定の場合は標準入力) を読み込んで、そのファイルの中に記述されている '#if', '#elif',
\&'#ifdef', \&'#ifndef' といったディレクティブ内に出現する識別子を、ソートし標準出力します。各識別を 1
行に出力し、次にその識別子が出現するファイルの一覧を、空白で区切った一覧として出力します。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .TP
.\"O \fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
.\"O print this help, then exit
.TP 
\fB\-h\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP
このヘルプを表示して終了します。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .TP
.\"O \fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
.\"O print version number, then exit
.TP 
\fB\-V\fP, \fB\-\-version\fP
バージョン番号を表示して終了します。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O Written by David J. MacKenzie and Paul Eggert.
.SH 著者
David J. MacKenzie, Paul Eggert
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.\"O Report bugs to <bug\-autoconf@gnu.org>.
.\"O .br
.\"O GNU Autoconf home page: <https://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf/>.
.\"O .br
.\"O General help using GNU software: <https://www.gnu.org/gethelp/>.
.SH バグ報告
バグ報告は <bug\-autoconf@gnu.org> までご連絡ください。
.br
GNU Autoconf ホームページ: <https://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf/>
.br
GNU ソフトウェアの全般的なヘルプ: <https://www.gnu.org/gethelp/>
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH COPYRIGHT
.\"O Copyright \(co 2021 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"O License GPLv3+/Autoconf: GNU GPL version 3 or later
.\"O <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>, <https://gnu.org/licenses/exceptions.html>
.\"O .br
.\"O This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
.\"O There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH 著作権
Copyright \(co 2021 Free Software Foundation, Inc.  License GPLv3+/Autoconf:
GNU GPL version 3 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>,
<https://gnu.org/licenses/exceptions.html>
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.  There is
NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O .BR autoconf (1),
.\"O .BR automake (1),
.\"O .BR autoreconf (1),
.\"O .BR autoupdate (1),
.\"O .BR autoheader (1),
.\"O .BR autoscan (1),
.\"O .BR config.guess (1),
.\"O .BR config.sub (1),
.\"O .BR ifnames (1),
.\"O .BR libtool (1).
.SH 関連項目
\fBautoconf\fP(1), \fBautomake\fP(1), \fBautoreconf\fP(1), \fBautoupdate\fP(1),
\fBautoheader\fP(1), \fBautoscan\fP(1), \fBconfig.guess\fP(1), \fBconfig.sub\fP(1),
\fBifnames\fP(1), \fBlibtool\fP(1).
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .PP
.\"O The full documentation for
.\"O .B ifnames
.\"O is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.\"O .B info
.\"O and
.\"O .B ifnames
.\"O programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.PP
\fBifnames\fP の完全なドキュメントは Texinfo マニュアルとしてメンテナンスされています。\fBinfo\fP と \fBifnames\fP
の両プログラムが適切にインストールされていれば、以下のコマンド
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .IP
.\"O .B info ifnames
.IP
\fBinfo ifnames\fP
.\"O ----------------------------------------
.\"O .PP
.\"O should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
を実行して完全なマニュアルを参照できます。
.\"O ----------------------------------------
