.\"	dhcpd.leases.5
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998 The Internet Software Consortium.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The Internet Software Consortium nor the names
.\"    of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM AND
.\" CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM OR
.\" CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
.\" USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
.\" ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" This software has been written for the Internet Software Consortium
.\" by Ted Lemon <mellon@fugue.com> in cooperation with Vixie
.\" Enterprises.  To learn more about the Internet Software Consortium,
.\" see ``http://www.isc.org/isc''.  To learn more about Vixie
.\" Enterprises, see ``http://www.vix.com''.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Dec 24 2001 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH dhcpd.leases 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O dhcpd.leases - DHCP client lease database
.SH 名前
dhcpd.leases \- DHCP クライアントへの貸し出しデータベース
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The Internet Software Consortium DHCP Server keeps a persistent
.\"O database of leases that it has assigned.  This database is a free-form
.\"O ASCII file containing a series of lease declarations.  Every time a
.\"O lease is acquired, renewed or released, its new value is recorded at
.\"O the end of the lease file.  So if more than one declaration appears
.\"O for a given lease, the last one in the file is the current one.
Internet Software Consortium DHCP サーバは、
割り当てたアドレスの貸し出し記録を永続的なデータベースに保持しています。
このデータベースはフリーフォームの ASCII ファイルで、
一連の貸し出し宣言 (declaration) からなります。
貸し出しが要求・更新・破棄されると、
その新しい値がこの貸し出しファイルの末尾に記録されます。
よって、ひとつの貸し出しに対して複数の宣言があった場合は、
ファイルの後ろの方にあるものが現在のものになります。
.PP
.\"O When dhcpd is first installed, there is no lease database.   However,
.\"O dhcpd requires that a lease database be present before it will start.
.\"O To make the initial lease database, just create an empty file called
.\"O DBDIR/dhcp/dhcpd.leases.
最初に dhcpd がインストールされたときは、
貸し出しデータベースは存在していません。
しかし dhcpd は、貸し出しデータベースが存在していないと起動しません。
この目的の初期データベースには、
/var/state/dhcp/dhcpd.leases という空のファイルを作るだけでかまいません。
.PP
.\"O In order to prevent the lease database from growing without bound, the
.\"O file is rewritten from time to time.   First, a temporary lease
.\"O database is created and all known leases are dumped to it.   Then, the
.\"O old lease database is renamed DBDIR/dhcpd.leases~.   Finally, the
.\"O newly written lease database is moved into place.
貸し出しデータベースが際限なく大きくなるのを防ぐため、
このファイルは時々書き換えられます。
まず一時的な貸し出しデータベースが作成され、
現在わかっている貸し出し記録がすべてそこにダンプされます。
次に、古い貸し出しデータベースが /var/state/dhcp/dhcpd.leases~
という名前に変更されます。
最後に、新たに書き出された貸し出しデータベースが適切な場所に移動されます。
.PP
.\"O There is a window of vulnerability where if the dhcpd process is
.\"O killed or the system crashes after the old lease database has been
.\"O renamed but before the new one has been moved into place, there will
.\"O be no DBDIR/dhcpd.leases.   In this case, dhcpd will refuse to start,
.\"O and will require manual intervention.   \fBDO NOT\fR simply create a
.\"O new lease file when this happens - if you do, you will lose all your
.\"O old bindings, and chaos will ensue.   Instead, rename
.\"O DBDIR/dhcpd.leases~ to DBDIR/dhcpd.leases, restoring the old, valid
.\"O lease file, and then start dhcpd.   This guarantees that a valid lease
.\"O file will be restored.
古い貸し出しデータベースの名前が変更された後、
新しいデータベースが適切な場所に移動される前には間隔があるので、
この間に dhcpd プロセスが kill されたりシステムがクラッシュすると、
/var/state/dhcp/dhcpd.leases が存在しなくなる危険性があります。
この場合 dhcpd は起動しなくなり、手動での修復が必要になります。
このとき新しい貸し出しファイルを\fB単純に作成してはいけません\fR。
こうすると、古い割り当てはすべて失われ、混乱が生じることになります。
そうではなく、/var/state/dhcp/dhcpd.leases~ を
/var/state/dhcp/dhcpd.leases にリネーム、
すなわち正しい古い貸し出しファイルを元に戻してから、
dhcpd を起動してください。
このようにすれば、正しい貸し出しファイルに復元できます。
.\"O .SH FORMAT
.SH フォーマット
.\"O Lease descriptions are stored in a format that is parsed by the same
.\"O recursive descent parser used to read the
.\"O .B dhcpd.conf(5)
.\"O and
.\"O .B dhclient.conf(5)
.\"O files.   Currently, the only declaration that is
.\"O used in the dhcpd.leases file is the 
.\"O .B lease
.\"O declaration.
貸し出し宣言が保存されるフォーマットは、
.BR dhcpd.conf (5)
や
.BR dhclient.conf (5)
ファイルの読み込みに用いられるのと同じ再帰パーサによって解釈されます。
.PP
 \fBlease \fIip-address\fB { \fIstatements...\fB }\fR
.PP
.\"O Each lease declaration include the single IP address that has been
.\"O leased to the client.   The statements within the braces define the
.\"O duration of the lease and to whom it is assigned.
各貸し出し宣言には、
クライアントに貸し出されている IP アドレスがひとつ含まれます。
括弧の内部の文は、貸し出しの有効期間と割り当て先とを定義します。
.PP
.\"O The start and end time of a lease are recorded using the ``starts''
.\"O and ``ends'' statements:
貸し出しの開始時刻と終了時刻は、
それぞれ ``starts'' および ``end'' 文によって記録されます。
.PP
 \fB starts \fIdate\fB;\fR
 \fB ends \fIdate\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O Dates are specified as follows:
日付は次のように指定されます。
.PP
 \fIweekday year\fB/\fImonth\fB/\fIday
hour\fB:\fIminute\fB:\fIsecond\fR
.PP
.\"O The weekday is present to make it easy for a human to tell when a
.\"O lease expires - it's specified as a number from zero to six, with zero
.\"O being Sunday.  The day of week is ignored on input.  The year is
.\"O specified with the century, so it should generally be four digits
.\"O except for really long leases.  The month is specified as a number
.\"O starting with 1 for January.  The day of the month is likewise
.\"O specified starting with 1.  The hour is a number between 0 and 23, the
.\"O minute a number between 0 and 59, and the second also a number between
.\"O 0 and 59.
曜日 (weekday) は、
貸し出しの期限切れを人間にわかりやすくするために書かれています。
番号 0 から 6 で指定され、0 が日曜日に対応しています。
曜日は入力では無視されます。年 (year) は世紀の部分とともに指定され、
よって通常は (ものすごく長い貸し出しでない限り)  4 桁になります。
月 (month) は 1 から始まり、1 が 1 月に対応します。
月内日 (day) も同じく 1 から始まります。
時 (hour) は 0 から 23 の数値で、
分 (minute) は 0 から 59 の数値で、
秒 (second) も同じく 0 から 59 の数値で、それぞれ指定します。
.PP
.\"O Lease times are specified in Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), not in the
.\"O local time zone.   Since Greenwich is actually on Daylight Savings
.\"O Time part of the year, there is probably nowhere in the world where
.\"O the times recorded on a lease are always the same as wall clock times.
.\"O On a unix machine, one can often figure out the current time in GMT by
.\"O typing \fBdate -u\fR.
貸し出し期間の両時刻はグリニッジ平均時 (GMT) で指定され、
ローカルのタイムゾーンではありません。
実はグリニッジは年内のある期間サマータイムになるので、
貸し出しの時刻が常に壁時計時刻と同じになるところは、
世界中のどこにも存在しません。
Unix マシンでは、GMT での現時刻は
\fBdate -u\fR と入力すればわかります。
.PP
.\"O The MAC address of the network interface that was used to acquire the
.\"O lease is recorded with the \fBhardware\fR statement:
貸し出しを要求したネットワークインターフェースの MAC アドレスは、
\fBhardware\fR 文で記録されます。
.PP
 \fBhardware \fIhardware-type mac-address\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O The MAC address is specified as a series of hexadecimal octets,
.\"O seperated by colons.
MAC アドレスは、コロンで区切られた 16 進のオクテットで指定されます。
.PP
.\"O If the client used a client identifier to acquire its address, the
.\"O client identifier is recorded using the \fBuid\fR statement:
クライアントがアドレス要求時にクライアント識別子を用いた場合は、
そのクライアント識別子が \fBuid\fR 文で記録されます。
.PP
 \fBuid \fIclient-identifier\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O The client identifier is recorded as a series of hexadecimal octets,
.\"O regardless of whether the client specifies an ASCII string or uses the
.\"O newer hardware type/MAC address format.
クライアント識別子は 16 進のオクテットで指定されます。
これはクライアントが ASCII 文字列を利用したか、
あるいは新しい「ハードウェア形式/MAC アドレス」形式を利用したかによりません。
.PP
.\"O If the client sends a hostname using the \fIClient Hostname\fR option,
.\"O as specified in some versions of the DHCP-DNS Interaction draft, that
.\"O hostname is recorded using the \fBclient-hostname\fR statement.
クライアントが
(DHCP-DNS Interaction ドラフトのある版で指定されているように)
\fIClient Hostname\fR オプションでホスト名を送ってきた場合には、
そのホスト名は \fBclient-hostname\fR 文で記録されます。
.PP
 \fBclient-hostname "\fIhostname\fB";\fR
.PP
.\"O If the client sends its hostname using the \fIHostname\fR option, as
.\"O Windows 95 does, it is recorded using the \fBhostname\fR statement.
クライアントが (Windows 95 などでのように)
\fIHostname\fR オプションで自分のホスト名を送ってきた場合には、
そのホスト名は \fBhostname\fR 文で記録されます。
.PP
 \fBhostname "\fIhostname\fB";\fR
.PP
.\"O The DHCP server may determine that a lease has been misused in some
.\"O way, either because a client that has been assigned a lease NAKs it,
.\"O or because the server's own attempt to see if an address is in use
.\"O prior to reusing it reveals that the address is in fact already in
.\"O use.   In that case, the \fBabandoned\fR statement will be used to
.\"O indicate that the lease should not be reassigned.
DHCP サーバは、ある貸し出しが
(なんらかの意味で) 誤用された、と指定することがあります。
割り当てを受けたクライアントがその割り当てを NAK した場合とか、
サーバがあるアドレスを割り当てる際にそれが利用中であるかを調べたところ、
実はそのアドレスがすでに使われていた場合などがこれに該当します。
このような場合には \fBabandoned\fR 文が用いられ、
その貸し出しは破棄し、再割り当てするな、ということを示します。
.PP
 \fBabandoned;\fR
.PP
.\"O Abandoned leases are reclaimed automatically.   When a client asks for
.\"O a new address, and the server finds that there are no new addresses,
.\"O it checks to see if there are any abandoned leases, and allocates the
.\"O least recently abandoned lease.   The standard mechanisms for checking
.\"O for lease address conflicts are still followed, so if the abandoned
.\"O lease's IP address is still in use, it will be reabandoned.
破棄された貸し出しは、自動的に再生されます。
クライアントが新しいアドレスを要求したときに、
割り当てるべき新しいアドレスがなかった場合には、
サーバは破棄されたアドレスがないかどうか調べ、
もっとも前に破棄された貸し出しアドレスを割り当てます。
貸し出しアドレスが衝突していないかを調べる際には、
標準的なチェック機構が用いられます。
従って破棄された貸し出しの IP アドレスがまだ利用されていた場合は,、
そのアドレスは再び破棄されることになります。
.PP
.\"O If a client \fBrequests\fR an abandoned address, the server assumes
.\"O that the reason the address was abandoned was that the lease file was
.\"O corrupted, and that the client is the machine that responded when the
.\"O lease was probed, causing it to be abandoned.   In that case, the
.\"O address is immediately assigned to the client.
クライアントが破棄されたアドレスを\fB要求\fRした場合は、
サーバはそのアドレスが破棄された理由を、
貸し出しファイルが壊れたためであるとみなし、
またそのクライアントは貸し出しを調査したときに反応したマシンであり、
そのためにそのアドレスが破棄扱いになったのだとみなします。
この場合には、そのアドレスは直ちにそのクライアントに割り当てられます。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .B DBDIR/dhcpd.leases
.B /var/state/dhcp/dhcpd.leases
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
dhcpd(8), dhcp-options(5), dhcpd.conf(5), RFC2132, RFC2131.
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B dhcpd(8)
.\"O was written by Ted Lemon <mellon@vix.com>
.\"O under a contract with Vixie Labs.   Funding
.\"O for this project was provided by the Internet Software Corporation.
.\"O Information about the Internet Software Consortium can be found at
.\"O .B http://www.isc.org/isc.
.BR dhcpd (8)
は Ted Lemon <mellon@vix.com>
が Vixie Labs との契約のもとに書きました。
このプロジェクトの資金は、
Internet Software Corporation によって提供されました。
Internet Software Consortium の情報は
.B http://www.isc.org/isc
にあります。
.SH 訳注
ファイルの置き場所はインストールによって変わることがあります。
ここではデフォルトの /var/state/dhcp を仮定してあります。
