.\" Copyright (C) 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:25:52 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 11 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 20 17:49:23 JST 1997
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi Yoshino <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Feb 15 04:01:41 JST 2005
.\"       by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH CLOSEDIR 3 2008\-09\-23 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
closedir \- ディレクトリをクローズする
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <sys/types.h>\fP
.sp
\fB#include <dirent.h>\fP
.sp
\fBint closedir(DIR *\fP\fIdirp\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.SH 説明
\fBclosedir\fP()  関数は \fIdirp\fP に関連付けられた ディレクトリストリームをクローズする。
\fBclosedir\fP()  の呼び出しが成功すると、 \fIdirp\fP に関連付けられた
ファイルディスクリプタもクローズされる。
ディレクトリストリームディスクリプタ (directory stream descriptor) \fIdirp\fP は、
この呼び出しの後では使用することができない。
.SH 返り値
\fBclosedir\fP()  関数は成功時に 0 を返す。 エラーの場合は、\-1 が返されて、 \fIerrno\fP が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP 
\fBEBADF\fP
ディレクトリストリームディスクリプタ \fIdirp\fP が無効である。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, POSIX.1\-2001, 4.3BSD.
.SH 関連項目
\fBclose\fP(2), \fBopendir\fP(3), \fBreaddir\fP(3), \fBrewinddir\fP(3), \fBscandir\fP(3),
\fBseekdir\fP(3), \fBtelldir\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.64 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
