.\" Copyright (c) 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	From: @(#)err.3	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/9/93
.\" $FreeBSD: src/lib/libc/gen/err.3,v 1.11.2.5 2001/08/17 15:42:32 ru Exp $
.\"
.\" 2011-09-10, mtk, Converted from mdoc to man macros
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.TH ERR 3 2012\-03\-15 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
err, verr, errx, verrx, warn, vwarn, warnx, vwarnx \- エラーメッセージを整形する
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <err.h>\fP
.sp
\fBvoid err(int \fP\fIeval\fP\fB, const char *\fP\fIfmt\fP\fB, ...);\fP
.sp
\fBvoid errx(int \fP\fIeval\fP\fB, const char *\fP\fIfmt\fP\fB, ...);\fP
.sp
\fBvoid warn(const char *\fP\fIfmt\fP\fB, ...);\fP
.sp
\fBvoid warnx(const char *\fP\fIfmt\fP\fB, ...);\fP
.sp
\fB#include <stdarg.h>\fP
.sp
\fBvoid verr(int \fP\fIeval\fP\fB, const char *\fP\fIfmt\fP\fB, va_list \fP\fIargs\fP\fB);\fP
.sp
\fBvoid verrx(int \fP\fIeval\fP\fB, const char *\fP\fIfmt\fP\fB, va_list \fP\fIargs\fP\fB);\fP
.sp
\fBvoid vwarn(const char *\fP\fIfmt\fP\fB, va_list \fP\fIargs\fP\fB);\fP
.sp
\fBvoid vwarnx(const char *\fP\fIfmt\fP\fB, va_list \fP\fIargs\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.SH 説明
\fBerr\fP()  関数群と \fBwarn\fP()  関数群は、エラーメッセージを整形して標準エラー出力に表示する。
どの関数の場合も、(ディレクトリ部分を省いた)プログラム名、 コロン 1個、スペース 1個が出力される。 \fIfmt\fP 引き数が NULL でない場合、
\fBprintf\fP(3)  と同様に整形が行われ、エラーメッセージが出力される。 出力は改行文字で終わる。
.PP
関数 \fBerr\fP(), \fBverr\fP(), \fBwarn\fP(), \fBvwarn\fP()  は、グローバル変数 \fIerrno\fP に基づいて
\fBstrerror\fP(3)  から得たエラーメッセージを出力する。 \fIfmt\fP 引き数が NULL
でない場合は、一個ずつのコロンとスペースに続けて出力する。
.PP
関数 \fBerrx\fP(), \fBwarnx\fP()  はエラーメッセージを付け加えない。
.PP
関数 \fBerr\fP(), \fBverr\fP(), \fBerrx\fP(), \fBverrx\fP()  は返り値を返さないが、引き数 \fIeval\fP の値を
exit status に設定し終了する。
.SH 準拠
.\" .SH HISTORY
.\" The
.\" .BR err ()
.\" and
.\" .BR warn ()
.\" functions first appeared in
.\" 4.4BSD.
これらの関数は非標準の BSD 拡張である。
.SH 例
現在の \fIerrno\fP の情報を表示し、終了する:
.in +4n
.nf

if ((p = malloc(size)) == NULL)
    err(1, NULL);
if ((fd = open(file_name, O_RDONLY, 0)) == \-1)
    err(1, "%s", file_name);
.fi
.in
.PP
エラーメッセージを表示し、終了する:
.in +4n
.nf

if (tm.tm_hour < START_TIME)
    errx(1, "too early, wait until %s", start_time_string);
.fi
.in
.PP
エラーを警告表示する:
.in +4n
.nf

if ((fd = open(raw_device, O_RDONLY, 0)) == \-1)
    warnx("%s: %s: trying the block device",
            raw_device, strerror(errno));
if ((fd = open(block_device, O_RDONLY, 0)) == \-1)
    err(1, "%s", block_device);
.fi
.in
.SH 関連項目
\fBerror\fP(3), \fBexit\fP(3), \fBperror\fP(3), \fBprintf\fP(3), \fBstrerror\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.40 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
