.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Chris Torek and the American National Standards Committee X3,
.\" on Information Processing Systems.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_4_CLAUSE_UCB)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"     @(#)fread.3	6.6 (Berkeley) 6/29/91
.\"
.\" Converted for Linux, Mon Nov 29 15:37:33 1993, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Sun Feb 19 21:26:54 1995 by faith, return values
.\" Modified Thu Apr 20 20:43:53 1995 by Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com>
.\" Modified Fri May 17 10:21:51 1996 by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.north.de>
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.TH FREAD 3 2012\-03\-30 GNU "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
fread, fwrite \- バイナリストリームの入出力
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <stdio.h>\fP
.sp
\fBsize_t fread(void *\fP\fIptr\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fIsize\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fInmemb\fP\fB, FILE *\fP\fIstream\fP\fB);\fP
.sp
\fBsize_t fwrite(const void *\fP\fIptr\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fIsize\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fInmemb\fP\fB,\fP
\fB              FILE *\fP\fIstream\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.SH 説明
\fBfread\fP()  関数は \fIstream\fP ポインタで指定されたストリームから \fInmemb\fP 個のデータを読み込み、 \fIptr\fP
で与えられた場所に格納する。 個々のデータは \fIsize\fP バイトの長さを持つ。
.PP
\fBfwrite\fP()  関数は \fIptr\fP で指定された場所から得た \fInmemb\fP 個のデータを、 \fIstream\fP
ポインタで指定されたストリームに書き込む。 個々のデータは \fIsize\fP バイトの長さを持つ。
.PP
これらの処理を停止せずに行いたいときは、 \fBunlocked_stdio\fP(3)  を参照のこと。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、 \fBfread\fP() と \fBfwrite\fP() は読み書きを行った要素の個数を返す。
\fIsize\fP が 1 の場合は、この数字は転送されたバイト数と等しい。
エラーが生じた場合や、ファイルの末尾 (end\-of\-file) に達した場合、
返り値は指定した個数よりも小さい値 (または 0) となる。
.PP
\fBfread\fP()  は end\-of\-file とエラーを区別しないので、 どちらが生じたかを判断するためには、 呼び出し側で \fBfeof\fP(3)
と \fBferror\fP(3)  とを使用しなければならない。
.SH 準拠
C89, POSIX.1\-2001.
.SH 関連項目
\fBread\fP(2), \fBwrite\fP(2), \fBfeof\fP(3), \fBferror\fP(3), \fBunlocked_stdio\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.53 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
