.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Kenji Kajiwara
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jul 15 18:20:00 JST 1996
.\"         by Kenji Kajiwara
.\" Proof Reading: Takashi Yoshino
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jun  6 05:30:45 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 15 02:32:55 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated 2008-09-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH HYPOT 3 2017\-09\-15 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
hypot, hypotf, hypotl \- ユークリッド距離関数
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <math.h>\fP
.PP
\fBdouble hypot(double \fP\fIx\fP\fB, double \fP\fIy\fP\fB);\fP
\fBfloat hypotf(float \fP\fIx\fP\fB, float \fP\fIy\fP\fB);\fP
\fBlong double hypotl(long double \fP\fIx\fP\fB, long double \fP\fIy\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.PP
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.PP
.RS -4
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件 (\fBfeature_test_macros\fP(7)  参照):
.RE
.PP
.ad l
\fBhypot\fP():
.RS 4
_ISOC99_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L
    || _XOPEN_SOURCE
    || /* Since glibc 2.19: */ _DEFAULT_SOURCE
    || /* Glibc versions <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.RE
.br
\fBhypotf\fP(), \fBhypotl\fP():
.RS 4
_ISOC99_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L
    || /* Since glibc 2.19: */ _DEFAULT_SOURCE
    || /* Glibc versions <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.RE
.ad b
.SH 説明
これらの関数は sqrt(\fIx\fP*\fIx\fP+\fIy\fP*\fIy\fP)  の値を返す。 これは 直角を挟む 2 辺の長さが \fIx\fP と \fIy\fP
である直角三角形の斜辺の長さ、 すなわち、原点と点 (\fIx\fP,\fIy\fP)  との距離である。
.PP
.\" e.g., hypot(DBL_MIN, DBL_MIN) does the right thing, as does, say
.\" hypot(DBL_MAX/2.0, DBL_MAX/2.0).
計算の中間ステップでは、必要以上のオーバーフローやアンダーフローが 起きないようにして計算が実行される。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は、 直角を挟む 2 辺の長さが \fIx\fP と \fIy\fP である直角三角形の斜辺の長さを返す。
.PP
\fIx\fP か \fIy\fP が無限大の場合、正の無限大が返される。
.PP
\fIx\fP か \fIy\fP の一方が NaN で、もう一方が無限大でない場合、 NaN が返される。
.PP
結果がオーバーフローする場合、範囲エラー (range error) が発生し、 各関数はそれぞれ \fBHUGE_VAL\fP, \fBHUGE_VALF\fP,
\fBHUGE_VALL\fP を返す。
.PP
.\" Actually, could the result not be subnormal if both arguments
.\" are subnormal?  I think not -- mtk, Jul 2008
両方の引数が非正規化数 (subnormal) で、結果も非正規化数 (subnormal) の場合、 範囲エラーが発生し、正しい結果が返される。
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は \fBmath_error\fP(7)  を参照のこと。
.PP
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP 
範囲エラー (range error): 結果のオーバーフロー
\fIerrno\fP に \fBERANGE\fP が設定される。 オーバーフロー浮動小数点例外 (\fBFE_OVERFLOW\fP)  が上がる。
.TP 
範囲エラー (range error): 結果のアンダーフロー
アンダーフロー浮動小数点例外 (\fBFE_UNDERFLOW\fP)  が上がる。
.IP
.\" This is intentional; see
.\" https://www.sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6795
これらの関数は、この場合に \fIerrno\fP を設定しない。
.SH 属性
この節で使用されている用語の説明については、 \fBattributes\fP(7) を参照。
.TS
allbox;
lbw27 lb lb
l l l.
インターフェース	属性	値
T{
\fBhypot\fP(),
\fBhypotf\fP(),
\fBhypotl\fP()
T}	Thread safety	MT\-Safe
.TE
.sp 1
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1\-2001, POSIX.1\-2008.
.PP
\fIdouble\fP 版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD にも準拠している。
.SH 関連項目
\fBcabs\fP(3), \fBsqrt\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 5.10 の一部である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
\%https://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
