.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:08:17 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-08-25, aeb
.\" Modified 2004-11-12 as per suggestion by Fabian Kreutz/AEB
.\" 2008-07-24, mtk, moved yxx() material into separate y0.3 page
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 Ishii Tatsuo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 24 1998 by Ishii Tatsuo <rfun@azusa.shinshu-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 2002-09-24 by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH J0 3 2014\-01\-18 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
j0, j0f, j0l, j1, j1f, j1l, jn, jnf, jnl \- 第一種ベッセル関数
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <math.h>\fP
.sp
.fi
\fBdouble j0(double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.br
\fBdouble j1(double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.br
\fBdouble jn(int \fP\fIn\fP\fB, double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.sp
\fBfloat j0f(float \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.br
\fBfloat j1f(float \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.br
\fBfloat jnf(int \fP\fIn\fP\fB, float \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.sp
\fBlong double j0l(long double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.br
\fBlong double j1l(long double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.br
\fBlong double jnl(int \fP\fIn\fP\fB, long double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.sp
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件 (\fBfeature_test_macros\fP(7)  参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
\fBj0\fP(), \fBj1\fP(), \fBjn\fP():
.RS 4
_SVID_SOURCE || _BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE
.RE
.br
\fBj0f\fP(), \fBj0l\fP(), \fBj1f\fP(), \fBj1l\fP(), \fBjnf\fP(), \fBjnl\fP():
.RS 4
.\" Also seems to work: -std=c99 -D_XOPEN_SOURCE
_SVID_SOURCE || _BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600
.RE
.ad b
.SH 説明
関数 \fBj0\fP(), \fBj1\fP()  はそれぞれ \fIx\fP の0次、1次の 第一種ベッセル関数の値を返す。 関数 \fBjn\fP()  は \fIx\fP の
\fIn\fP 次の 第一種ベッセル関数の値を返す。
.PP
関数 \fBj0f\fP(), \fBj1f\fP(), \fBjnf\fP() は、 \fIfloat\fP 型を引数に取り、返り値として返す。 関数 \fBj0l\fP(),
\fBj1l\fP(), and \fBjnl\fP() は、 \fIlong double\fP 型を引数に取り、返り値として返す。
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は \fIx\fP に対する第一種ベッセル関数の値を返す。

\fIx\fP が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

\fIx\fP の絶対値が大き過ぎる場合や結果がアンダーフローする場合、 範囲エラー (range error) が発生し、返り値が 0 となる。
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は \fBmath_error\fP(7)  を参照のこと。
.PP
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP 
範囲エラー: 結果のアンダーフローや、\fIx\fP の絶対値が大き過ぎる
.\" An underflow floating-point exception
.\" .RB ( FE_UNDERFLOW )
.\" is raised.
\fIerrno\fP に \fBERANGE\fP が設定される。
.PP
.\" FIXME . Is it intentional that these functions do not raise exceptions?
.\" e.g., j0(1.5e16)
.\" Bug raised: http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6805
これらの関数は、 \fBfetestexcept\fP(3)  でチェックできる例外を上げない。
.SH 準拠
\fIdouble\fP 型の値を返す関数は、SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1\-2001 に準拠する。 それ以外は非標準の関数で、BSD
にも存在する。
.SH バグ
\-8 から 8 までの \fIx\fP の値について \fBj0\fP(), \fBj1\fP(), \fBjn\fP()  が返す値には、最大で 2e\-16 の誤差がある。
.SH 関連項目
\fBy0\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.79 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
