.\" Copyright (C) 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:29:11 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 11 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec 24 12:34:00 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\"
.TH REWINDDIR 3 2013\-09\-02 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
rewinddir \- ディレクトリストリームの初期化
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <sys/types.h>\fP
.sp
\fB#include <dirent.h>\fP
.sp
\fBvoid rewinddir(DIR *\fP\fIdirp\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.SH 説明
\fBrewinddir\fP()  関数は、ディレクトリストリーム \fIdirp\fP の位置を ディレクトリの先頭に初期化する。
.SH 返り値
\fBrewinddir\fP()  関数は、値を返さない。
.SH 属性
.SS "マルチスレッディング (pthreads(7) 参照)"
The \fBrewinddir\fP()  function is thread\-safe.
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1\-2001.
.SH 関連項目
\fBclosedir\fP(3), \fBopendir\fP(3), \fBreaddir\fP(3), \fBscandir\fP(3), \fBseekdir\fP(3),
\fBtelldir\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.54 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
