.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 1996-06-08 by aeb
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat, 13 Jul 1996 17:54:30 JST
.\"         by Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Feb 17 22:50:25 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SINH 3 2017\-09\-15 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sinh, sinhf, sinhl \- 双曲線正弦 (ハイパボリックサイン) 関数
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <math.h>\fP
.PP
\fBdouble sinh(double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
\fBfloat sinhf(float \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
\fBlong double sinhl(long double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.PP
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.PP
.RS -4
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件 (\fBfeature_test_macros\fP(7)  参照):
.RE
.PP
.ad l
\fBsinhf\fP(), \fBsinhl\fP():
.RS 4
_ISOC99_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L
    || /* Since glibc 2.19: */ _DEFAULT_SOURCE
    || /* Glibc versions <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.RE
.ad
.SH 説明
これらの関数は双曲線正弦 (ハイパボリックサイン) 関数の値を返す。 数学的には以下のように定義されている。
.PP
.nf
    sinh(x) = (exp(x) \- exp(\-x)) / 2
.fi
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は \fIx\fP の双曲線正弦を返す。
.PP
\fIx\fP が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。
.PP
\fIx\fP が +0 (\-0) の場合、+0 (\-0) が返される。
.PP
\fIx\fP が正の無限大 (負の無限大) の場合、正の無限大 (負の無限大) が返される。
.PP
.\"
.\" POSIX.1-2001 documents an optional range error (underflow)
.\" for subnormal x;
.\" glibc 2.8 does not do this.
結果がオーバーフローする場合、 範囲エラー (range error) が発生し、 各関数はそれぞれ \fBHUGE_VAL\fP,
\fBHUGE_VALF\fP, \fBHUGE_VALL\fP を返す。符号は \fIx\fP と同じになる。
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は \fBmath_error\fP(7)  を参照のこと。
.PP
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP 
範囲エラー (range error): 結果のオーバーフロー
\fIerrno\fP に \fBERANGE\fP が設定される。 オーバーフロー浮動小数点例外 (\fBFE_OVERFLOW\fP)  が上がる。
.SH 属性
この節で使用されている用語の説明については、 \fBattributes\fP(7) を参照。
.TS
allbox;
lbw24 lb lb
l l l.
インターフェース	属性	値
T{
\fBsinh\fP(),
\fBsinhf\fP(),
\fBsinhl\fP()
T}	Thread safety	MT\-Safe
.TE
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1\-2001, POSIX.1\-2008.
.PP
\fIdouble\fP 版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89 にも準拠している。
.SH 関連項目
\fBacosh\fP(3), \fBasinh\fP(3), \fBatanh\fP(3), \fBcosh\fP(3), \fBcsinh\fP(3), \fBtanh\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 5.10 の一部である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
\%https://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
