.\" (c) 1999 by Paul Sheer <psheer@obsidian.co.za>    -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed 29 Jan 2003 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH forward 1 "1999 February 14" "Linux"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O forward \- arbitrary socket forwarding over a secure or compressed channel
forward \- 任意のソケットを安全で圧縮された経路にフォワードする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B forward
.br
[\fB-h\fP, \fB--help\fP]
.br
[\fB-v\fP, \fB--verbose\fP]
.br
[\fB-V\fP, \fB--version\fP]
.br
[\fB-p\fP, \fB--password\fP \fIpassword\fP]
.br
[\fB--netrc\fP]
.br
[\fB--no-netrc\fP]
.br
[\fB--secure\fP]
.br
[\fB-z\fP, \fB--gzip\fP]
.br
[\fB-K\fP, \fB--key-size\fP \fIbits\fP]
.br
[\fIuser\fP\fB@\fP]\fImachine1\fP[\fB:\fP\fIport1\fP] 
.br
\fImachine2\fP\fB:\fP\fIport2\fP
.br
\fIlisten_port\fP
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .PP
.\"O \fBforward\fP listens on port \fIlisten_port\fP on your local machine. When
.\"O it receives a connection, it forwards this to \fImachine1\fP where a
.\"O \fBsecure-mcserv\fP(1) daemon is assumed to be running. The
.\"O \fBsecure-mcserv\fP daemon then makes a connection to \fImachine2\fP on
.\"O port \fIport2\fP. All traffic is then forwarded transparently between
.\"O \fIlisten_port\fP and \fIport2\fP of \fImachine2\fP.
.B forward
はローカルマシンの
.I listen_port
で待ち受ける。接続を受信すると、その接続を
.BR secure-mcserv (1)
デーモンが既に動作しているはずの
.I machine1
ヘとフォワードする。すると
.B secure-mcserv
デーモンは
.I machine2
のポート
.I port2
に接続する。そしてすべてのトラフィックは、
透過的に
.I listen_port
と
.I machine2
の
.I port2
の間をフォワードされる。

.\"O The \fB--secure\fP and \fB--gzip\fP options can be used to effect the
.\"O connection between \fIlisten_port\fP of the local machine and 
.\"O \fIport2\fP of \fImachine2\fP. In this way \fBforward\fP can be used
.\"O to create secure or compressed versions of any service.
ローカルマシンの
.I listen_port
と
.I machine2
の
.I port2
との間の接続は、
.B --secure
オプションと
.B --gzip
オプションで変更できる。このように、
.B forward
はあらゆるサービスに対して、安全性あるいは圧縮を付加できる。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O All options are analogous to those of \fBmirrordir\fP. See \fBmirrordir\fP(1)
.\"O for more info. \fB--debug\fP just prevents \fBforward\fP from forking into
.\"O the background as a daemon.
すべてのオプションは
.B mirrordir
と同様である。詳細は
.BR mirrordir (1)
を見てほしい。ただし
.B --debug
は
.B forward
がバックグラウンドのデーモンへフォークするのを妨げる意味しか持たない。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O I havn't tested this, but they seem logical. Tell me if I've made a typo
.\"O somewhere.
私はこれらを試していないが、論理的には正しいと思う。
どこかでタイプミスをしていたら、私に知らせてほしい。
.PP
.\"O Consider a print server \fBA\fP on some LAN. The LAN has a masquerading server
.\"O \fBB\fP giving that LAN internet access. \fBB\fP can see both the internet and \fBA\fP. At
.\"O some other site \fBJohn\fP has a machine \fBD\fP using a masquerading server \fBC\fP
.\"O to give that LAN internet access. \fBB\fP and \fBC\fP can see each other only over
.\"O the open internet. He would like to run lpr on \fBD\fP and have it
.\"O automatically print out at \fBA\fP. He would also like the channel between \fBB\fP
.\"O and \fBC\fP to be compressed and encrypted (using a 1024 bit key exchange).
プリントサーバ \fBA\fP が LAN にある。
この LAN にはマスカレードサーバ \fBB\fP があり、
LAN をインターネットにつないでいる。
\fBB\fP はインターネットと \fBA\fP の両方を見ることができる。
ある別のサイトで、\fBJohn\fP は \fBD\fP というマシンを持っており、
これはマスカレードサーバ \fBC\fP を通してインターネットにつながっている。
\fBB\fP と \fBD\fP は、インターネット越しでしかお互いを見ることはできない。
.B John
は lpr を \fBD\fP で起動し、
印刷を \fBA\fP に出力させたい。
また \fBB\fP と \fBC\fP の間の経路を圧縮させ、
(1024 ビットの鍵交換で) 暗号化させたい。
.PP
.nf
.\"O The procedure is as follows (515 is the printer port):
手順は以下のようになる (515 はプリンタのポート):
    A# lpd &
    B# secure-mcserv -d -p 12345
.\"O add an entry to ~/.netrc for the password of john on B, then
~/.netrc に john の B におけるパスワードのエントリを追加する。そして
    C# forward john@B:12345 A:515 515 --secure -K 1024 -z
.\"O add an entry to /etc/printcap, defining a printer x on C, then
/etc/printcap に C のプリンタ x のエントリを追加する。そして
    D# lpr -Px mydocument
.fi
.PP
.\"O Consider \fBJill\fP who doesn't like colleague \fBJohn\fP printing out
.\"O screen dumps of her X session. She would like to create a secure X
.\"O session between her X server \fBA\fP and her mainframe \fBB\fP.
同僚の \fBJohn\fP が嫌いな \fBJill\fP が、
X セッションのスクリーンダンプを表示する場合を考える。
彼女は安全な X セッションを、サーバ \fBA\fP と
メインフレーム \fBB\fP の間に作りたい。
.PP
.nf
.\"O The procedure is as follows (6010 corresponds to display 10.0):
手順は以下のようになる (6010 は display 10.0 に対応する):
    A# X &
    A# secure-mcserv -d -p 12345
.\"O add an entry to ~/.netrc for the password of jill on A, then
~/.netrc に jill の A におけるパスワードのエントリを追加する。そして
    B# forward jill@A:12345 A:6000 6010 --secure -K 1024
    B# export DISPLAY=localhost:10.0
    B# fvwm &
.fi
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH LIST OF TESTED SERVICES
.SH テスト済みサービスのリスト
.\"O Telnet logins, X sessions, printer (lpr) services, http and pop3
.\"O connections have been tested and work. Ftp connections do not forward
.\"O because of the way ftp tries to do wierd binding things with sockets
.\"O (?). Please tell about what else worked, although most everything should
.\"O work.
.\"nakano wierd は多分 weird の typo.
telnet ログイン、X セッション、プリンタ (lpr) サービス、
http、pop3 接続はテストされ、動作が確認されている。
ftp はソケットのバインドが妙 (?) なのでフォワードできない。
他に動作したものがあったら知らせてほしい。
ほとんどのものは動作するはずだが。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O See also the \fBBUGS\fP section of \fBmirrordir\fP(1).
.BR mirrordir (1)
の \fBバグ\fP セクションも見てほしい。
.\"O .PP
.\"O Out of bounds (\fBMSG_OOB\fP of \fBrecv\fP(2) and \fBsend\fP(2)) data is
.\"O never encrypted or compressed. It is sent unmodified in the plain text.
.\"O If anyone thinks this is a security risk, please tell me about it and
.\"O I'll come up with something.
帯域外データ
.RB ( recv "(2) と " send (2)
の
.BR MSG_OOB )
は暗号化も圧縮もされない。修正されず、プレインテキストで送信される。
これをセキュリティ上のリスクだと考える方は、
私に知らせてほしい。何らかの対応をしたいと思う。
.PP
.\"O Screen resizing (detection?) under \fBrlogin\fP(1) does not seem
.\"O to work, although it works under \fBtelnet\fP(1). This must have
.\"O something to do with OOB data not being sent properly. I don't
.\"O feel like debugging rlogin, rlogind, forward, and secure-mcserv
.\"O simultaneously to find the problem. If anyone wants to try this
.\"O please go ahead.
.BR rlogin (1)
での画面サイズ変更 (の検知?) は動作しないようだ。しかし
.BR telnet (1)
では問題ない。これは OOB データが正しく送られないことと関連しているに違いない。
しかし問題点を発見するために
rlogin, rlogind, forward, secure-mcserv
を同時にデバッグするのは、私は気がすすまない。
チャレンジしてみたい人は、どうか頑張ってほしい。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
\fB~/.netrc\fP
.\"O List of machines and corresponding passwords.
マシンとそのパスワードのリスト。
.\"O .SH STANDARDS
.SH 標準
.\"O mirrordir is an invention of its author and does not belong to any
.\"O operating system standard.
mirrordir は作成者の発明であり、
いかなる OS の標準にも従っていない。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O The latest version of the program can be found at either
.\"O \fBftp://metalab.unc.edu/pub/Linux/system/backup\fP, or
.\"O \fBftp://lava.obsidian.co.za/pub/linux/mirrordir\fP.
このプログラムの最新版は、
\fBftp://metalab.unc.edu/pub/Linux/system/backup\fP または
\fBftp://lava.obsidian.co.za/pub/linux/mirrordir\fP
から入手できる。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Paul Sheer  <psheer@obsidian.co.za>  <psheer@icon.co.za>
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
\fBmirrordir\fP(1), \fBpslogin\fP(1), \fBssh\fP(1)
