.\" (c) 1998 by James R. Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com>    -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed 29 Jan 2003 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH mirrordir 1 "1998 November 8" "Linux"
.\"O .SH NAME secure-mcserv
.SH 名前
.\"O secure-mcserv \- secure server for encrypted login, file transfer and socket forwarding.
secure-mcserv \- 暗号化ログイン・ファイル転送・ソケットフォワード用の安全なサーバ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI secure-mcserv " \fR[\fPoptions\fR] [\fP" -p " portnum\fR]\fP"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .PP
.\"O \fBsecure-mcserv\fP is a server for the Midnight Commander (network)
.\"O filesystem (mcfs) of the Midnight Commander vfs (virtual file system).
.\"O It is part of the \fBmirrordir\fP package. In can operate as a
.\"O substitute to the Midnight Commander's native \fBmcserv\fP daemon,
.\"O although It has several extensions for use with \fBmirrordir\fP.
.B secure-mcserv
は Midnight Commander vfs (バーチャルファイルシステム) の
Midnight Commander (ネットワーク) ファイルシステム (mcfs) サーバである。
.B secure-mcserv
は
.B mirrordir
パッケージに含まれている。Midnight Commander のネイティブな
.B mcserv
デーモンの代わりに動作させることができ、
.B mirrordir
向けにいくつかの拡張がなされている。
.TP
.\"O \fBsecurity and compression\fP
.B セキュリティと圧縮
.\"O This is not so much a feature of \fBsecure-mcserv\fP as of the
.\"O transparent secure TCP layer implemented for the whole of
.\"O \fBmirrordir\fP. This layer can operate in normal mode, compressed
.\"O (gzipped) mode, encrypted mode, or compressed and encrypted mode. The
.\"O mode of connection is autodetected from magic numbers at the head of the
.\"O TCP stream. The Midnight Commander can use \fBsecure-mcserv\fP instead
.\"O of its native \fBmcserv\fP. See the \fB-z\fP, \fB--secure\fP and
.\"O \fB-K\fP options of \fBmirrordir\fP(1).
これは
.B secure-mcserv
の機能というよりも、
.B mirrordir
全体に対して実装された、透過的かつ安全な TCP 層である。
この層は、通常モード、圧縮 (gzipped) モード、暗号化モード、
圧縮+暗号化モードで動作できる。
接続のモードは TCP ストリーム先頭のマジックナンバーによって自動検知される。
Midnight Commander は
.B secure-mcserv
を、自らのネイティブなサーバである
.B mcserv
の代わりに利用できる。
.BR mirrordir (1)
の
.BR -z ,
.BR --secure ,
.B -K
各オプションを見よ。
.TP
.\"O \fBDenying access from specific hosts\fP
.B 特定のホストからのアクセスの拒否
.RS
.\"O You can add to your \fI/etc/hosts.allow\fP file lines like the following:
.I /etc/hosts.allow
ファイルに以下のような行を追加する。
.PP
.nf
    secure-mcserv:  <source-ip-address> : ALLOW
    secure-mcserv:  212.89.128.0/255.255.255.0 : ALLOW
    secure-mcserv:  ALL : DENY
.fi
.PP
.\"O (This feature was submitted to me by Juergen Kammer <j.kammer@eurodata.de>
.\"O who claims it works.)
(この機能は Juergen Kammer <j.kammer@eurodata.de>
から寄せられました。彼のところでは動作しているそうです。)
.RE
.TP
.\"O \fBlogins\fP
.B ログイン
.\"O You can securely login to \fBsecure-mcserv\fP with \fBpslogin\fP which
.\"O comes with the \fBmirrordir\fP distribution. This is analogous to
.\"O \fBrlogin\fP(1) working with \fBrlogind\fP(1). See the
.\"O \fB--login-mode\fP option of \fBmirrordir\fP(1).
.B mirrordir
の配布に含まれる
.B pslogin
を用いると、安全に
.B secure-mcserv
に対するログインができる。
これは
.BR rlogin (1)
が
.BR rlogind (8)
に対して動作するのと同様である。
.BR mirrordir (1)
の
.B --login-mode
オプションを見よ。
.TP
.\"O \fBTCP socket forwarding\fP
.B TCP ソケットのフォワード
.\"O Using the \fBforward\fP(1) command of the \fBmirrordir\fP distribution,
.\"O you can forward arbitrary TCP socket connections over a secure and/or
.\"O compressed TCP channel. This is very useful for making encrypted
.\"O services out of ordinary services. \fBforward\fP(1) has an examples
.\"O section.
.B mirrordir
の配布に含まれる
.BR forward (1)
コマンドを用いると、任意の TCP ソケット接続を
安全または圧縮 (あるいはその両方の) TCP チャネルにフォワードできる。
これは通常のサービスを暗号化サービスにでき、とても便利である。
.BR forward (1)
に例がある。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP 
\fB-d\fP
.\"O Become a daemon (set -q). This option will almost always be used.
.\"O Alternative \fB-d\fP can be omitted and \fB-v\fP (see below) set to
.\"O debug failed connections.
デーモンになる (同時に -q も設定される)。
通常は常にこのオプションを用いることになるだろう。
これ以外としては、
.B -d
を指定せずに
.B -v
(後述) を指定して、失敗した接続をデバッグする場合があり得るだろう。
.TP
\fB-q\fP
.\"O Quiet mode. This is the default.
寡黙モード。これはデフォルトである。
.TP
\fB-f\fP
.\"O Try ftp authentication if normal authentication fails.
通常の認証が失敗したときに ftp 認証を試みる。
.TP
\fB-v\fP
.\"O Verbose mode. Print out various debugging information.
饒舌モード。様々なデバッグ情報を表示する。
.TP 
\fB-p\fP \fIport\fP
.\"O Specify a port number to listen to. The default is 9876.
待ち受けるポート番号を指定する。デフォルトは 9876。
.TP
\fB-s\fP \fIserver\fP\fB[\fP\fI:port\fP\fB]\fP
.RS
.\"O Specify a password server to use. The password server is
.\"O just another machine running \fBsecure-mcserv\fP albeit 
.\"O without the \fB-s\fP option.
利用するパスワードサーバを指定する。
このパスワードサーバとは、単に他のマシンで
.B -s
オプション無しで動作している
.B secure-mcserv
のことである。

.\"O This is a very useful option if you have lots of machines that a
.\"O group of users have to be able to log into. Create accounts for
.\"O all these users on each machine and disable them by editing
.\"O their password fields to \fB*\fP in \fB/etc/password\fP (or
.\"O \fB/etc/shadow\fP).
このオプションは、たくさんのマシンを用いており、
それらに対して一群のユーザ達がログインするような場合にとても便利である。
これらのユーザ全員に対するアカウントを各マシンにつくり、
.B /etc/password
(あるいは
.BR /etc/shadow )
を編集してパスワードフィールドを
\fB*\fP にしてアカウントを無効にしておく。

.\"O Select one machine as your password server (say it is called
.\"O \fBpasserv.my.doma.in\fP). This machine will contain proper
.\"O password fields in \fB/etc/password\fP. On this machine run
.\"O \fBsecure-mcserv -d\fP as usual. On all other machines, run
.\"O \fBsecure-mcserv -d -s passerv.my.doma.in\fP
ひとつのマシンをパスワードサーバとして選択する (このマシンを仮に
.B passerv.my.doma.in
としよう)。このマシンの
.B /etc/password
のパスワードフィールドには、正しいパスワードを入れておく。
このマシンで、通常のように
.B secure-mcserv -d
を起動する。他の全てのマシンでは、
.B secure-mcserv -d -s passerv.my.doma.in
を起動する。

.\"O Because all intermediate connections use the same encrypted TCP
.\"O stream, and are all equally secure, you can use this method even
.\"O if \fBpasserv.my.doma.in\fP is across the open internet. In fact
.\"O the very method to authenticate against the password server is
.\"O to check the exit status of the command:
これらの間の接続は、全て等しく暗号化された TCP ストリームとなるので、
これらはすべて同じように安全である。この方法は
.B passerv.my.doma.in
がインターネットの向こうにあるような場合にでも利用できる。
実際、パスワードサーバに対する認証は、
以下のコマンドの終了ステータスを見ることによって行なわれている。
.br
.nf
\fBpslogin\fP \fIuser\fP\fB@passerv.my.doma.in --test-login --read-password-from-stdin\fP
.fi
.PP
.\"O I also see no reason why you cannot use cascading password
.\"O servers, although there is no advantage to doing this.
また、パスワードサーバのカスケードを利用することも不可能では無いはずだ。
こうすることには何の利点も無いけれど。

.\"O Each authentication takes the same time to execute, so using a
.\"O password server takes twice as long as a normal login, because
.\"O of the second connection it has to make to the password server.
.\"O Cascades will take that much time extra for each successive
.\"O password server.
それぞれの認証は、実行に同じ時間を必要とする。
よってパスワードサーバを用いると、
2 つめの接続がパスワードサーバになされるため、
通常のログインの 2 倍の時間がかかる。
カスケードにすると、各パスワードサーバごとに、
もっと余計な時間がかかる。
.RE
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Does not log to syslog.
syslog にログ出力しない。
.PP
.\"O Midnight Commander vfs has a bug that device files are always
.\"O major:minor of 0:0. This bug is fixed in this implementation.
.\"O Don't use the Midnight Commander to transfer device files. By
.\"O the time you read this, the latest Midnight Commander may have
.\"O had this fixed.
Midnight Commander vfs にはバグがあり、
デバイスファイルは常に メジャー番号:マイナー番号 が 0:0 となる。
このバグは、この実装では修正されている。
デバイスファイルの転送に Midnight Commander を用いてはいけない。
ただしこれをあなたが読んだ時点の最新版の Midnight Commander では、
この問題は修正されているかもしれない。
.PP
.\"O The special escape characters for suspending an \fBrlogin\fP session are
.\"O not recognised. Hence programs like \fBscreen\fP (?) will not work. I
.\"O will add this functionality if users request it. Currently, ^Z etc. do
.\"O not have any effect.
.B rlogin
セッションをサスペンドする特殊なエスケープ文字は認識しない。
よって
.B screen
(?) のようなコマンドは動作しない。
もしユーザからの要望があれば、この機能は追加するつもりだ。
現在のところ、^Z などは効力を持たない。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O See \fBmirrordir\fP(1).
.BR mirrodir (1)
を見よ。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH STANDARDS
.SH 標準
.\"O None. See \fBBUGS\fP.
ない。
.B バグ
を見よ。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O The latest version of the program can be found at either
.\"O \fBftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/Linux/system/backup\fP, 
.\"O \fBftp://lava.obsidian.co.za/pub/linux/mirrordir\fP, or
.\"O \fBftp://obsidian.co.za/pub/linux/mirrordir\fP.
このプログラムの最新版は、
\fBftp://metalab.unc.edu/pub/Linux/system/backup\fP,
\fBftp://lava.obsidian.co.za/pub/linux/mirrordir\fP,
\fBftp://obsidian.co.za/pub/linux/mirrordir\fP
のいずれかから入手できる。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Paul Sheer  <psheer@obsidian.co.za>  <psheer@icon.co.za>
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
\fBmirrordir\fP(1), \fBssh\fP(1), \fBmcserv\fP(1), \fBmc\fP(1)
