.\" @(#)cdrecord.1	1.57 01/04/17 Copyright 1996 J. Schilling
.\" 
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Nov 25 18:34:39 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.if t .ds a \v'-0.55m'\h'0.00n'\z.\h'0.40n'\z.\v'0.55m'\h'-0.40n'a
.if t .ds o \v'-0.55m'\h'0.00n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.55m'\h'-0.45n'o
.if t .ds u \v'-0.55m'\h'0.00n'\z.\h'0.40n'\z.\v'0.55m'\h'-0.40n'u
.if t .ds A \v'-0.77m'\h'0.25n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.77m'\h'-0.70n'A
.if t .ds O \v'-0.77m'\h'0.25n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.77m'\h'-0.70n'O
.if t .ds U \v'-0.77m'\h'0.30n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.77m'\h'-0.75n'U
.if t .ds s \\(*b
.if t .ds S SS
.if n .ds a ae
.if n .ds o oe
.if n .ds u ue
.if n .ds s sz
.TH CDRECORD 1 "Version 1.10" "J\*org Schilling" "Schily\'s USER COMMANDS"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O cdrecord \- record audio or data Compact Discs from a master
cdrecord \- マスタからオーディオ CD やデータ CD を記録する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B cdrecord
[
.I "general options
]
.BI dev= device
[
.I track options
]
.IR track1 .\|.\|. trackn

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O is used to record data or audio Compact Discs on an Orange Book
.\"O CD-Recorder.
.B cdrecord
は Orange Book CD-Recorder で
データ CD やオーディオ CD を記録するために使う。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I device
.\"O refers to
.\"O .IR scsibus / target / lun
.\"O of the CD-Recorder. Communication on 
.\"O .I SunOS
.\"O is done with the SCSI general driver
.\"O .B scg.
.I device
は CD レコーダの
.IR scsibus / target / lun
を指す。
.I SunOS
での通信は汎用 SCSI ドライバ 
.B scg 
を用いて行われる。
.\"O Other operating systems are using a library simulation of this driver.
.\"O Possible syntax is:
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR scsibus , target , lun
.\"O or
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR target , lun .
他の OS では、このドライバをシミュレートするライブラリを使う。
使用可能な書式は、
.B dev=
.IR scsibus , target , lun
または
.B dev=
.IR target , lun
である。
.\"O In the latter case, the CD-Recorder has to be connected to the default 
.\"O SCSI bus of the machine.
後者の場合、CD-R はマシンのデフォルトの SCSI バスに
接続されていなければならない。
.\"O .IR Scsibus ,
.\"O .I target 
.\"O and 
.\"O .I lun
.\"O are integer numbers. 
.IR scsibus ,
.IR target , 
.I lun
は整数である。
.\"O Some operating systems or SCSI transport implementations may require to
.\"O specify a filename in addition.
OS や SCSI 転送の実装のなかには、これに加えてデバイスファイル名を
指定しなければならないものもある。
.\"O In this case the correct syntax for the device is:
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
.\"O or
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : target , lun .
この場合の正しい書式は、
.B dev=
.IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
または
.B dev=
.IR devicename : target , lun
である。
.\"O If the name of the device node that has been specified on such a system
.\"O refers to exactly one SCSI device, a shorthand in the form
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : @
.\"O or
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : @ , lun
.\"O may be used instead of
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun .
このようなシステムでは、指定されたデバイスノード名が
1 つの SCSI デバイスのみを参照している場合、
.B dev=
.IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
の代わりに、省略形の
.B dev=
.IR devicename : @
または
.B dev=
.IR devicename : @ , lun
を使うことができる。
.PP
.\"O To access remote SCSI devices, you need to prepend the SCSI device name by
.\"O a remote device indicator. The remote device indicator is either
.\"O .BI REMOTE: user@host:
.\"O or
.\"O .BR
.\"O .BI REMOTE: host:
リモートの SCSI デバイスにアクセスするためには、
リモートのデバイスであることを示すインジケータを
SCSI デバイス名の前に付ける必要がある。
リモートデバイスのインジケータは
.BI REMOTE: user@host:
または
.BI REMOTE: host:
という形式である。
.br
.\"O A valid remote SCSI device name may be:
.\"O .BI REMOTE: user@host:
.\"O to allow remote SCSI bus scanning or
.\"O .BI REMOTE: user@host:1,0,0
.\"O to access the SCSI device at 
.\"O .I host
.\"O connected to SCSI bus # 1,target 0 lun 0.
指定可能なリモート SCSI デバイス名は、
.BI REMOTE: user@host:
または
.BI REMOTE: user@host:1,0,0
という形式である。
1 つ目の形式では、リモートで SCSI デバイスのスキャンを行わせる。
2 つ目の形式では、
.I host
の SCSI bus # 1,target 0 lun 0 に接続されている
SCSI デバイスにアクセスする。

.PP
.\"O To make 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O portable to all \s-2UNIX\s0 platforms, the syntax
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
.\"O is preferred as is hides OS specific knowledge about device names from the user.
.B cdrecord
を全ての \s-2UNIX\s0 系プラットフォームで汎用的にするためには、
.B dev=
.IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
という書式が好ましい。
これによりデバイスについての各 OS 特有の知識を
ユーザーに対して隠蔽することができる。
.\"O A specific OS must not necessarily support a way to specify a real device file name nor a
.\"O way to specify 
.\"O .IR scsibus , target , lun .
またこれにより、実際のデバイスファイル名や
.IR scsibus , target , lun
を指定する方法を、特定の OS 上でサポートする必要がなくなる。

.PP
.\"O .I Scsibus 
.\"O 0 is the default SCSI bus on the machine. Watch the boot messages for more 
.\"O information or look into 
.\"O .B /var/adm/messages 
.\"O for more information about the SCSI configuration of your machine.
.I scsibus 
0 はマシンのデフォルトの SCSI バスである。
マシンの SCSI 設定についてのより詳細な情報は、
ブート時のメッセージや
.B /var/adm/messages 
を参照すること。
.\"O If you have problems to figure out what values for 
.\"O .IR scsibus , target , lun
.\"O should be used, try the 
.\"O .B \-scanbus
.\"O option of 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O described below.
.IR scsibus , target , lun
にどのような値を指定してよいか分らない場合は、
以下に記述されている
.B cdrecord
の
.B \-scanbus
オプションを使ってみること。

.PP
.\"O If a file /etc/default/cdrecord exists, the parameter to the
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O option may also be a drive name label in said file (see FILES section).
ファイル /etc/default/cdrecord が存在する場合、
.B dev=
のパラメータはこのファイル中のドライブ名ラベルにもなる
(「ファイル」セクションを参照)。

.PP
.\"O On 
.\"O .B SVr4 
.\"O compliant systems, 
.\"O .B cdrecord 
.\"O uses the the real time class to get the highest scheduling priotity that is
.\"O possible (higher than all kernel processes).
.B SVr4 
互換のシステムでは、
.B cdrecord 
はリアルタイムクラスを使い、
可能な限りスケジューリング優先度を高くする
(全てのカーネルプロセスより優先度を高くする)。
.\"O On systems with 
.\"O .B POSIX real time scheduling
.\"O cdrecord uses real time scheduling too, 
.\"O but may not be able to gain a priority that is higher than all kernel processes.
\fBPOSIX リアルタイムスケジューリング\fR
を備えたシステムでも、
cdrecord はリアルタイムスケジューリングを使う。
ただし、カーネルプロセスより高い優先度は得られない。
.PP
.\"O In 
.\"O .I Track At Once 
.\"O mode, each
.\"O .I track
.\"O corresponds to a single file that contains the prepared data for that track.
.I Track At Once 
モードでは、
各
.I track
はそのトラックのデータが書かれた個別のファイルに対応する。
.\"O If the argument is 
.\"O .RB ` \- ',
.\"O standard input is used for that track. 
.\"O Only one track may be taken from 
.\"O .IR stdin .
引き数が
.RB ` \- '
の場合は標準入力がトラックとして使われる。
この場合は
.I stdin 
(標準入力) から 1 つのトラックだけが読み込まれる。

.\"O .SH "GENERAL OPTIONS
.SH 一般的なオプション
.PP
.\"O General options must be before any track file name or track option.
一般オプションはトラックファイル名や
トラックオプションより前に指定しなければならない。
.TP
.B \-version
.\"O Print version information and exit.
バージョン情報を表示して、終了する。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Increment the level of general verbosity by one.
.\"O This is used e.g. to display the progress of the writing process.
一般的な表示の詳細度を 1 つ上げる。
例えば、書き込み処理の進捗状況を表示するために使われる。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Increment the verbose level in respect of SCSI command transport by one.
.\"O This helps to debug problems
.\"O during the writing process, that occur in the CD-Recorder. 
SCSI コマンド転送に関する表示の詳細度を 1 つ上げる。
CD レコーダにおける書き込み処理での問題をデバックするのに役立つ。
.\"O If you get incomprehensible error messages you should use this flag
.\"O to get more detailed output.
簡単なエラーメッセージしか表示されない場合は、
このフラグを使って詳細な表示を行わせることができる。
.\"O .B \-VV
.\"O will show data buffer content in addition.
.B \-VV
を指定すると、データバッファの内容も表示される。
.\"O Using
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-VV
.\"O slows down the process and may be the reason for a buffer underrun.
.B \-V
や
.B \-VV
を使うと、処理が遅くなりバッファアンダーランの原因になるかもしれない。
.TP
.BI debug= "#, " -d
.\"O Set the misc debug value to # (with debug=#) or increment
.\"O the misc debug level by one (with -d). If you specify
.\"O .I -dd,
.\"O this equals to 
.\"O .BI debug= 2.
(debug=# を使って) その他のデバッグレベルを # に設定する。
または (-d を使って) デバッグレベルを 1 つ上げる。
.I -dd
を指定した場合、
.BI debug= 2
と等しくなる。
.\"O This may help to find problems while opening a driver for libscg
.\"O as well as with sector sizes and sector types.
libscg でドライバをオープンする際の問題や、
セクタサイズとセクタタイプの問題を発見するのに役立つ。
.\"O Using
.\"O .B \-debug
.\"O slows down the process and may be the reason for a buffer underrun.
.B \-debug
を使うと、処理が遅くなりバッファアンダーランの原因になるかもしれない。
.TP
.BR kdebug= "#, " kd= #
.\"O Tell the 
.\"O .BR scg -driver
.\"O to modify the kernel debug value while SCSI commands are running.
.B scg
ドライバに対して、SCSI コマンドを動作させているときの
カーネルデバッグレベルを変更させる。
.TP
.BR \-silent ", " \-s
.\"O Do not print out a status report for failed SCSI commands.
SCSI コマンドが失敗したときの状況報告を表示させない。
.TP
.B \-force
.\"O Force to continue on some errors.
.\"O This option currently implements some tricks that will allow 
.\"O you to blank bad CD-RW disks.
エラーが起こった場合でも処理を続行させる。
このオプションは、壊れた CD-RW ディスクを空にできるように、
いくつかのトリックを使って実装している。
.TP
.B \-dummy
.\"O The CD-Recorder will go through all steps of the recording process,
.\"O but the laser is turned off during this procedure.
.\"O It is recommended to run several tests before actually writing to a 
.\"O Compact Disk, if the timing and load response of the system is not known.
記録プロセスの全ての段階を CD レコーダに行わせるが、
処理中にレーザーをオフにしておく。
システムにおけるタイミングと負荷がかかった場合の応答が不明な場合は、
実際に CD に書き込む前に何回かテストしておくことを薦める。
.TP
.B \-dao
.\"O Set 
.\"O .B "Disk At Once mode.
.\"O This currently only works with MMC drives that support non raw
.\"O .B "Session At Once
.\"O mode.
\fBDisk At Once モード\fRに設定する。
今のところ、non raw
.B "Session At Once"
モードをサポートしている MMC ドライブでしか動作しない。
.TP
.B \-multi
.\"O Allow multi session CD's to be made. This flag needs to be present
.\"O on all sessions of a multi session disk,
.\"O except you want to create a session that will be 
.\"O the last session on the media.
マルチセッション CD の作成を可能にする。
メディアの最後のセッションを作成するのでなければ、
マルチセションディスクの全てのセッションについて、
このオプションを指定する必要がある。
.\"O The fixation will be done in a way that allows the CD-Recorder to
.\"O append additional sessions later. This is done by generation a TOC
.\"O with a link to the next program area. The so generated media is not
.\"O 100% compatible to manufactured CD's (except for CDplus). 
CD レコーダが後でセッションを追加できるように修正を行う。
次のプログラム領域へのリンクを含んだ TOC が作成される。
ここで作成されたメディアは、
(CDplus 以外の) 製品版 CD とは 100% 互換ではない。
.\"O Use only for recording of multi session CD's.
.\"O If this option is present, the default track type is
.\"O .BR "CD-ROM XA mode 2" .
マルチセッション CD の記録だけに使用すること。
このオプションを指定した場合、デフォルトのトラックタイプは
.B "CD-ROM XA mode 2"
である。
.\"O The 
.\"O .I Sony 
.\"O drives have no hardware support for 
.\"O .BR "CD-ROM XA mode 2" .
.I Sony 
製のドライブはハードウェアが
.B "CD-ROM XA mode 2" 
に対応していない。
.\"O You have to specify the 
.\"O .B \-data 
.\"O option in order to create multi session disks on these drives.
このようなドライブでマルチセッションのディスクを作成するためには、
.B \-data 
オプションを指定しなければならない。
.\"O As long as cdrecord does not have a coder for converting data sectors
.\"O to audio sectors, you need to force 
.\"O .B CD-ROM
.\"O sectors by including the
.\"O .B \-data
.\"O option if you like to record a multisession disk in DAO/SAO mode.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: force と対になる動詞が分からなくて、意味がはっきりしません。
.\"Osato: 
cdrecord はデータセクタをオーディオセクタに変換する
コーダーを備えていないので、
マルチセッションディスクを DAO/SAO モードで記録したい場合は、
.B \-data
オプションをつけて
.B CD-ROM
セクタをマルチセッションにしなければならない。
.\"O Not all drives allow multisession CD's in DAO/SAO mode.
全てのドライブがマルチセッション CD の DAO/SAO モードに対応している訳ではない。
.TP
.B \-msinfo
.\"O Retrieve multi session info in a form suitable for 
.\"O .B "mkisofs-1.10" 
.\"O or later.
.B "mkisofs-1.10" 
以降に適した形式のマルチセッション情報を取得する。
.sp
.\"O This option makes only sense with a CD that contains at least
.\"O one closed session and is appendable (not finally closed yet). 
.\"O Some drives create error messages if you try to get the multi 
.\"O session info for a disk that is not suitable for this operation.
このオプションは、少なくとも 1 つの閉じたセッションがあり、
セッションを追加できる (まだ閉じられていない) CD のみで動作する。
この操作に適さないディスクからマルチセッション情報を取得しようとした場合、
エラーメッセージを出すドライブもある。
.TP
.B \-toc
.\"O Retrieve and print out the table of content or PMA of a CD.
.\"O With this option, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O will work with CD-R drives and with CD-ROM drives.
CD の table of content (内容一覧) または PMA を取得して表示する。
このオプションを使うと、
.B cdrecord
は CD-R ドライブと CD-ROM ドライブで動作する。
.TP
.B \-atip
.\"O Retrieve and print out the ATIP (absolute Time in Pregroove) info of a CD
.\"O recordable or CD rewritable media.
.\"O With this option, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O will try to retrieve the ATIP info. If the actual drive does not support
.\"O to read the ATIP info, it may be that only a reduced set of information
.\"O records or even nothing is displayed. Only a limited number of MMC compliant
.\"O drives support to read the ATIP info.
CD-R メディアや CD-RW メディアの
ATIP (absolute Time in Pregroove) 情報を取得して表示する。
このオプションを使うと、
.B cdrecord
は ATIP 情報を取得する。
ドライブが ATIP	情報の読み取りに対応していない場合、
記録されている情報の一部もしくは何も表示されない。
ATIP 情報の読み取りは、
MMC 互換のわずかなドライブでしかサポートされていない。
.sp
.\"O If 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O is able to retrieve the lead-in start time for the first session, it will try to
.\"O decode and print the manufacturer info from the media.
.B cdrecord
が最初のセッションの lead-in start time を取得できる場合、
メディアにかかれた製造者情報をデコードして表示しようとする。
.TP
.B \-fix
.\"O The disk will only be fixated (i.e. a TOC for a CD-Reader will be written). 
.\"O This may be used, if for some reason the disk has been written but not
.\"O fixated. This option currently does not work with old TEAC drives (CD-R50S and
.\"O CD-R55S).
ディスクの固定 (fixated) のみを行う (つまり、CD-R の TOC が書き込まれる)。
何らかの理由により、ディスクには書かれたが固定が行われなかった場合に、
このオプションを使うことができる。
現在のところ、このオプションは昔の TEAC 製ドライブ
(CD-R50S と CD-R55S) では動作しない。
.TP
.B \-nofix
.\"O Do not fixate the disk after writing the tracks. This may be used
.\"O to create an audio disk in steps. An un-fixated disk can usually not be used
.\"O on a non CD-writer type drive but there are audio CD players that will
.\"O be able to play such a disk.
トラックを書き込んだ後にディスクを固定しない。
このオプションはオーディオディスクを段階的に作成するために使用できる。
固定していないディスクは、一般には CD を記録するドライブ以外では使えないが、
このようなディスクを再生できるオーディオ CD プレーヤもある。
.TP
.B \-waiti
.\"O Wait for input to become available on standard input before trying to open
.\"O the SCSI driver. This allows 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O to read it's input from a pipe even
.\"O when writing additional sessions to a multi session disk.
SCSI ドライバをオープンする前に、標準入力からの入力が可能になるのを待つ。
このオプションを使うと
.B cdrecord
がマルチセッションディスクに追加セッションを書き込んでいる間でも、
パイプからの入力を読み取ることができるようになる。
.\"O When writing another session to a multi session disk,
.\"O .B mkisofs 
.\"O needs to read the old session from the device before writing output.
マルチセッションディスクに追加セッションを書き込んでいる場合、
.B mkisofs 
は出力を書き出す前に前のセッションを読み込む必要がある。
.\"O This cannot be done if
.\"O .B cdrecord 
.\"O opens the SCSI driver at the same time.
標準入力からの入力が可能になるのと同時に、
.B cdrecord 
が SCSI ドライバをオープンする場合は、このオプションを使用できない。
.TP
.B \-load
.\"O Load the media and exit. This only works with a tray loading mechanism
.\"O but seems to be useful when using the Kodak disk transporter.
メディアをロードして終了する。
このオプションはトレーのロード機構があるドライブでしか動作しないが、
Kodak のディスクトランスポータを使う場合にも便利である。
.TP
.B \-eject
.\"O Eject disk after doing the work.
.\"O Some Devices (e.g. Philips) need to eject the medium before creating a new
.\"O disk. Doing a \-dummy test and immediately creating a real disk would not
.\"O work on these devices.
動作後にディスクを取り出す。
(Philips などの) いつかのデバイスでは、
新しいディスクを作成する前にメディアを取り出す必要がある。
これらのデバイスでは、
\-dummy テストをした直後に実際のディスクを作成できない。
.TP
.B "speed=#
.\"O Set the speed factor of the writing process to #.
.\"O # is an integer, representing a multiple of the audio speed.
.\"O This is about 150 KB/s for CD-ROM and about 172 KB/s for CD-Audio.
書き込みプロセスの速度ファクタを # にする。
# はオーディオ速度の何倍の速さにするかを表す整数である。
オーディオ速度は CD-ROM では約 150 KB/s、
CD-Audio では約 172 KB/s である。
.\"O If no 
.\"O .I speed
.\"O option is present, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O will try to get the speed value from the 
.\"O .B CDR_SPEED
.\"O environment.
.I speed
オプションを指定しない場合、
.B cdrecord
は環境変数
.B CDR_SPEED
から速度を取得する。
.\"O If your drive has problems with
.\"O .I "speed=2 
.\"O or 
.\"O .IR "speed=4" , 
.\"O you should try 
.\"O .IR "speed=0" .
.I "speed=2" 
または
.I "speed=4" 
で問題がある場合、
.I "speed=0" 
を試してみること。
.TP
.BI blank= type
.\"O Blank a CD-RW and exit or blank a CD-RW before writing. The blanking type may be one of:
CD-RW を空 (blank) にして終了する。または、書き込む前に CD-RW を空にする。
空にする方法は以下のいずれかである。
.RS
.TP 12
help
.\"O Display a list of possible blanking types.
空にする方法の一覧を表示する。
.TP
all
.\"O Blank the entire disk. This may take a long time.
ディスク全体を空にする。長い時間がかかる。
.TP
fast
.\"O Minimally blank the disk. This results in erasing the PMA, the TOC and the pregap.
最小限の手間でディスクを空にする。
PMA, TOC, pregap を消去する。
.TP
track
.\"O Blank a track.
トラックを空にする。
.TP
unreserve
.\"O Unreserve a reserved track.
予約済みトラックの予約を解除する。
.TP
trtail
.\"O Blank the tail of a track.
トラックの末尾を空にする。
.TP
unclose
.\"O Unclose last session.
最後のセッションを閉じない。
.TP
session
.\"O Blank the last session.
最後のセッションを空にする。
.RE
.\"O If used together with the 
.\"O .B \-force
.\"O flag, this option may be used to blank CD-RW disks that otherwise cannot be
.\"O blanked. 
このオプションを
.B \-force
フラグと一緒に使うと、
.B \-force
フラグなしでは空にできない CD-RW ディスクを空にすることができる。
.\"O Note that you may need to specify
.\"O .BI blank= all
.\"O because some drives will not continue with certain types of bad CD-RW
.\"O disks. 
ドライブの中にはある種の壊れた CD-RW ディスクの消去を
続行することができないものもあるので、
.BI blank= all
を指定する必要があるかもしれない。
.\"O Note also that
.\"O .B cdecord
.\"O does it's best if the 
.\"O .B \-force 
.\"O flag is used but it finally depends on the drive's firmware 
.\"O whether the blanking operation will succeed or not.
.B \-force 
が指定された場合、
.B cdecord
はできる限りのことを行うが、空にする操作が成功するか否かは、
最終的にはドライブのファームウェアに依存する。
.TP
.BR fs= #
.\"O Set the fifo (ring buffer) size to #.
.\"O You may use the same method as in 
.\"O .BR dd (1),
.\"O .BR sdd (1)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR star (1).
fifo (リングバッファ) サイズを # にする。
このオプションは
.BR dd (1),
.BR sdd (1),
.BR star (1)
のものと同じ方法で使うことができる。
.\"O The number representing the size is taken in bytes unless otherwise specified.
.\"O If a number is followed directly by the letter `b', `k', `m', `s' of `f',
.\"O the size is multiplied by 512, 1024, 1024*1024, 2048 or 2352.
他の単位が指定されない限り、サイズはバイト数であるとする。
数字の直後に `b', `k', `m', `s', `f' を付けることができる。
それぞれサイズが 512, 1024, 1024*1024, 2048, 2352 倍であることを表す。
.\"O If the size consists of numbers separated by `x' or `*', multiplication of the 
.\"O two numbers is performed.
.\"O Thus 
.\"O .I "fs=10x63k
.\"O will specify a fifo size of 630\ kBytes.
`x' や `*' で区切ってサイズを指定した場合、2 つの数の掛け算が行われる。
よって、
.I "fs=10x63k
は fifo のサイズを 630\ kB に指定したことになる。
.sp
.\"O The size specified by the 
.\"O .I fs=
.\"O argument includes the shared memory that is needed for administration. This
.\"O is at least one page of memory.
.I fs=
引き数で指定されたサイズには、管理に必要な共有メモリの分も含まれている。
このメモリの大きさは、少なくとも 1 ページである。
.\"O If no
.\"O .IR fs =
.\"O option is present, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O will try to get the fifo size value from the 
.\"O .B CDR_FIFOSIZE
.\"O environment.
.IR fs =
オプションが指定されていない場合、
.B cdrecord
は fifo のサイズを環境変数
.B CDR_FIFOSIZE
から取得する。
.\"O The default fifo size is currently 4 MB.
デフォルトの fifo サイズは、現在のところ 4 MB である。
.sp
.\"O The fifo is used to increase buffering for the real time writing process.
.\"O It allows to run a pipe from 
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O directly into 
.\"O .BR cdrecord .
fifo はリアルタイム書き込みプロセスのバッファを増やすために使われる。
これによって、
.B mkisofs
と
.B cdrecord
をパイプで直接つないで動作させることができる。
.\"O If the fifo is active and a pipe from 
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O into 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O is used to create a CD, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O will abort prior to do any modifications on the disk if 
.\"O .B mkisofs 
.\"O dies before it starts writing.
fifo がアクティブで、かつ CD を作成するために
.B mkisofs
から
.B cdrecord
へのパイプを使った場合、
.B cdrecord
が書き込みをする前に
.B mkisofs 
が落ちると、
.B cdrecord
はディスクの何も変更せずに終了する。
.\"O The recommended fifo size is between 4 and 32 MBytes.
.\"O As a rule of thumb, the fifo size should be at least equal to the size
.\"O of the internal buffer of the CD-Recorder and no more than half of
.\"O the physical amount of RAM available in the machine.
推奨される fifo サイズは 4 〜 32 MB である。
経験則として、fifo サイズは少なくとも
CD レコーダの内部バッファのサイズと同じなければならない。
また、マシンで使用されている RAM の物理サイズの半分以下でなければならない。
.\"O If the fifo size is big enough, the fifo statistics will print a fifo
.\"O empty count of zero and the fifo min fill is not below 20%.
.\"O It is not wise to use too much space for the fifo. If you need more
.\"O than 8 MB to write a CD on an idle machine, your machine is either
.\"O underpowered, has hardware problems or is mis-configured.
fifo サイズが充分大きい場合、
fifo empty count が 0 で、fifo min fill が 20% 以上であるという
fifo の統計情報が表示される。
fifo のためにあまり多くのメモリ量を使わない方がよい。
他に何もしていないマシンで、
CD を書き込むのに 8 MB 以上のメモリが必要になるのは、
マシンパワーが足りないか、ハードウェアに問題があるか、
設定が間違っている場合である。
.\"O The sun4c architecture (e.g. a Sparcstation-2) has only MMU page table entries
.\"O for 16 MBytes per process. Using more than 14 MBytes for the fifo
.\"O may cause the operating system in this case to spend much time to constantly
.\"O reload the MMU tables. Newer machines from Sun do not have this MMU
.\"O hardware problem. I have no information on PC-hardware reflecting
.\"O this problem.
(Sparcstation-2 などの) sun4c アーキテクチャでは、
1 プロセス当たりの MMU ページテーブルエントリは 16MB しかない。
sun4c では fifo に 14 MB 以上を使うと、
OS が MMU テーブルを絶えず再読み込みするために非常に時間がかかる。
Sun の新しいマシンでは、このような MMU のハードウェア問題はない。
PC ハードウェアがこの問題に影響されるかについての情報はない。
.sp
.\"O If you have buffer underruns or similar problems and observe a zero
.\"O .IR "fifo empty count" ,
.\"O you have hardware problems. The fifo size in this case is sufficient.
バッファアンダーランやそれと同様な問題があり、かつ
.I "fifo empty count"
が 0 であるという表示がされる場合は、
ハードウェア上の問題がある。
この場合、fifo のサイズは充分である。
.TP
.BI dev= target
.\"O Sets the SCSI target for the CD-Recorder, see notes above.
.\"O A typical device specification is
.\"O .BI dev= 6,0
.\"O \&.
CD レコーダの SCSI target を設定する。上記を参照。
一般的なデバイス指定では
.BI dev= 6,0
である。
.\"O If a filename must be provided together with the numerical target 
.\"O specification, the filename is implementation specific.
.\"O The correct filename in this case can be found in the system specific
.\"O manuals of the target operating system.
数値での target 指定の他に、
ファイル名も指定しなければならない場合、
そのファイル名は実装依存である。
この場合の正確なファイル名は、
対象とする OS の独自のマニュアルに書かれているだろう。
.\"O On a 
.\"O .I FreeBSD
.\"O system without 
.\"O .I CAM
.\"O support, you need to use the control device (e.g.
.\"O .IR /dev/rcd0.ctl ).
.I CAM
をサポートしてない
.I FreeBSD
システムでは、
.RI ( /dev/rcd0.ctl
などの) 制御デバイスを使う必要がある。
.\"O A correct device specification in this case may be
.\"O .BI dev= /dev/rcd0.ctl:@
.\"O \&.
この場合の正確なデバイス指定は、
.BI dev= /dev/rcd0.ctl:@
である。
.sp
.\"O On Linux, drives connected to a parallel port adapter are mapped
.\"O to a virtual SCSI bus. Different adapters are mapped to different
.\"O targets on this virtual SCSI bus.
Linux では、パラレルポートアダプタに接続されたデバイスは、
仮想 SCSI bus に対応付けされる。
別のパラレルポートアダプタは、
この仮想 SCSI bus の別の target に対応付けされる。
.sp
.\"O If no 
.\"O .I dev
.\"O option is present, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O will try to get the device from the 
.\"O .B CDR_DEVICE
.\"O environment.
.I dev
オプションが指定されていない場合、
.B cdrecord
は環境変数
.B CDR_DEVICE
からデバイスを取得しようとする。
.sp
.\"O If the argument to the
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O option does not contain the characters ',', '/', '@' or ':',
.\"O it is interpreted as an label name that may be found in the file
.\"O /etc/default/cdrecord (see FILES section).
.B dev=
オプションの引き数に文字 ',', '/', '@', ':' がない場合、
ファイル /etc/default/cdrecord に書かれたラベル名として扱われる
(「ファイル」セクションを参照すること)。
.TP
.BI timeout= #
.\"O Set the default SCSI command timeout value to 
.\"O .IR # " seconds.
.\"O The default SCSI command timeout is the minimum timeout used for sending
.\"O SCSI commands.
SCSI コマンドのデフォルトのタイムアウトを
.I #
秒にする。
SCSI コマンドのデフォルトのタイムアウトは、
SCSI コマンドを送る際の最短タイムアウトとして使われる。
.\"O If a SCSI command fails due to a timeout, you may try to raise the
.\"O default SCSI command timeout above the timeout value of the failed command.
.\"O If the command runs correctly with a raised command timeout,
.\"O please report the better timeout value and the corresponding command to 
.\"O the author of the program.
SCSI コマンドがタイムアウトにより失敗した場合、
タイムアウトの値を失敗したコマンドの
デフォルトのタイムアウトより長くすることができる。
タイムアウトを長くしてコマンドが正常に動作した場合は、
成功したときのタイムアウト時間とそのコマンドを、
このプログラムの著者に知らせて下さい。
.\"O If no 
.\"O .I timeout 
.\"O option is present, a default timeout of 40 seconds is used.
.I timeout 
オプションが指定されない場合、
デフォルトのタイムアウト 40 秒が使われる。
.TP
.BI driver= name
.\"O Allows to use a user supplied driver name for the device.
.\"O To get a list of possible drivers use
.\"O .BR "driver=help" .
このオプションを指定すると、
デバイスに対してユーザーが指定したドライバ名を使える。
使用可能なドライバのリストを取得するには、
.B "driver=help"
を使うこと。
.\"O The reason for the existence of this option is to allow users to use 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O with drives that are similar to supported drives but not known
.\"O directly by
.\"O .BR cdrecord .
このオプションは存在するのは、
サポートされているドライブに似ているが、
.B cdrecord
が直接検出できないドライブで
.B cdrecord
を使うことができるようにするためである。
.\"O Use this option with extreme care. If a wrong driver is used for a
.\"O device, the possibility of creating corrupted disks is high.
.\"O The minimum problem related to a wrong driver is that the 
.\"O .B \-speed
.\"O or 
.\"O .B \-dummy
.\"O will not work.
このオプションは細心の注意を払って使用すること。
デバイスに合わないドライバを使うと、
ディスクを使えなくしてしまう可能性が高くなる。
合わないドライバを使った場合、最も良くても
.B \-speed
または
.B \-dummy
が動作しない。
.sp
.\"O There are two special driver entries in the list:
.\"O .B cdr_simul
.\"O and
.\"O .BR dvd_simul .
リストには
.B cdr_simul
と
.B dvd_simul
という 2 つの特別なドライバエントリがある。
.\"O These driver entries are designed to make timing tests at any speed
.\"O or timing tests for drives that do not support the 
.\"O .B \-dummy
.\"O option.
これらのドライバエントリは、いろいろなスピードでのタイミングテストや、
.B \-dummy
オプションに対応していないドライバでのタイミングテストを
行うために作られている。
.\"O The simulation drivers implement a drive with a buffer size of 1MB
.\"O that can be changed via the 
.\"O .B CDR_SIMUL_BUFSIZE
.\"O environment variable.
シミュレーションドライバは、バッファサイズが 1MB のドライブを実装している。
また、このバッファサイズは環境変数
.B CDR_SIMUL_BUFSIZE
で変更できる。
.\"O The simulation driver correctly simulates even a buffer underrun condition.
.\"O If the 
.\"O .B \-dummy 
.\"O option is present, the simulation is not aborted in case of a buffer underrun.
シミュレーションドライバはバッファアンダーランも正しくシミュレートする。
.B \-dummy 
オプションを指定すると、バッファアンダーランの場合でも終了しない。
.TP
.BI driveropts= "option list"
.\"O Set driver specific options. The options are specified a comma separated list.
.\"O To get a list of valid options use 
.\"O .BI driveropts= help
.\"O together with the 
.\"O .I \-checkdrive
.\"O option.
ドライバ特有のオプションを設定する。
オプションはコンマで区切ったリストで指定する。
使用可能なオプションのリストを取得するには、
.BI driveropts= help
を
.I \-checkdrive
オプションと一緒に指定すること。
.\"O Currently only the 
.\"O .B burnproof 
.\"O option is implemented to support Buffer Underrun Proof writing with
.\"O drives that use the Sanyo BURN-Proof technology.
現在のところ、
.B burnproof
オプションのみが実装されている。
これは Sanyo BURN-Proof 技術を使っているドライブで、
バッファアンダーラン検証書き込み
(Buffer Underrun Proof writing) に対応するためのものである。
.TP
.B \-checkdrive
.\"O Checks if a driver for the current drive is present and exit.
.\"O If the drive is a known drive, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O uses exit code 0.
現在のドライブに対応したドライバが存在するかをチェックして、終了する。
ドライブが既知のものであれば、
.B cdrecord
は終了コード 0 で終了する。
.TP
.B \-prcap
.\"O Print the drive capabilities for SCSI-3/mmc compliant drives
.\"O as obtained from mode page 0x2A. Values marked with 
.\"O .I kB
.\"O use 1000 bytes as kilo-byte, values marked with
.\"O .I KB
.\"O use 1024 bytes as Kilo-byte.
SCSI-3/mmc 互換ドライブでモードページを 0x2A としたときに取得できる
ドライブの機能を表示する。
.I kB
のマークがあるものは、1000 バイトを kilo-byte とする。
また
.I KB
のマークがあるものは、1024 バイトを Kilo-byte とする。
.TP
.B \-inq
.\"O Do an inquiry for the drive, print the inquiry info and exit.
ドライブから情報の取得 (inqurity) を行い、
取得された情報を表示して、終了する。
.TP
.B \-scanbus
.\"O Scan all SCSI devices on all SCSI busses and print the inquiry
.\"O strings. This option may be used to find SCSI address of the 
.\"O CD-Recorder on a system.
.\"O The numbers printed out as labels are computed by: 
.\"O .B "bus * 100 + target
全ての SCSI バス上のドライブをスキャンし、
取得できた文字列を表示する。
このオプションは、システム上の CD レコーダの SCSI アドレスを
知るために使われる。
ラベルに使われる数字は
.B "bus * 100 + target"
で計算される。
.TP
.B \-reset
.\"O Try to reset the SCSI bus where the CD recorder is located. This works not
.\"O on all operating systems.
CD レコーダのある SCSI バスをリセットする。
このオプションは全ての OS 上で動作するわけではない。
.TP
.B \-ignsize
.\"O Ignore the known size of the medium. This options should be used with extreme
.\"O care, it exists only for debugging purposes don't use it for other reasons.
.\"O It is not needed to write disks with more than the nominal capacity.
メディアの既知のサイズを無視する。
このオプションは特に注意して使うべきである。
このオプションはデバッグのためだけに存在するので、
他の目的に使用してはならない。
通常の容量以上にディスクに書き込む必要はない。
.TP
.B \-useinfo
.\"O Use *.inf files to overwrite audio options.
.\"O If this option is used, the pregap size information is read from 
.\"O the *.inf file that is associated with the file that contains the audio
.\"O data for a track.
audio オプションを上書きするのに *.inf ファイルを使う。
このオプションを使うと、*.inf ファイルから
プレギャップサイズ情報を読み込む。
*.inf ファイルは 1 トラック毎のオーディオデータが書かれた
ファイルと関連づけられる。
.TP
.BR defpregap =#
.\"O Set the default pre-gap size for all tracks except track number 1.
.\"O This option currently only makes sense with the TEAC drive when
.\"O creating track-at-once disks without the 2 second silence before each track.
第 1 トラック以外の全てのトラックのデフォルトのプレギャップサイズを設定する。
このオプションは現在のところ、
track-at-once ディスクを作成する際に
各トラックの先頭に 2 秒の無音領域がない場合には、
TEAC ドライブでしか機能しない。
.br
.\"O This option may go away in future. 
このオプションは将来なくなるかもしれない。
.TP
.B \-packet
.\"O Set 
.\"O .B "Packet writing mode. 
.\"O This is an experimental interface.
.B "packet writing mode"
に設定する。
これは実験的なインターフェースである。
.TP
.BR pktsize =#
.\"O Set the paket size to #, forces fixed packet mode.
.\"O This is an experimental interface.
パケットサイズを # に設定し、修正パケットモードを使わせる。
これは実験的なインターフェースである。
.TP
.B \-noclose
.\"O Do not close the current track, useful only when in packet writing mode.
.\"O This is an experimental interface.
現在のトラックを閉じない。パケット書き込みモードでのみ役立つ。
これは実験的なインターフェースである。
.TP
.B mcn=med_cat_nr
.\"O Set the 
.\"O .B "Media Catalog Number
.\"O of the CD to 
.\"O .IR med_cat_nr .
CD の
.B "メディアカタログ番号 (Media Catalog Number)"
を
.I med_cat_nr
に設定する。

.\"O .SH "TRACK OPTIONS
.SH トラックオプション
.PP
.\"O Track options may be mixed with track file names.
トラックオプションはトラックファイル名と合わせて指定する。
.TP
.B isrc=ISRC_number
.\"O Set the 
.\"O .B "International Standard Recording Number
.\"O for the next track to
.\"O .IR ISRC_number .
次のトラックの
.B "国際標準録音資料コード (International Standard Recording Code)"
を
.I ISRC_number
にする。
.TP
.BI index= list
.\"O Sets an index list for the next track.
.\"O In index list is a comma separated list of numbers that are counting
.\"O from index 1. The first entry in this list must contain a 0, the following 
.\"O numbers must be an ascending list of numbers (counting in 1/75 seconds) that 
.\"O represent the start of the indices. An index list in the form:
.\"O 0,7500,15000 sets index 1 to the start of the track, index 2 100 seconds from
.\"O the start of the track and index 3 200 seconds from the start of the track.
次のトラックのインデックスリストを設定する。
インデックスリストは、コンマで区切られた数値のリストで、
インデックスは 1 から始める。
このリストの最初のエントリには 0 が書かれていなければならない。
以降はこれより大きな数値が順番にリストされていなければならず、
それぞれの数値は 1 単位を 1/75 秒として、インデックスの開始を表す。
インデックスリストは以下のような形式である:
0,7500,15000 はインデックス 1 を開始トラックとし、
インデックス 2 を開始トラックから 100 秒後、
インデックス 3 を開始トラックから 200 秒後とする。
.TP
.B \-audio
.\"O If this flag is present, all subsequent tracks are written in
.\"O .B "CD-DA 
.\"O (similar to Red Book) audio format.
.\"O The file with data for this tracks should
.\"O contain stereo, 16-bit digital audio with 44100 samples/s.
このフラグが指定されると、以降の全てのトラックが (Red Book と同じ) 
.B "CD-DA" 
オーディオフォーマットで書かれる。
このトラック用のデータファイルは、
ステレオ 16-bit デジタルオーディオデータで、
サプリングレートは 1 秒あたり 44100 回にすべきである。
.\"O The byte order should be the following: MSB left, LSB left, 
.\"O MSB right, LSB right, MSB left and so on. The track should be a multiple of 
.\"O 2352 bytes. It is not possible to put the master image of an audio track 
.\"O on a raw disk because 
.\"O data will be read in multiple of 2352 bytes during the recording process.
バイトオーダーは、MSB left, LSB left, MSB right, LSB right, MSB left, ... 
というようにする。
トラックは 2352 バイトの倍数にする。
書き込みプロセスにおいて、データが 2352 バイトの倍数で読み込まれるので、
オーディオトラックのマスタイメージを raw ディスクにおくことはできない。
.sp
.\"O If a filename ends in 
.\"O .I .au
.\"O or
.\"O .I .wav
.\"O the file is considered to be a structured audio data file.
ファイル名が
.I .au
または
.I .wav
で終る場合、ファイルは構造化オーディオファイルデータファイルとして扱われる。
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O assumes that the file in this case is a Sun audio file or a
.\"O Microsoft .WAV file
.\"O and extracts the audio data from the files by skipping over the
.\"O non-audio header information.
この場合
.B cdrecord
は、ファイルを Sun オーディオファイルまたは
Microsoft .WAV ファイルと仮定して、
オーディオヘッダ情報以外をスキップしてオーディオデータを抽出する。
.\"O In all other cases, cdrecord will only work correctly if the
.\"O audio data stream does not have any header.
それ以外の場合は、オーディオデータストリームに
ヘッダが含まれていないときにしか cdrecord は正常に動作しない。
.\"O Because many structured audio files do not have an integral
.\"O number of blocks (1/75th second) in length,
.\"O it is often necessary to specify the
.\"O .B \-pad
.\"O option as well.
多くの構造化オーディオファイルは
長さが (1/75 秒の) ブロックの倍数でないので、
.B \-pad
オプションも指定しなければならないことが多い。
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O recognizes that audio data in a .WAV file is stored in Intel
.\"O (little-endian) byte order, and will automatically byte-swap the data
.\"O if the CD recorder requires big-endian data.  
.B cdrecord
は .WAV ファイルのオーディオデータが
Intel (リトルエンディアン) バイトオーダーで書かれていると認識して、
CD レコーダがビッグエンディアンのデータを必要としているときには、
データのバイト交換を行う。
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O will reject any audio file that does not match the Red Book requirements
.\"O of 16-bit stereo samples in PCM coding at 44100 samples/second.
.B cdrecord
は、(1 秒あたり 44100 回の 16 ビットステレオサンプリングを行い
PCM コーディングする) Red Book の必要条件を満たさない
オーディオファイルの使用を拒否する。
.sp
.\"O Using other structured audio data formats as input to 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O will usually work if the structure of the data is the 
.\"O structure described above (raw pcm data in big-endian byte order).
他の構造化オーディオデータ形式を
.B cdrecord
の入力に使う場合は、
データの構造が上記の (ビッグエンディアンバイトオーダー) 構造であれば、
通常は動作する。
.\"O However, if the data format includes a header,
.\"O you will hear a click at the start of a track.
しかし、データ形式にヘッダが含まれている場合は、
トラックの開始時にクリック音が聞こえてしまうだろう。
.TP
.I " "
.\"O If neither 
.\"O .I \-data 
.\"O nor
.\"O .I \-audio
.\"O have been specified, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O defaults to 
.\"O .I \-audio
.\"O for all filenames that end in
.\"O .I .au
.\"O or 
.\"O .I .wav
.\"O and to
.\"O .I \-data 
.\"O for all other files.
.I \-data 
と
.I \-audio
がどちらも指定されていない場合、
.B cdrecord
は、ファイル名が
.I .au
または 
.I .wav
で終るときは
.I \-audio
をデフォルトとし、
それ以外のときは
.I \-data 
をデフォルトとする。
.TP
.B \-swab
.\"O If this flag is present, audio data is assumed to be in byte-swapped
.\"O (little-endian) order.  Some types of CD-Writers e.g. Yamaha, Sony and the
.\"O new SCSI-3/mmc drives require audio data to be presented in
.\"O little-endian order,
.\"O .\" (which is the order in which it's actually recorded on the CD) ????
このフラグが指定されている場合、オーディオデータは
バイトスワップ (リトルエンディアン) オーダーであると仮定する。
Yamaha, Sony, new SCSI-3/mmc などの CD ライタでは、
オーディオデータがリトルエンディアンオーダーでなければならない。
.\" (リトルエンディアンは、実際に CD に記録されるバイトオーダーである) ????
.\"O while other writers require audio data to be
.\"O presented in the big-endian (network) byte order normally used by the
.\"O SCSI protocol.
他の CD ライタでは、オーディオデータは SCSI プロトコルで使われる
ビッグエンディアン (ネットワーク) バイトオーダーなければならない。
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O knows if a CD-Recorder needs audio data in big- or little-endian order,
.\"O and corrects the byte order of the data stream to match the needs
.\"O of the recorder.
.B cdrecord
は、CD レコーダがビッグエンディアンのオーディオデータを必要とするのか、
リトルエンディアンのオーディオデータを必要とするのかを認識して、
データストリームのバイトオーダーをレコーダの必要にあったものに修正する。
.\"O You only need the 
.\"O .I \-swab 
.\"O flag if your data stream is in Intel (little-endian) byte order.
.I \-swab 
フラグが必要になるのは、データストリームが
Intel (リトルエンディアン) バイトオーダーの場合のみである。
.sp
.\"O Note that the verbose output of
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O will show you if swapping is necessary to make the byte order of 
.\"O the input data fit the required byte order of the recorder.
.B cdrecord
の詳細な出力には、入力データをレコーダが必要とする
バイトオーダーに合わせるのために入れ換える必要があるかが表示される。
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O will not show you if the 
.\"O .I \-swab 
.\"O flag was actually present for a track.
.B cdrecord
は
.I \-swab 
フラグが実際にトラックに指定されているかどうかは表示しない。
.TP
.B \-data
.\"O If this flag is present, all subsequent tracks are written in
.\"O .B "CD-ROM mode 1
.\"O (Yellow Book) format. The data is a multiple of 2048 bytes.
.\"O The file with track data should contain an 
.\"O .BR ISO-9660 " or " "Rock Ridge
.\"O filesystem image (see 
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O for more details). 
このフラグが指定されている場合、これ以降の全てのトラックは
.B "CD-ROM mode 1
(Yellow Book) フォーマットで書き込まれる。
データは 2048 バイトの倍数である。
The file with track data should contain an 
トラックデータのファイルは、
.BR ISO-9660 " または " Rock Ridge
ファイルシステムイメージでなければならない
(詳細は
.B mkisofs 
を参照すること)。
.\"O If the track data is an
.\"O .B ufs
.\"O filesystem image, fragment size should be set to 2 KB or more to allow
.\"O CR-drives with 2 KB sector size to to be used for reading.
トラックデータが
.B ufs
ファイルシステムイメージの場合、
フラグメントサイズを 2 KB バイトに設定するれば、
セクタサイズが 2 KB の CD ドライブを読み込みに使うことができる。
.TP
.I " "
.\"O \-data is the default, if no other flag is present.
他のフラグが指定されていない場合、\-data がデフォルトである。
.TP
.I " "
.\"O If neither 
.\"O .I \-data 
.\"O nor
.\"O .I \-audio
.\"O have been specified, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O defaults to 
.\"O .I \-audio
.\"O for all filenames that end in
.\"O .I .au
.\"O or 
.\"O .I .wav
.\"O and to
.\"O .I \-data 
.\"O for all other files.
.I \-data 
と
.I \-audio
がどちらも指定されていない場合、
.B cdrecord
は、ファイル名が
.I .au
または 
.I .wav
で終るときは
.I \-audio
をデフォルトとし、
それ以外のときは
.I \-data 
をデフォルトとする。
.TP
.B \-mode2
.\"O If this flag is present, all subsequent tracks are written in
.\"O .B "CD-ROM mode 2
.\"O format. The data is a multiple of 2048 bytes.
このフラグが指定されると、これ以降の全てのトラックは
.B "CD-ROM mode 2
フォーマットで書き込まれる。
データは 2048 バイトの倍数である。
.TP
.B \-xa1
.\"O If this flag is present, all subsequent tracks are written in
.\"O .B "CD-ROM XA mode 1
.\"O format. The data is a multiple of 2048 bytes.
このフラグが指定されると、これ以降の全てのトラックは
.B "CD-ROM XA mode 1
フォーマットで書き込まれる。
データは 2048 バイトの倍数である。
.TP
.B \-xa2
.\"O If this flag is present, all subsequent tracks are written in
.\"O .B "CD-ROM XA mode 2
.\"O format. The data is a multiple of 2048 bytes.
このフラグが指定されると、これ以降の全てのトラックは
.B "CD-ROM XA mode 2
フォーマットで書き込まれる。
データは 2048 バイトの倍数である。
.TP
.B \-cdi
.\"O If this flag is present, all subsequent tracks are written in
.\"O .B "CDI
.\"O format. The data is a multiple of 2048 bytes.
このフラグが指定されると、これ以降の全てのトラックは
.B "CDI
フォーマットで書き込まれる。
データは 2048 バイトの倍数である。
.TP
.B \-isosize
.\"O Use the 
.\"O .B "ISO-9660
.\"O file system size as the size of the next track.
.B "ISO-9660
ファイルシステムサイズを次のトラックのサイズとする。
.\"O This option is needed if you want to read the image of a track from
.\"O a raw disk partition or on a master CD. In the first case the option
.\"O .B \-isosize
.\"O is needed to limit the size of the CD to the size of the ISO filesystem.
raw ディスクパーティションまたはマスタ CD から
トラックのイメージを読み込ませたい場合、
このオプションが必要になる。
raw ディスクパーティションの場合は、
CD のサイズを ISO ファイルシステムのサイズに制限するために
.B \-isosize
オプションが必要となる。
.\"O In the second case the option
.\"O .B \-isosize
.\"O is needed to prevent 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O from reading the two run out blocks that are appended by each CD-recorder
.\"O in track at once mode. 
マスタ CD の場合は、
track at once モードのときに
CD レコーダに 2 つのランアウト (run out) ブロックを読み込ませないために、
.B \-isosize
オプションが必要になる。
.\"O These two run out blocks cannot be read and would
.\"O cause a buffer under run that would cause a defective copy.
この 2 つのランアウトブロックは読み込むことができず、
defective コピーを引き起こすバッファアンダーランの原因になる。
.\"O Do not use this option if 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O reads the track data from 
.\"O .IR stdin .
.B cdrecord
がトラックデータを
.I stdin
から読み込む場合には、このオプションを使ってはならない。
.\"O This option currently cannot be used to determine the size of a file system
.\"O if the multi session option is present.
今のところ \-multi オプションが指定されている場合には、
ファイルシステムのサイズを決定するために、このオプションを使うことはできない。
.TP
.B \-pad
.\"O If the track is a data track, 15 sectors of zeroed data
.\"O will be added to the end of this and each subsequent data track.
データトラックの場合は、
各データトラックの後ろにデータ 0 が 15 セクタ分追加される。
.\"O In this case, the 
.\"O .B \-pad 
.\"O option is superseded by the 
.\"O .B padsize=
.\"O option. It will remain however as a shorthand for
.\"O .BI padsize=15s.
この場合、
.B \-pad 
オプションは
.B padsize=
オプションによって上書きされる。
ただし、このオプションは
.BI padsize=15s
の省略形のままである。
.\"O If the 
.\"O .I \-pad 
.\"O option refers to an audio track,
.\"O .B cdrecord 
.\"O will pad the audio data to be a multiple of 2352 bytes. 
.\"O The audio data padding is done with binary zeroes which is 
.\"O equal to absolute silence.
.I \-pad 
がオーディオトラックを参照している場合、
.B cdrecord 
はオーディオデータが 2352 バイトの倍数になるようにデータを埋め込む。
詰め込まれるオーディオデータはバイナリの 0 であり、
全くの無音状態と等しい。
.sp
.\"O .B \-pad 
.\"O remains valid until disabled by 
.\"O .BR \-nopad .
.B \-pad 
は
.B \-nopad 
によって無効にされるまで有効であり続ける。
.TP
.BR padsize= #
.\"O Set the amount of data to be appended as padding to the next track to #.
.\"O Opposed to the behavior of the 
.\"O .B \-pad
.\"O option, the value for 
.\"O .I padsize=
.\"O is reset to zero for each new track.
次のトラックに詰め込まれるデータ 0 の数を # に設定する。
.B \-pad
オプションの動作とは反対に、新たなトラックでは
.I padsize=
の値が 0 にリセットされる。
.\"O See
.\"O .BR fs =
.\"O option for possible arguments.
使用可能な引き数は
.BR fs =
オプションを参照すること。
.\"O Use this option if your CD-drive is not able to read the last sectors of
.\"O a track or if you want to be able to read the CD
.\"O on a 
.\"O .B Linux 
.\"O system with the ISO-9660 filesystem read ahead bug.
CD ドライブがトラックの最終セクタを読み込めない場合、
または ISO-9660 ファイルシステムの先読みバグがある
.B Linux 
システム上で CD を読み込ませたい場合は、このオプションを使うこと。
.\"O If an empty file is used for track data, 
.\"O this option may be used to create a disk that is entirely made of padding.
空のファイルをトラックデータとして用いる場合、
このオプションは全てを 0 で埋めたディスクを作成するために使われる。
.TP
.B \-nopad
.\"O Do not pad the following tracks \- the default.
以降のトラックに対して 0 の埋め込みを行わない \- 
これがデフォルトである。
.TP
.B \-shorttrack
.\"O Allow all subsequent tracks to violate the Read Book track length standard
.\"O which requires a minimum track length of 4 seconds.
.\"O This option is only useful when used in DAO mode.
.\"O Not all drives support this feature. The drive must be accept the
.\"O resulting CUE sheet.
これ以降のトラックで、Red Book トラック長基準を破っても構わないことにする。
トラック長は最短でも 4 秒なければならない。
このオプションは DAO モードで用いられた場合にのみ有効である。
全てのドライブがこの機能に対応しているわけではない。
ドライブは結果として得られる CUE シートを受け付けなければならない。
.TP
.B \-noshorttrack
.\"O Re-enforce the Red Book track length standard. Tracks must be
.\"O at least 4 seconds.
Red Book トラック長基準を再び守らせる。
トラックは少なくとも 4 秒でなければならない。
.TP
.BR pregap =#
.\"O Set the  pre-gap size for the next track.
.\"O This option currently only makes sense with the TEAC drive when
.\"O creating track-at-once disks without the 2 second silence before each track.
次のトラックのプレギャップサイズを設定する。
このオプションは現在のところ、TEAC 製ドライブで
各トラックの前に 2 秒間の無音を入れずに
track-at-once ディスクを作成するときにしか動作しない。
.br
.\"O This option may go away in future. 
このオプションは将来なくなる。
.TP
.B \-preemp
.\"O If this flag is present, all TOC entries for subsequent audio tracks 
.\"O will indicate that the audio data has been sampled with 50/15 micro sec
.\"O preemphasis.
.\"ysato: 
.\"ysato: 原文では "micro" の部分が「μ」の 1 バイト文字で書かれているが、
.\"ysato: EUC-JP で保存できないので変更した。
.\"ysato: 
このフラグを指定すると、オーディオトラックの全ての TOC エントリは、
オーディオデータが 50/15 μ秒のプレ・エンファシス (pre-emphasis) で
サンプリングされているとする。
.\"O The data, however is not modified during the process of transferring from file
.\"O to disk. 
.\"O This option has no effect on data tracks.
ただし、このデータがファイルからディスクに移される際に変更されることはない。
このオプションはデータトラックには何も影響しない。
.TP
.B \-nopreemp
.\"O If this flag is present, all TOC entries for subsequent audio tracks 
.\"O will indicate that the audio data has been mastered with linear data \- 
.\"O this is the default.
このフラグが指定されていると、
これ以降のオーディオトラックの TOC エントリは、
オーディオデータのマスタがリニアデータとして作成されているものとする
\- これがデフォルトである。
.TP
.B tsize=#
.\"O If the master image for the next track has been stored on a raw disk, 
.\"O use this option
.\"O to specify the valid amount of data on this disk. If the image of the next 
.\"O track is stored in a regular file, the size of that file is taken to determine
.\"O the length of this track.
次のトラックのマスタイメージが raw ディスクに格納されている場合、
ディスク上の有効なデータ量を指定するために、このオプションを使うこと。
次のトラックのイメージが通常のファイルとして格納されている場合、
ファイルのサイズからそのトラックの長さを決定する。
.\"O If the track contains an ISO 9660 filesystem image use the 
.\"O .I \-isosize
.\"O option to determine the length of that filesystem image.
トラックに ISO 9660 ファイルシステムイメージがある場合は、
ファイルシステムイメージの長さを決定するために
.I \-isosize
オプションを使うこと。
.br
.\"O In Disk at Once mode and with some drives that use
.\"O the TEAC programming interface, even in Track at Once mode,
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O needs to know the size of each track before starting to write the disk.
.\"O Cdrecord now checks this and aborts before starting to write.
TEAC プログラミングインターフェースを使ういくつかのドライブでは、
Disk at Once モードでも Track at Once モードでも
ディスクの書き込みを始める前に
.B cdrecord
が各トラックのサイズを知る必要がある。
今のところ cdrecord はサイズをチェックして、書き込みを始める前に中止する。
.\"O If this happens you will need to run
.\"O .B "mkisofs -print-size
.\"O before and use the output as an argument to the 
.\"O .BR tsize =
.\"O option of 
.\"O .BR cdrecord .
このような現象が起こった場合は、
.B "mkisofs -print-size
を実行して、得られた結果を
.B cdrecord
の
.BR tsize =
オプションの引き数として使うこと。
.br
.\"O See
.\"O .BR fs =
.\"O option for possible arguments.
指定可能な引き数は
.BR fs =
オプションを参照すること。

.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.PP
.\"O For all examples below, it will be assumed that the CD-Recorder is
.\"O connected to the primary SCSI bus of the machine. The SCSI target id is
.\"O set to 2.
以下の例では、CD レコーダがマシンのプライマリ SCSI バスに
接続されていると仮定している。
SCSI ターゲット ID は 2 に設定されている。
.PP
.\"O To record a pure CD-ROM at double speed, using data from the file
.\"O .IR cdimage.raw :
ファイル
.I cdimage.raw 
にあるデータを使って単純な CD-ROM を 2 倍速で記録する:
.PP
    cdrecord \-v speed=2 dev=2,0 cdimage.raw
.PP
.\"O To create an image for a ISO 9660 filesystem with Rock Ridge extensions:
Rock Ridge 拡張された ISO 9660 ファイルシステムのイメージを作成する:
.PP
    mkisofs \-R \-o cdimage.raw /home/joerg/master/tree
.PP
.\"O To check the resulting file before writing to CD on Solaris:
Solaris で CD を書き込む前に上の結果のファイルを検査する:
.PP
    mount \-r \-F fbk \-o type=hsfs /dev/fbk0:cdimage.raw /mnt
.PP
.\"O On Linux:
Linux では:
.PP
    mount cdimage.raw \-r \-t iso9660 \-o loop /mnt
.PP
.\"O Go on with:
以下のように続ける:
.br
    ls \-lR /mnt
.br
    umount /mnt
.PP
.\"O If the overall speed of the system is sufficient and the structure of
.\"O the filesystem is not too complex, cdrecord will run without creating an
.\"O image of the ISO 9660 filesystem. Simply run the pipeline:
システム全体のスピードが充分で、
ファイルシステムの構造がそれほど複雑でない場合、
cdrecord は ISO 9660 ファイルシステムのイメージを作成せずに実行できる。
単純にパイプラインで実行すればよい:
.PP
    mkisofs \-R /master/tree | cdrecord \-v fs=6m speed=2 dev=2,0 -
.PP
.\"O The recommended minimum fifo size for running this pipeline is 4 MBytes.
.\"O As the default fifo size is 4 MB, the 
.\"O .B fs=
.\"O option needs only be present if you want to use a different fifo size.
このパイプラインを実行するために推奨される最小の fifo サイズは 4 MB である。
デフォルトの fifo サイズは 4 MB であるので、
別の fifo サイズを指定したい場合以外は
.B fs=
オプションを指定する必要はない。
.\"O If your system is loaded, you should run mkisofs in the real time class too.
システムに負荷がかかっている場合は、
mkisofs もリアルタイムクラスで実行すべきである。
.\"O To raise the priority of 
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O replace the command
.\"O .PP
.\"O     mkisofs \-R /master/tree
.\"O .br
.\"O by
.\"O .br
.\"O     priocntl \-e \-c RT \-p 59 mkisofs \-R /master/tree
.\"O .sp
.\"O on Solaris and by
.\"O .sp
.\"O     nice --18 mkisofs \-R /master/tree
.\"O .sp
.\"O on systems that don't have
.\"O .B "UNIX International
.\"O compliant realtime scheduling.
.B mkisofs
の優先度を上げるためには、コマンド
.PP
    mkisofs \-R /master/tree
.sp
を Solaris では
.sp
    priocntl \-e \-c RT \-p 59 mkisofs \-R /master/tree
.sp
に、
.B "UNIX International"
互換のリアルタイムスケジューリングのないシステムでは
.sp
    nice --18 mkisofs \-R /master/tree
.sp
に変更する。
.PP
.\"O Cdrecord runs at priority 59 on Solaris, you should run mkisofs
.\"O at no more than priority 58. On other systems, you should run mkisofs
.\"O at no less than nice --18.
Solaris では cdrecord は優先度 59 で実行されるので、
mkisofs は優先度 58 以下で実行すべきである。
他のシステムでは nice -18 以上で mkisofs で実行すべきである。
.PP
.\"O Creating a CD-ROM without file system image on disk has been tested
.\"O on a Sparcstation-2 with a Yamaha CDR-400. It did work up to quad speed
.\"O when the machine was not loaded.
.\"O A faster machine may be able to handle quad speed also in the loaded case.
Sparcstation-2 で Yamaha CDR-400 を使って
ディスク上にファイルシステムイメージを置かずに
CD-ROM を作成するテストを行ってみたが、
マシンに負荷がかかっていない場合でも
4 倍速では動作しなかった。
より高速なマシンでは、負荷がかかった場合でも 4 倍速で動作できるだろう。
.PP
.\"O To record a pure CD-DA (audio) at single speed, with each track contained
.\"O in a file named
.\"O .IR track01.cdaudio ,
.\"O .IR track02.cdaudio ,
.\"O etc:
.IR track01.cdaudio ,
.IR track02.cdaudio ", ..."
というファイルに各トラックのデータがある場合に、
単純な CD-DA (オーディオ) を等速で記録するには:
.PP
    cdrecord \-v speed=1 dev=2,0 -audio track*.cdaudio
.PP
.\"O To check if it will be ok to use double speed for the example above. 
.\"O Use the dummy write option:
上の例が 2 倍速でできるかをチェックするためには、
dummy 書き込みオプションを使うこと:
.PP
    cdrecord \-v \-dummy speed=2 dev=2,0 \-audio track*.cdaudio
.PP
.\"O To record a mixed-mode CD with an ISO 9660 filesystem from
.\"O .I cdimage.raw
.\"O on the first track, the other tracks being audio tracks from the files
.\"O .IR track01.cdaudio ,
.\"O .IR track02.cdaudio ,
.\"O etc:
最初のトラックは ISO 9660 ファイルシステム
.IR cdimage.raw 、
それ以外は
.IR track01.cdaudio ,
.IR track02.cdaudio ", ..."
というオーディオトラック、というようなミックスモード CD を記録するには:
.PP
    cdrecord \-v \-dummy dev=2,0 cdimage.raw \-audio track*.cdaudio
.PP
.\"O To handle drives that need to know the size of a track before starting to write,
.\"O first run
書き込みを始める前にトラックのサイズを知らせる必要がある
ドライブを操作するには、最初に
.PP
    mkisofs -R -q -print-size /master/tree
.PP
.\"O and then run
を実行し、次に
.PP
    mkisofs -R /master/tree | cdrecord speed=2 dev=2,0 tsize=XXXs -
.PP
を実行する。
.\"O where 
.\"O .I XXX
.\"O is replaced by the output of the previous run of mkisofs.
ここで
.I XXX
は先に実行した mkisofs の出力で置き換える。
.PP
.\"O To copy an audio CD in the most accurate way, first run
オーディオ CD を最も正確な方法で複製するには、
最初に
.PP
    cdda2wav -v255 -D2,0 -B -Owav
.PP
.\"O and then run
を実行し、次に
.PP
    cdrecord -v dev=2,0 -dao -useinfo  *.wav
.PP
を実行する。

.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.TP
CDR_DEVICE
.\"O This may either hold a device identifier that is suitable to the open
.\"O call of the SCSI transport library or a label in the file /etc/default/cdrecord.
SCSI 転送ライブラリの open コールに適したデバイス識別子と、
ファイル /etc/default/cdrecord にかかれたラベルを設定できる。
.TP
CDR_SPEED
.\"O Sets the default speed value for writing (see also 
.\"O .B \-speed
.\"O option).
デフォルトの書き込みの速度を設定する
.RB ( \-speed
オプションを参照)。
.TP
CDR_FIFOSIZE
.\"O Sets the default size of the FIFO (see also 
.\"O .B fs=#
.\"O option).
FIFO のデフォルトサイズを設定する
.RB ( fs=#
オプションを参照)。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
/etc/default/cdrecord
.\"O Default values can be set for the following options in /etc/default/cdrecord.
.\"O For example:
.\"O .SM CDR_FIFOSIZE=8m
.\"O or
.\"O .SM CDR_SPEED=2
デフォルトの値は、/etc/default/cdrecord にある以下のオプションで設定できる。
例えば、
.SM CDR_FIFOSIZE=8m
や
.SM CDR_SPEED=2
のように設定できる。
.RS
.TP
CDR_DEVICE
.\"O This may either hold a device identifier that is suitable to the open
.\"O call of the SCSI transport library or a label in the file /etc/default/cdrecord 
.\"O that allows to identify a specific drive on the system.
SCSI 転送ライブラリの open コールに適したデバイス識別子と、
ファイル /etc/default/cdrecord にかかれたラベルを設定できる。
これによりシステム上の特定のドライブを識別できる。
.TP
CDR_SPEED
.\"O Sets the default speed value for writing (see also 
.\"O .B \-speed
.\"O option).
デフォルトの書き込みの速度を設定する
.RB ( \-speed
オプションを参照)。
.TP
CDR_FIFOSIZE
.\"O Sets the default size of the FIFO (see also 
.\"O .B fs=#
.\"O option).
FIFO のデフォルトサイズを設定する
.RB ( fs=#
オプションを参照)。
.TP
.\"O Any other label
.\"O is an identifier for a specific drive on the system.
.\"O Such an identifier may not contain the characters ',', '/', '@' or ':'.
その他のラベル
システム上の特定のドライブを識別する。
識別子は文字 ',', '/', '@', ':' を含んではならない。
.sp
.\"O Each line that follows a label contains a TAB separated list of items.
.\"O Currently, three items are recognized: the SCSI ID of the drive, the
.\"O default speed that should be used for this drive and the default FIFO size
.\"O that should be used for this drive. The values for 
.\"O .I speed
.\"O and
.\"O .I fifosize
.\"O may be set to -1 to tell cdrecord to use the global defaults.
.\"O A typical line may look this way:
ラベルに続く行には、タブで区切られたアイテムのリストが書かれる。
今のところ、ドライブの SCSI ID・ドライブのデフォルトの速度・
デフォルトの FIFO サイズ、という3 つのアイテムが認識される。
.I speed
と
.I fifosize
の値を -1 に設定すると、cdrecord はグローバルのデフォルト値を使う。
典型的な例としては以下のようものである:
.sp
teac1= 0,5,0	4	8m
.sp
yamaha= 1,6,0	-1	-1
.sp
.\"O This tells
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O that a drive named
.\"O .I teac1
.\"O is at scsibus 0, target 5, lun 0 and should be used with speed 4 and
.\"O a FIFO size of 8 MB.
これは
.B cdrecord
に対して、
.I teac1
という名前のドライブが scsibus 0, target 5, lun 0 にあり、
速度を 4 倍速、FIFO サイズを 8 MB にすることを指示する。
.\"O A second drive may be found at scsibus 1, target 6, lun 0 and uses the
.\"O default speed and the default FIFO size.
2 番目のドライブは scsibus 1, target 6, lun 0 にあり、
デフォルトの速度とデフォルトの FIFO サイズを使う。
.RE

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR cdda2wav (1),
.BR readcd (1),
.BR scg (7),
.BR fbk (7),
.BR mkisofs (8).

.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.PP
.\"O On Solaris you need to stop the volume management if you like to use the USCSI
.\"O fallback SCSI transport code. Even things like 
.\"O .B "cdrecord -scanbus
.\"O will not work if the volume management is running.
Solaris において USCSI フォールバック SCSI 転送コードを使いたい場合は、
ボリューム管理を停止する必要がある。
ボリューム管理が動作していると、
.B "cdrecord -scanbus
すらも動作しない。
.PP
.\"O Disks made in 
.\"O .B "Track At Once 
.\"O mode are not suitable as a master for direct mass production by CD manufacturers.
.B "Track At Once 
モードで作られたディスクは、CD 製造業者によって
大量生産される製品のマスタには向いていない。
.\"O You will need the 
.\"O .B "disk at once
.\"O option to record such disks.
このようなディスクを記録するには
.B "disk at once
オプションを指定する必要がある。
.B "Track At Once 
で作られたディスクは、通常はどの CD プレーヤでも読めるが、
古いオーディオ CD プレーヤのなかには
オーディオトラックの間に 2 秒間のクリック音を出してしまうものもある。
.\"O Nevertheless the disks made in
.\"O .B "Track At Once 
.\"O will normally be read in all CD players. Some old
.\"O audio CD players however may produce a two second click between two audio tracks.
.PP
.\"O The minimal size of a track is 4 seconds or 300 sectors. If you write 
.\"O smaller tracks, the CD-Recorder will add dummy blocks. This is not an
.\"O error, even though the SCSI-error message looks this way.
トラックの最小サイズは 4 秒または 300 セクタである。
これよりも小さいトラックを書き込んだ場合、
CD レコーダがダミーブロックを追加する。
これが SCSI エラーメッセージに現れたとしてもエラーではない。
.PP
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O has been tested on an upgraded Philips CDD-521 recorder at single and 
.\"O double speed on a SparcStation 20/502 with no problems, slower computer systems
.\"O should work also. 
.B cdrecord
は、SparcStation 20/502 上のアップグレードされた Philips CDD-521 レコーダで
等速と 2 倍速でテストして問題がなかった。
もっと遅いコンピュータシステムでも動作するだろう。
.\"O The newer Philips/HP/Plasmon/Grundig
.\"O drives as well as Yamaha CDR-100 and CDR-102 work also. The Plasmon RF-4100
.\"O work, but has not tested in multi session.
Philips/HP/Plasmon/Grundig の新しいドライブでも、
Yamaha の CDR-100 と CDR-102 でも動作する。
Plasmon RF-4100 でも動作するが、マルチセッションについてはテストしていない。
.\"O A Philips CDD-521 that has not been upgraded will not work.
.\"O The Sony CDU-924 has been tested, but does not support XA-mode2 in hardware.
.\"O The sony therefore cannot create conforming multi session disks.
アップグレードされていない Philips CDD-521 では動作しない。
Sony CDU-924 をテストしたが、ハードウェアが XA-mode2 に対応していない。
よって Sony 製ドライブでは適合した
マルチセッションディスクを作成することはできない。
.\"O The Ricoh RO-1420C works, but some people seem to have problems to 
.\"O use them with speed=2, try speed=0 in this case.
Ricoh RO-1420C でも動作するが、
speed=2 で使うと問題が発生することがあるようなので、
このような場合には speed=0 を試してみること。
.PP
.\"O The Yamaha CDR-400 and all new SCSI-3/mmc conforming drives are supported
.\"O in single and multi-session.
Yamaha CDR-400 や SCSI-3/mmc に適合した全ての新しいドライブは、
シングルセッションとマルチセッションに対応している。
.PP
.\"O You should run several tests in all supported speeds of your drive with the
.\"O .B \-dummy
.\"O option turned on if you are using 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O on an unknown system. Writing a CD is a realtime process. 
不明なシステム上で
.B cdrecord
を使う場合は、
.B \-dummy
オプションをオンにして、ドライブでサポートされている
全ての速度について何回かテストすべきである。
CD の書き込みはリアルタイムプロセスである。
.\"O .B NFS
.\"O will not always deliver constantly the needed data rates.
.\"O If you want to use 
.\"O .B cdrecord 
.\"O with CD-images that are located on a
.\"O .B NFS
.\"O mounted filesystem, be sure that the fifo size is big enough.
.B NFS
は必要とされるデータ転送率を絶えず提供するわけではない。
.B NFS
でマウントされたファイルシステム上にある CD イメージを
.B cdrecord 
で使いたい場合は、fifo サイズが充分大きいこと確認すること。
.\"O I used
.\"O .B cdrecord 
.\"O with with medium load on a SS20/502 and even at quad speed 
.\"O on a Sparcstation-2 which was heavily loaded, 
.\"O but it is recommended to leave the system
.\"O as lightly loaded as possible while writing a CD.
.B cdrecord 
を SS20/502 において中間的な負荷状態で使用したことや、
Sparcstation-2 においてかなりの負荷状態で 4 倍速で使用したこともあるが、
CD を書き込むときはシステムの負荷を出来る限り軽くしておくことを勧める。
.\"O If you want to make sure that buffer underrungs are not
.\"O caused by your source disk, you may use the command
読み込み元のディスクが原因でバッファアンダーランが起こっていないことを
確認したいなら、コマンド
.PP
.B "    cdrecord -dummy dev=2,0 padsize=600m /dev/null
.PP
.\"O to create a disk that is entirely made of dummy data.
を実行して、全てをダミーデータから作ったディスクを作成すればよい。
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O needs to run as root to get access to the 
.\"O .B /dev/scg?
.\"O device nodes and to be able to lock itself into memory.
.B cdrecord
は、
.B /dev/scg?
デバイスノードにアクセスして、
プログラム自身をメモリ内にロックできるように、
root で実行する必要がある。
.PP
.\"O If you don't want to allow users to become root on your system,
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O may safely be installed suid root. This allows all users or a group of
.\"O users with no root privileges to use 
.\"O .B cdrecord.
システム上でユーザーが root になるのを許可したくない場合は、
.B cdrecord
を root に suid することで安全にインストールできる。
これにより、root 権限を持たない全てのユーザーやユーザーのグループが
.B cdrecord
を使うことができる。
.\"O .B Cdrecord 
.\"O in this case checks, if the real user would have been able to read 
.\"O the specified files.
この場合
.B cdrecord 
は、実際のユーザーが特定のファイルを読めるかを調べる。
.\"O To give all user access to use 
.\"O .B cdrecord, 
.\"O enter:
全てのユーザーに
.B cdrecord
を使う権限を与えたいならば以下を実行する:
.PP
	chown root /usr/local/bin/cdrecord
.br
	chmod 4711 /usr/local/bin/cdrecord
.PP
.\"O To give a restricted group of users access to cdrecord enter:
特定のユーザーのグループに
cdrecord を使う権限を与えたいならば以下を実行する:
.PP
	chown root /usr/local/bin/cdrecord
.br
	chgrp cdburners /usr/local/bin/cdrecord
.br
	chmod 4710 /usr/local/bin/cdrecord
.PP
.\"O and add a group 
.\"O .I cdburners
.\"O on your system.
そして、システムの
.I cdburners
グループに追加する。
.PP
.\"O Never give write permissions for non root users to the 
.\"O .I /dev/scg?
.\"O devices unless you would allow anybody to read/write/format
.\"O all your disks.
ディスクの読み込み・書き出し・フォーマットを
全てのユーザーに許可したい場合を除き、
root 以外のユーザーに
.I /dev/scg?
への書き込みを許可してはならない。
.PP
.\"O You should not connect old drives that do not support
.\"O disconnect/reconnect to either the SCSI bus that is connected to the
.\"O CD-Recorder or the source disk.
CD レコーダや読み込み元のディスクが接続された SCSI バスに、
切断や再接続に対応していない昔のディスクを接続するべきではない。
.PP
.\"O A Compact Disc can have no more than 99 tracks.
CD には 99 トラック以上は入らない。
.PP
.\"O When creating a disc with both audio and data tracks, 
.\"O the data should be on track 1 otherwise you should create
.\"O a CDplus disk which is a multi session disk with the first session 
.\"O containing the audio tracks and the following session containing the data track.
オーディオトラックとデータトラックが両方入ったディスクを作成する場合は、
データをトラック 1 に入れるべきである。
そうでなければ CDplus ディスクを作成するべきである。
CDplus は、最初のセッションがオーディオトラックで、
以降のセッションがデータトラックになったマルチセッションディスクである。
.PP
.\"O Many operating systems are not able to read more than a single data track, or
.\"O need special software to do so.
多くの OS ではデータトラックが 1 つしか読み出せない。
また読むためには特別のソフトが必要である。
.PP
.\"O More information on the SCSI command set of a HP CD-Recorder can be found at:
HP 製 CD レコーダの SCSI コマンドセットについての
詳しい情報は以下で入手できる。
.PP
	http://www.hp.com/isgsupport/cdr/index.html
.PP
.\"O If you have more information or SCSI command manuals for currently 
.\"O unsupported CD-Recorders please contact the author.
もっと詳しい情報や、現在対応していないCD レコーダの
SCSI コマンドマニュアルがあったら、著者に連絡してください。
.PP
.\"O The Philips CDD 521 CD-Recorder (even in the upgraded version)
.\"O has several firmware bugs. Some of them will
.\"O force you to power cycle the device or to reboot the machine.
Philips CDD 521 にはファームウェアのバグがある。
(アップグレードされたものにもある)。
これらうちのいくつかは、デバイスの電気の周波数を
ある固定のものにしなければならず、
そうしない場合にはマシンをリブートしなければならない。
.PP
.\"O When using 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O with the broken 
.\"O .B "Linux SCSI generic driver."
.\"O You should note that 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O uses a hack, that tries to emulate the functionality of the scg driver.
壊れた
.B "Linux SCSI generic driver"
で
.B cdrecord
を使う場合、
.B cdrecord
は scg ドライバの機能をエミュレートを試みるという対処療法を使う。
.\"O Unfortunately, the sg driver on 
.\"O .B Linux
.\"O has several severe bugs:
不幸なことに、
.B Linux
の sg ドライバには以下のような酷いバグがある:
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It cannot see if a SCSI command could not be sent at all.
SCSI コマンドが全く送られていないかを調べることができない。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It cannot get the SCSI status byte. 
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O for that reason cannot report failing SCSI commands in some
.\"O situations.
SCSI status バイトを取得できない。
このため、
.B cdrecord
は失敗した SCSI コマンドをある状況下では報告できない。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It cannot get real DMA count of transfer. 
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O cannot tell you if there is an DMA residual count.
転送時の実際の DMA カウントを取得できない。
.B cdrecord
は、DMA の残余カウントがあるかをユーザーに知らせることができない。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It cannot get number of bytes valid in auto sense data.
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O cannot tell you if device transfers no sense data at all.
auto sense データのうち有効なバイト数を取得できない。
.B cdrecord
は、認識したデータをデバイスが全く転送していないかを
ユーザーに知らせることができない。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It fetches to few data in auto request sense (CCS/SCSI-2/SCSI-3 needs >= 18).
auto request sense では非常に少ないデータしか取得できない
(CCS/SCSI-2/SCSI-3 では 18 以上でなければならない)。
.PP
.\"O The fifo percent output is computed just after a block of data has been written
.\"O to the CD-Recorder. For this reason, there will never be 100% fifo fill,
.\"O while the fifo is in streaming mode.
fifo 率の表示は、CD レコーダにデータブロックが書き込まれた直後に計算される。
このため、fifo がストリーミングモードであるにもかかわらず、
100% fifo fill になることはない。

.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.PP
.\"O You have 9 seconds to type ^C to abort 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O after you see the message:
以下のようなメッセージが表示されてから、
9 秒間の間に ^C で
.B cdrecord
を中止できる。
.PP
Starting to write CD at speed %d in %s mode for %s session.
.PP
.\"O A typical error message for a SCSI command looks like:
SCSI コマンドの典型的なエラーメッセージは以下のようなものである:
.sp
.RS
.nf
cdrecord: I/O error. test unit ready: scsi sendcmd: no error
CDB:  00 20 00 00 00 00
status: 0x2 (CHECK CONDITION)
Sense Bytes: 70 00 05 00 00 00 00 0A 00 00 00 00 25 00 00 00 00 00
Sense Key: 0x5 Illegal Request, Segment 0
Sense Code: 0x25 Qual 0x00 (logical unit not supported) Fru 0x0
Sense flags: Blk 0 (not valid)
cmd finished after 0.002s timeout 40s
.fi
.sp
.RE
.\"O The first line gives information about the transport of the command.
.\"O The text after the first colon gives the error text for the system call
.\"O from the view of the kernel. It usually is:
.\"O .B "I/O error
.\"O unless other problems happen. The next words contain a short description for
.\"O the SCSI command that fails. The rest of the line tells you if there were
.\"O any problems for the transport of the command over the SCSI bus.
1 行目はコマンドの転送についての情報である。
最初のコロンのあとの文字列は、
カーネルの視点からみたシステムコールのエラーである。
他の問題が起こらないときに、一般的なのは
.B "I/O error
である。
次の文字列は失敗した SCSI コマンドの簡単な説明である。
残りの部分は SCSI バス越しにコマンドを転送する際に
問題が発生したことを示す。
.\"O .B "fatal error
.\"O means that it was not possible to transport the command (i.e. no device present
.\"O at the requested SCSI address).
.B "fatal error
はコマンドを転送できなかったことを示す
(つまり、要求された SCSI アドレスにデバイスが存在しなかった)。
.PP
.\"O The second line prints the SCSI command descriptor block for the failed command.
2 行目には失敗したコマンドの SCSI コマンドの
ディスクリプターブロックが表示される。
.PP
.\"O The third line gives information on the SCSI status code returned by the 
.\"O command, if the transport of the command succeeds. 
.\"O This is error information from the SCSI device.
3 行目には、コマンドの転送が成功した場合に、
コマンドによって返される SCSI status コードについての情報が表示される。
これは SCSI デバイスからのエラー情報である。
.PP
.\"O The fourth line is a hex dump of the auto request sense information for the 
.\"O command.
4 行目はコマンドの auto request sense 情報の 16 進ダンプである。
.PP
.\"O The fifth line is the error text for the sense key if available, followed
.\"O by the segment number that is only valid if the command was a
.\"O .I copy
.\"O command. If the error message is not directly related to the current command,
.\"O the text
.\"O .I deferred error
.\"O is appended.
5 行目は (もし存在すれば) sense key のエラー文字列である。
コマンドが
.I copy
の場合にのみ、セグメント番号が続く。
エラーメッセージが現在のコマンドに直接関係していない場合、
.I deferred error
という文字列が表示される。
.PP
.\"O The sixth line is the error text for the sense code and the sense qualifier if available.
.\"O If the type of the device is known, the sense data is decoded from tables
.\"O in
.\"O .IR scsierrs.c " .
.\"O The text is followed by the error value for a field replaceable unit.
6 行目は sense code のエラー文字列である。
存在する場合には sense qualifier も表示される。
デバイスのタイプが既知の場合、
sense data は
.I scsierrs.c"
にあるテーブルを用いてデコードされる。
その文字列の後には field replaceable unit についてのエラー値が続く。
.PP
.\"O The seventh line prints the block number that is related to the failed command
.\"O and text for several error flags. The block number may not be valid.
7 行目には、失敗したコマンドに関連したブロック番号と
エラーフラグ文字列が表示される。
ブロック番号は有効ではないかも知れない。
.PP
.\"O The eight line reports the timeout set up for this commans and the time
.\"O that the command realy needed to be finished.
8 行目は、そのコマンドについて設定されたタイムアウトと、
実際にコマンドが完了するまでにかかった時間が表示される。
.PP
.\"O The following message is not an error:
以下のメッセージはエラーではない:
..sp
.RS
.nf
Track 01: Total bytes read/written: 2048/2048 (1 sectors).
cdrecord: I/O error. flush cache: scsi sendcmd: no error
CDB:  35 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
status: 0x2 (CHECK CONDITION)
Sense Bytes: F0 00 05 80 00 00 27 0A 00 00 00 00 B5 00 00 00 00 00
Sense Key: 0x5 Illegal Request, Segment 0
Sense Code: 0xB5 Qual 0x00 (dummy data blocks added) Fru 0x0
Sense flags: Blk -2147483609 (valid)
cmd finished after 0.002s timeout 40s
.fi
.sp
.RE
.\"O It simply notifies, that a track that is smaller than the minimum size has been
.\"O expanded to 300 sectors.
これは単に、最小サイズより小さいトラックを
300 セクタに拡張したことを知らせているだけである。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.PP
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O has even more options than 
.\"O .BR ls .
.B cdrecord
には
.B ls
よりも多くのオプションがある。
.PP
.\"O .B Cdrecord
.\"O currently only warns if the input data will not fit on the disk.
.\"O If you don't abort the command you will get unpredictable results.
現在のところ、
.B cdrecord 
は入力データがディスクに合わない場合に警告しか出さない。
コマンドを中止しないと、予想できない結果になる。
.PP
.\"O There should be an option to write index numbers for audio tracks.
オーディオトラックのインデックス番号を
書き込むオプションが存在するべきである。
.PP
.\"O There should be a recover option to make disks usable, that have been written
.\"O during a power failure.
パワー不足の時に書き込まれたディスクを
修復して使えるようにするオプションが存在するべきである。

.\"O .SH CREDITS
.SH 謝辞
.PP
.TP 15
Bill Swartz	(Bill_Swartz@twolf.com)
.br
.\"O For helping me with the TEAC driver support
TEAC ドライバのサポートに協力してくれた。
.TP
Aaron Newsome	(aaron.d.newsome@wdc.com)
.br
.\"O For letting me develop Sony support on his drive
彼のドライブで Sony 製ドライブのサポートを開発させてくれた。
.TP
Eric Youngdale	(eric@andante.jic.com)
.br
.\"O For supplying mkisofs
mkisofs を提供してくれた。
.TP
Gadi Oxman	(gadio@netvision.net.il)
.br
.\"O For tips on the ATAPI standard
ATAPI 標準規格についてのいろいろな情報をもらった。
.TP
Finn Arne Gangstad	(finnag@guardian.no)
.br
.\"O For the first FIFO implementation.
最初の FIFO 実装をしてくれた。
.TP
Dave Platt	(dplatt@feghoot.ml.org)
.br
.\"O For creating the experimental packet writing support,
.\"O the first implementation of CD-RW blanking support,
.\"O the first .wav file decoder 
.\"O and many nice discussions on cdrecord.
実験的なパケット書き込みの作成、
CD-RW を空にする機能の最初の実装、
\&.wav ファイルの最初のデコーダの実装、
cdrecord に関する有益な議論をしてくれた。
.TP
Chris P. Ross (cross@eng.us.uu.net)
.br
.\"O For the first implementation os a BSDI SCSI rtansport.
BSDI SCSI 転送を最初に実装してくれた。
.TP
Grant R. Guenther   (grant@torque.net)
.br
.\"O For creating the first parallel port transport implementation
.\"O for Linux.
Linux におけるパラレルポート転送を最初に実装してくれた。
.TP
Kenneth D. Merry (ken@kdm.org)
.br
.\"O for providing the CAM port for FreeBSD together with Michael Smith (msmith@freebsd.org)
Michael Smith (msmith@freebsd.org) とともに、
FreeBSD の CAM ポートを提供してくれた。

.\"O .SH "MAILING LISTS
.SH メーリングリスト
.\"O If you want to actively take part on the development of cdrecord,
.\"O you may join the cdwriting mailing list by sending mail to:
.\"O .nf
.\"O .sp
.\"O 	other-cdwrite-request@lists.debian.org
.\"O .sp
.\"O .fi
.\"O and include the word 
.\"O .I subscribe
.\"O in the body.
cdrecord の開発に積極的に参加したいなら、本文に
.I subscribe
と書いたメールを
.nf
.sp
	other-cdwrite-request@lists.debian.org
.sp
.fi
へ送って、cdwriting メーリングリストに入ることができる。
.\"O The mail address of the list is:
.\"O .nf
.\"O .sp
.\"O 	other-cdwrite@lists.debian.org
.\"O .fi
.nf
.sp
	other-cdwrite@lists.debian.org
.sp
.fi
がメーリングリストのアドレスである。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.nf
J\*org Schilling
Seestr. 110
D-13353 Berlin
Germany
.fi
.PP
.\"O Additional information can be found on:
その他の情報は以下で入手できる。
.br
http://www.fokus.gmd.de/usr/schilling/cdrecord.html
.PP
.\"O If you have support questions, send them to:
サポートに関する質問は、
.PP
.B
cdrecord-support@berlios.de
.br
.\"O or
または
.B
other-cdwrite@lists.debian.org
.PP
にメールを送ってください。
.PP
.\"O Of you definitly found a bug, send a mail to:
明らかなバグを見付けた場合は、
.PP
.B
cdrecord-developers@berlios.de
.br
.\"O or
または
.B
schilling@fokus.gmd.de
.PP
にメールを送ってください。
.PP
.\"O To subscribe, use:
メーリングリストを購読するには、
.PP
.B
http://lists.berlios.de/mailman/listinfo/cdrecord-developers 
.br
.\"O or
または
.B
http://lists.berlios.de/mailman/listinfo/cdrecord-support 
.PP
を参照すること。
