.\" @(#)readcd.1	1.5 01/04/16 Copyright 1996 J. Schilling
.\" 
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Dec  1 03:06:05 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.if t .ds a \v'-0.55m'\h'0.00n'\z.\h'0.40n'\z.\v'0.55m'\h'-0.40n'a
.if t .ds o \v'-0.55m'\h'0.00n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.55m'\h'-0.45n'o
.if t .ds u \v'-0.55m'\h'0.00n'\z.\h'0.40n'\z.\v'0.55m'\h'-0.40n'u
.if t .ds A \v'-0.77m'\h'0.25n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.77m'\h'-0.70n'A
.if t .ds O \v'-0.77m'\h'0.25n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.77m'\h'-0.70n'O
.if t .ds U \v'-0.77m'\h'0.30n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.77m'\h'-0.75n'U
.if t .ds s \\(*b
.if t .ds S SS
.if n .ds a ae
.if n .ds o oe
.if n .ds u ue
.if n .ds s sz
.TH READCD 1 "Version 1.10" "J\*org Schilling" "Schily\'s USER COMMANDS"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O readcd \- read or write data Compact Discs
readcd \- データ CD を読み出す・書き込む
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B readcd
.BI dev= device
[
.I options
]

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Readcd
.\"O is used to read or write Compact Discs.
.B readcd
は CD を読み出したり、データを CD に書き込んだりするのに使う。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I device
.\"O refers to
.\"O .IR scsibus / target / lun
.\"O of the drive. Communication on 
.\"O .I SunOS
.\"O is done with the SCSI general driver
.\"O .B scg.
.I device
は CD レコーダの
.IR scsibus / target / lun
を指す。
.I SunOS
での通信は汎用 SCSI ドライバ 
.B scg 
を用いて行われる。
.\"O Other operating systems are using a library simulation of this driver.
.\"O Possible syntax is:
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR scsibus , target , lun
.\"O or
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR target , lun .
他の OS では、このドライバをシミュレートするライブラリを使う。
使用可能な書式は、
.B dev=
.IR scsibus , target , lun
または
.B dev=
.IR target , lun
である。
.\"O In the latter case, the drive has to be connected to the default 
.\"O SCSI bus of the machine.
後者の場合、CD-R はマシンのデフォルトの SCSI バスに
接続されていなければならない。
.\"O .IR Scsibus ,
.\"O .I target 
.\"O and 
.\"O .I lun
.\"O are integer numbers. 
.IR scsibus ,
.IR target , 
.I lun
は整数である。
.\"O Some operating systems or SCSI transport implementations may require to
.\"O specify a filename in addition.
OS や SCSI 転送の実装のなかには、これに加えてデバイスファイル名を
指定しなければならないものもある。
.\"O In this case the correct syntax for the device is:
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
.\"O or
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : target , lun .
この場合の正しい書式は、
.B dev=
.IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
または
.B dev=
.IR devicename : target , lun
である。
.\"O If the name of the device node that has been specified on such a system
.\"O refers to exactly one SCSI device, a shorthand in the form
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : @
.\"O or
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : @ , lun
.\"O may be used instead of
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun .
このようなシステムでは、指定されたデバイスノード名が
1 つの SCSI デバイスのみを参照している場合、
.B dev=
.IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
の代わりに、省略形の
.B dev=
.IR devicename : @
または
.B dev=
.IR devicename : @ , lun
を使うことができる。

.PP
.\"O To access remote SCSI devices, you need to prepend the SCSI device name by
.\"O a remote device indicator. The remote device indicator is either
.\"O .BI REMOTE: user@host:
.\"O or
.\"O .BR
.\"O .BI REMOTE: host:
リモートの SCSI デバイスにアクセスするためには、
リモートのデバイスであることを示すインジケータを
SCSI デバイス名の前に付ける必要がある。
リモートデバイスのインジケータは
.BI REMOTE: user@host:
または
.BI REMOTE: host:
という形式である。
.br
.\"O A valid remote SCSI device name may be:
.\"O .BI REMOTE: user@host:
.\"O to allow remote SCSI bus scanning or
.\"O .BI REMOTE: user@host:1,0,0
.\"O to access the SCSI device at 
.\"O .I host
.\"O connected to SCSI bus # 1,target 0 lun 0.
指定可能なリモート SCSI デバイス名は、
.BI REMOTE: user@host:
または
.BI REMOTE: user@host:1,0,0
という形式である。
1 つ目の形式では、リモートで SCSI デバイスのスキャンを行わせる。
2 つ目の形式では、
.I host
の SCSI bus # 1,target 0 lun 0 に接続されている
SCSI デバイスにアクセスする。

.PP
.\"O To make 
.\"O .B readcd
.\"O portable to all \s-2UNIX\s0 platforms, the syntax
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O .IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
.\"O is preferred as is hides OS specific knowledge about device names from the user.
.B readcd
を全ての \s-2UNIX\s0 系プラットフォームで汎用的にするためには、
.B dev=
.IR devicename : scsibus , target , lun
という書式が好ましい。
これによりデバイスについての各 OS 特有の知識を
ユーザーに対して隠蔽することができる。
.\"O A specific OS must not necessarily support a way to specify a real device file name nor a
.\"O way to specify 
.\"O .IR scsibus , target , lun .
またこれにより、実際のデバイスファイル名や
.IR scsibus , target , lun
を指定する方法を、特定の OS 上でサポートする必要がなくなる。

.PP
.\"O .I Scsibus 
.\"O 0 is the default SCSI bus on the machine. Watch the boot messages for more 
.\"O information or look into 
.\"O .B /var/adm/messages 
.\"O for more information about the SCSI configuration of your machine.
.I scsibus 
0 はマシンのデフォルトの SCSI バスである。
マシンの SCSI 設定についてのより詳細な情報は、
ブート時のメッセージや
.B /var/adm/messages 
を参照すること。
.\"O If you have problems to figure out what values for 
.\"O .IR scsibus , target , lun
.\"O should be used, try the 
.\"O .B \-scanbus
.\"O option of 
.\"O .BR cdrecord .
.IR scsibus , target , lun
にどのような値を指定してよいか分らない場合は、
.B cdrecord
の
.B \-scanbus
オプションを使ってみること。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.PP
.\"O If no options except the 
.\"O .I dev=
.\"O option have been specified, 
.\"O .B readcd
.\"O goes into intercative mode.
.\"O Select a primary function and then follow the instructions.
.I dev=
以外のオプションが何も指定されていない場合、
.B readcd
は対話モードになる。
対話モードでは、主要な機能を選択した後、指示に従って操作する。
.PP
.TP
.B \-version
.\"O Print version information and exit.
バージョン情報を表示して、終了する。
.TP
.BI dev= target
.\"O Sets the SCSI target for the drive, see notes above.
.\"O A typical device specification is
.\"O .BI dev= 6,0
.\"O \&.
CD レコーダの SCSI target を設定する。上記を参照。
一般的なデバイス指定では
.BI dev= 6,0
である。
.\"O If a filename must be provided together with the numerical target 
.\"O specification, the filename is implementation specific.
.\"O The correct filename in this case can be found in the system specific
.\"O manuals of the target operating system.
数値での target 指定の他に、
ファイル名も指定しなければならない場合、
そのファイル名は実装依存である。
この場合の正確なファイル名は、
対象とする OS の独自のマニュアルに書かれているだろう。
.\"O On a 
.\"O .I FreeBSD
.\"O system without 
.\"O .I CAM
.\"O support, you need to use the control device (e.g.
.\"O .IR /dev/rcd0.ctl ).
.I CAM
をサポートしてない
.I FreeBSD
システムでは、
.RI ( /dev/rcd0.ctl
などの) 制御デバイスを使う必要がある。
.\"O A correct device specification in this case may be
.\"O .BI dev= /dev/rcd0.ctl:@
.\"O \&.
この場合の正確なデバイス指定は、
.BI dev= /dev/rcd0.ctl:@
である。
.sp
.\"O On Linux, drives connected to a parallel port adapter are mapped
.\"O to a virtual SCSI bus. Different adapters are mapped to different
.\"O targets on this virtual SCSI bus.
Linux では、パラレルポートアダプタに接続されたデバイスは、
仮想 SCSI bus に対応付けされる。
別のパラレルポートアダプタは、
この仮想 SCSI bus の別の target に対応付けされる。
.sp
.\"O If no 
.\"O .I dev
.\"O option is present, 
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O will try to get the device from the 
.\"O .B CDR_DEVICE
.\"O environment.
.I dev
オプションが指定されていない場合、
.B cdrecord
は環境変数
.B CDR_DEVICE
からデバイスを取得しようとする。
.sp
.\"O If the argument to the
.\"O .B dev=
.\"O option does not contain the characters ',', '/', '@' or ':',
.\"O it is interpreted as an label name that may be found in the file
.\"O /etc/default/cdrecord (see FILES section).
.B dev=
オプションの引き数に文字 ',', '/', '@', ':' がない場合、
ファイル /etc/default/cdrecord に書かれたラベル名として扱われる
(「ファイル」セクションを参照すること)。
.TP
.BI timeout= #
.\"O Set the default SCSI command timeout value to 
.\"O .IR # " seconds.
.\"O The default SCSI command timeout is the minimum timeout used for sending
.\"O SCSI commands.
SCSI コマンドのデフォルトのタイムアウトを
.I #
秒にする。
SCSI コマンドのデフォルトのタイムアウトは、
SCSI コマンドを送る際の最短タイムアウトとして使われる。
.\"O If a SCSI command fails due to a timeout, you may try to raise the
.\"O default SCSI command timeout above the timeout value of the failed command.
.\"O If the command runs correctly with a raised command timeout,
.\"O please report the better timeout value and the corresponding command to 
.\"O the author of the program.
SCSI コマンドがタイムアウトにより失敗した場合、
タイムアウトの値を失敗したコマンドの
デフォルトのタイムアウトより長くすることができる。
タイムアウトを長くしてコマンドが正常に動作した場合は、
成功したときのタイムアウト時間とそのコマンドを、
このプログラムの著者に知らせて下さい。
.\"O If no 
.\"O .I timeout 
.\"O option is present, a default timeout of 40 seconds is used.
.I timeout 
オプションが指定されない場合、
デフォルトのタイムアウト 40 秒が使われる。
.TP
.BI debug= "#, " -d
.\"O Set the misc debug value to # (with debug=#) or increment
.\"O the misc debug level by one (with -d). If you specify
.\"O .I -dd,
.\"O this equals to 
.\"O .BI debug= 2.
(debug=# を使って) その他のデバッグレベルを # に設定する。
または (-d を使って) デバッグレベルを 1 つ上げる。
.I -dd
を指定した場合、
.BI debug= 2
と等しくなる。
.\"O This may help to find problems while opening a driver for libscg.
.\"O as well as with sector sizes and sector types.
libscg でドライバをオープンする際の問題や、
セクタサイズとセクタタイプの問題を発見するのに役立つ。
.\"O Using
.\"O .B \-debug
.\"O slows down the process and may be the reason for a buffer underrun.
.B \-debug
を使うと、処理が遅くなりバッファアンダーランの原因になるかもしれない。
.TP
.BR kdebug= "#, " kd= #
.\"O Tell the 
.\"O .BR scg -driver
.\"O to modify the kernel debug value while SCSI commands are running.
.B scg
ドライバに対して、SCSI コマンドを動作させているときの
カーネルデバッグレベルを変更させる。
.TP
.BR \-silent ", " \-s
.\"O Do not print out a status report for failed SCSI commands.
SCSI コマンドが失敗したときの状況報告を表示させない。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Increment the level of general verbosity by one.
.\"O This is used e.g. to display the progress of the process.
一般的な表示の詳細度を 1 つ上げる。
例えば、書き込み処理の進捗状況を表示するために使われる。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Increment the verbose level with respect of SCSI command transport by one.
.\"O This helps to debug problems
.\"O during the process, that occur in the CD-Recorder. 
SCSI コマンド転送に関する表示の詳細度を 1 つ上げる。
CD レコーダにおける書き込み処理での問題をデバックするのに役立つ。
.\"O If you get incomprehensible error messages you should use this flag
.\"O to get more detailed output.
簡単なエラーメッセージしか表示されない場合は、
このフラグを使って詳細な表示を行わせることができる。
.\"O .B \-VV
.\"O will show data buffer content in addition.
.B \-VV
を指定すると、データバッファの内容も表示される。
.\"O Using
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-VV
.\"O slows down the process.
.B \-V
や
.B \-VV
を使うと、処理が遅くなりバッファアンダーランの原因になるかもしれない。
.TP
.BI f= file
.TP
.B \-w
.\"O Switch to write mode. If this option is not present,
.\"O .B readcd
.\"O reads from the specified device.
書き込みモードに変更する。
このオプションが指定されない場合、
.B readcd
は指定されたデバイスから読み出しを行う。
.TP
.BI sectors= range
.\"O Specify a sector range that should be read.
.\"O The range is specified by the starting sector number, a minus sign and the
.\"O ending sector number.
読み出しを行うセクタの範囲を指定する。
範囲は「開始セクタ番号-終了セクタ番号」という形式で指定する。
.TP
.B \-notrunc
.\"O Do not truncate the outputfile when opening it.
出力ファイルをオープンするときに切り詰めない。

.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.PP
.\"O For all examples below, it will be assumed that the drive is
.\"O connected to the primary SCSI bus of the machine. The SCSI target id is
.\"O set to 2.
以下の例では、CD レコーダがマシンのプライマリ SCSI バスに
接続されていると仮定している。
SCSI ターゲット ID は 2 に設定されている。
.PP
.\"O To read the complete media from a CD-ROM writing the data to the file
.\"O .IR cdimage.raw :
CD-ROM のメディア全体を読み出して、ファイル
.I cdimage.raw
にデータを書き出す:
.PP
    readcd dev=2,0 f=cdimage.raw
.PP
.\"O To read sectors from range 150 ... 10000 from a CD-ROM writing the data to the file
.\"O .IR cdimage.raw :
CD-ROM のセクタ範囲 150 〜 10000 を読み出して、ファイル
.I cdimage.raw 
に書き出す:
.PP
    readcd dev=2,0 sectors=150-10000 f=cdimage.raw
.PP
.\"O To write the data from the file
.\"O .I cdimage.raw
.\"O (e.g. a filesystem image from 
.\"O .BR mkisofs )
.\"O to a DVD-RAM, call:
ファイル
.I cdimage.raw
のデータ (例えば、
.B mkisofs 
で作成したファイルシステムイメージ) を DVD-RAM に書き出す:
.PP
    readcd dev=2,0 -w f=cdimage.raw

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR cdrecord (1),
.BR mkisofs (1),
.BR scg (7),
.BR fbk (7).

.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.PP
.\"O If you don't want to allow users to become root on your system,
.\"O .B readcd
.\"O may safely be installed suid root. This allows all users or a group of
.\"O users with no root privileges to use 
.\"O .B readcd.
システム上でユーザーが root になるのを許可したくない場合は、
.B readcd
を root に suid することで安全にインストールできる。
これにより、root 権限を持たない全てのユーザーやユーザーのグループが
.B readcd
を使うことができる。
.\"O .B Readcd
.\"O in this case will only allow access to CD-ROM type drives-
この場合
.B readcd
は、CD-ROM タイプデバイスへのアクセスのみを許可する。
.\"O To give all user access to use 
.\"O .B readcd, 
.\"O enter:
全てのユーザーに
.B readcd
を使う権限を与えたいならば以下を実行する:
.PP
	chown root /usr/local/bin/readcd
.br
	chmod 4711 /usr/local/bin/readcd
.PP
.\"O To give a restricted group of users access to 
.\"O .B readcd
.\"O enter:
特定のユーザーのグループに
.B readcd
を使う権限を与えたいならば以下を実行する:
.PP
	chown root /usr/local/bin/readcd
.br
	chgrp cdburners /usr/local/bin/readcd
.br
	chmod 4710 /usr/local/bin/readcd
.PP
.\"O and add a group 
.\"O .I cdburners
.\"O on your system.
そして、システムの
.I cdburners
グループに追加する。
.PP
.\"O Never give write permissions for non root users to the 
.\"O .I /dev/scg?
.\"O devices unless you would allow anybody to read/write/format
.\"O all your disks.
ディスクの読み込み・書き出し・フォーマットを
全てのユーザーに許可したい場合を除き、
root 以外のユーザーに
.I /dev/scg?
への書き込みを許可してはならない。
.PP
.\"O You should not connect old drives that do not support
.\"O disconnect/reconnect to either the SCSI bus that is connected to the
.\"O CD-Recorder or the source disk.
CD レコーダや読み込み元のディスクが接続された SCSI バスに、
切断や再接続に対応していない昔のディスクを接続するべきではない。
.PP
.\"O When using 
.\"O .B readcd
.\"O with the broken 
.\"O .B "Linux SCSI generic driver."
.\"O You should note that 
.\"O .B readcd
.\"O uses a hack, that tries to emulate the functionality of the scg driver.
壊れた
.B "Linux SCSI generic driver"
で
.B readcd
を使う場合、
.B readcd
は scg ドライバの機能をエミュレートを試みるという対処療法を使う。
.\"O Unfortunately, the sg driver on 
.\"O .B Linux
.\"O has several severe bugs:
不幸なことに、
.B Linux
の sg ドライバには以下のような酷いバグがある:
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It cannot see if a SCSI command could not be sent at all.
SCSI コマンドが全く送られていないかを調べることができない。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It cannot get the SCSI status byte. 
.\"O .B Readcd
.\"O for that reason cannot report failing SCSI commands in some
.\"O situations.
SCSI status バイトを取得できない。
このため、
.B readcd
は失敗した SCSI コマンドをある状況下では報告できない。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It cannot get real DMA count of transfer. 
.\"O .B Readcd
.\"O cannot tell you if there is an DMA residual count.
転送時の実際の DMA カウントを取得できない。
.B readcd
は、DMA の残余カウントがあるかをユーザーに知らせることができない。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It cannot get number of bytes valid in auto sense data.
.\"O .B Readcd
.\"O cannot tell you if device transfers no sense data at all.
auto sense データのうち有効なバイト数を取得できない。
.B readcd
は、認識したデータをデバイスが全く転送していないかを
ユーザーに知らせることができない。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O It fetches to few data in auto request sense (CCS/SCSI-2/SCSI-3 needs >= 18).
auto request sense では非常に少ないデータしか取得できない
(CCS/SCSI-2/SCSI-3 では 18 以上でなければならない)。

.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.PP
.PP
.\"O A typical error message for a SCSI command looks like:
SCSI コマンドの典型的なエラーメッセージは以下のようなものである:
.sp
.RS
.nf
readcd: I/O error. test unit ready: scsi sendcmd: no error
CDB:  00 20 00 00 00 00
status: 0x2 (CHECK CONDITION)
Sense Bytes: 70 00 05 00 00 00 00 0A 00 00 00 00 25 00 00 00 00 00
Sense Key: 0x5 Illegal Request, Segment 0
Sense Code: 0x25 Qual 0x00 (logical unit not supported) Fru 0x0
Sense flags: Blk 0 (not valid)
cmd finished after 0.002s timeout 40s
.fi
.sp
.RE
.\"O The first line gives information about the transport of the command.
.\"O The text after the first colon gives the error text for the system call
.\"O from the view of the kernel. It usually is:
.\"O .B "I/O error
.\"O unless other problems happen. The next words contain a short description for
.\"O the SCSI command that fails. The rest of the line tells you if there were
.\"O any problems for the transport of the command over the SCSI bus.
1 行目はコマンドの転送についての情報である。
最初のコロンのあとの文字列は、
カーネルの視点からみたシステムコールのエラーである。
他の問題が起こらないときに、一般的なのは
.B "I/O error
である。
次の文字列は失敗した SCSI コマンドの簡単な説明である。
残りの部分は SCSI バス越しにコマンドを転送する際に
問題が発生したことを示す。
.\"O .B "fatal error
.\"O means that it was not possible to transport the command (i.e. no device present
.\"O at the requested SCSI address).
.B "fatal error
はコマンドを転送できなかったことを示す
(つまり、要求された SCSI アドレスにデバイスが存在しなかった)。
.PP
.\"O The second line prints the SCSI command descriptor block for the failed command.
2 行目には失敗したコマンドの SCSI コマンドの
ディスクリプターブロックが表示される。
.PP
.\"O The third line gives information on the SCSI status code returned by the 
.\"O command, if the transport of the command succeeds. 
.\"O This is error information from the SCSI device.
3 行目には、コマンドの転送が成功した場合に、
コマンドによって返される SCSI status コードについての情報が表示される。
これは SCSI デバイスからのエラー情報である。
.PP
.\"O The fourth line is a hex dump of the auto request sense information for the 
.\"O command.
4 行目はコマンドの auto request sense 情報の 16 進ダンプである。
.PP
.\"O The fifth line is the error text for the sense key if available, followed
.\"O by the segment number that is only valid if the command was a
.\"O .I copy
.\"O command. If the error message is not directly related to the current command,
.\"O the text
.\"O .I deferred error
.\"O is appended.
5 行目は (もし存在すれば) sense key のエラー文字列である。
コマンドが
.I copy
の場合にのみ、セグメント番号が続く。
エラーメッセージが現在のコマンドに直接関係していない場合、
.I deferred error
という文字列が表示される。
.PP
.\"O The sixth line is the error text for the sense code and the sense qualifier if available.
.\"O If the type of the device is known, the sense data is decoded from tables
.\"O in
.\"O .IR scsierrs.c " .
.\"O The text is followed by the error value for a field replaceable unit.
6 行目は sense code のエラー文字列である。
存在する場合には sense qualifier も表示される。
デバイスのタイプが既知の場合、
sense data は
.I scsierrs.c"
にあるテーブルを用いてデコードされる。
その文字列の後には field replaceable unit についてのエラー値が続く。
.PP
.\"O The seventh line prints the block number that is related to the failed command
.\"O and text for several error flags. The block number may not be valid.
7 行目には、失敗したコマンドに関連したブロック番号と
エラーフラグ文字列が表示される。
ブロック番号は有効ではないかも知れない。
.PP
.\"O The eight line reports the timeout set up for this commans and the time
.\"O that the command realy needed to be finished.
8 行目は、そのコマンドについて設定されたタイムアウトと、
実際にコマンドが完了するまでにかかった時間が表示される。

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ

.\"O .SH CREDITS
.SH 謝辞

.\"O .SH "MAILING LISTS
.SH メーリングリスト
.\"O If you want to actively take part on the development of cdrecord,
.\"O you may join the cdwriting mailing list by sending mail to:
.\"O .nf
.\"O .sp
.\"O 	other-cdwrite-request@lists.debian.org
.\"O .sp
.\"O .fi
.\"O and include the word 
.\"O .I subscribe
.\"O in the body.
cdrecord の開発に積極的に参加したいなら、本文に
.I subscribe
と書いたメールを
.nf
.sp
	other-cdwrite-request@lists.debian.org
.sp
.fi
へ送って、cdwriting メーリングリストに入ることができる。
.\"O The mail address of the list is:
.\"O .nf
.\"O .sp
.\"O 	cdwrite@lists.debian.org
.\"O .fi
.nf
.sp
	cdwrite@lists.debian.org
.sp
.fi
がメーリングリストのアドレスである。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.nf
J\*org Schilling
Seestr. 110
D-13353 Berlin
Germany
.fi
.PP
.\"O Additional information can be found on:
その他の情報は以下で入手できる。
.br
http://www.fokus.gmd.de/usr/schilling/cdrecord.html
.PP
.\"O If you have support questions, send them to:
サポートに関する質問は、
.PP
.B
cdrecord-support@berlios.de
.br
.\"O or
または
.B
other-cdwrite@lists.debian.org
.PP
にメールを送ってください。
.PP
.\"O Of you definitly found a bug, send a mail to:
明らかなバグを見付けた場合は、
.PP
.B
cdrecord-developers@berlios.de
.br
.\"O or
または
.B
schilling@fokus.gmd.de
.PP
にメールを送ってください。
.PP
.\"O To subscribe, use:
メーリングリストを購読するには、
.PP
.B
http://lists.berlios.de/mailman/listinfo/cdrecord-developers 
.br
.\"O or
または
.B
http://lists.berlios.de/mailman/listinfo/cdrecord-support 
.PP
を参照すること。
