.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999, 2001 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\"  published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul 27 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH nicknames 5 "May 1999" "YP Tools 2.8"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O /var/yp/nicknames - nickname translation table for NIS maps
.SH 名前
/var/yp/nicknames \- NIS マップ用のニックネーム変換テーブル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B nicknames
.\"O contains a list of aliases and the corresponding NIS maps.
.\"O There is one entry per line. The default
.\"O .B nicknames
.\"O table looks like:
.B nicknames
にはそれぞれの NIS マップに対する別名のリストが書かれている。
エントリは一行にひとつづつ書かれる。デフォルトの
.B nicknames
のテーブルは以下のようなものである。
.RS
.TP 25
.PD 0
.TP
\f3passwd
\f3passwd.byname
.TP
\f3group
\f3group.byname
.TP
\f3networks
\f3networks.byaddr
.TP
\f3hosts
\f3hosts.byname
.TP
\f3protocols
\f3protocols.bynumber
.TP
\f3services
\f3services.byname
.TP
\f3aliases
\f3mail.aliases
.TP
\f3ethers
\f3ethers.byname
.LP
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ypcat (1),
.BR ypmatch (1),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR ypwhich (1)
.LP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O The
.\"O .B yp-tools
.\"O package was written by Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>.
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
