.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 17 10:58:21 JST 1998
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Sep 14 JST 2003 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH ISINF 3 2002-07-27 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
isinf, isnan, finite \- 無限大や無効値(NaN)であるかをテストする
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "int isinf(double " value );
.sp
.BI "int isinf(double " value );
.sp
.BI "int isnan(double " value );
.sp
.BI "int finite(double " value );
.fi
.SH 説明
\fBisinf()\fP 関数は、
\fIvalue\fP が負の無限大を表す場合には \-1 を、
\fIvalue\fP が正の無限大を表す場合には 1 を、
その他の場合には 0 を返す。
.PP
\fBisnan()\fP 関数は、
\fIvalue\fPが"数値ではない(not-a-number)"(NaN:無効値)場合には
ゼロではない値を返し、その他の場合には 0 を返す。
.PP
.\"O The \fBfinite()\fP function returns a non-zero value if \fIvalue\fP is
.\"O neither infinite nor a "not-a-number" (NaN) value, and 0 otherwise.
\fBfinite()\fP 関数は、\fIvalue\fP が無限大か "数値ではない"(NaN)値の
場合には 0 を返し、その他の場合にはゼロではない値を返す。
.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.\"O C99 provides additional macros, such as the type-independent
.\"O .BR fpclassify() ,
.\"O .BR isinf()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR isnan() .
C99 は
.BR fpclassify() ,
.BR isinf() ,
.B isnan()
という、型に依存しない追加のマクロを提供している。
.SH 準拠
BSD 4.3
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fpclassify (3)
