.\" (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:04:55 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2004-11-11, Michael Kerrisk, <mtk-manpages@gmx.net>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Dec 26 15:29:06 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Feb 17 00:17:33 JST 2005
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH KILLPG 3  1993-04-04 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O killpg \- send signal to all members of a process group
killpg \- プロセスグループの全メンバにシグナルを送る
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int killpg(pid_t " pgrp ", int " signal );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR killpg ()
.\"O function causes signal
.\"O .I signal
.\"O to be sent to all the processes in the process group
.\"O .I pgrp
.\"O or to the processes' own process group if
.\"O .I pgrp
.\"O is equal to zero.
.BR killpg ()
関数は、プロセスグループ
.I pgrp
の全てのプロセスにシグナル
.I signal
を送る。
もし
.I pgrp
が 0 ならば、そのプロセス自身のプロセスグループにシグナルを送る。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I pgrp
.\"O is greater than 1, it is equivalent to:
.I pgrp
が 1 より大きい場合は、以下の呼び出しと等価である。
.nf
.sp
.in +0.5i
.B kill(\-pgrp , signal);
.in -0.5i
.fi
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The value returned is \-1 on error, or 0 for success.
エラーが発生した場合は \-1 が、成功した場合は 0 が返される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O Errors are returned in
.\"O .I errno
.\"O and can be one of the following:
以下に示すエラーの一つが
.I errno
に返される:
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O for an invalid signal,
シグナルが無効である。
.TP
.B EPERM
.\"O if the userid of the calling process is not equal to that of the
.\"O process the signal is sent to, and the userid is not that of the
.\"O superuser.
呼び出しプロセスのユーザ ID が、シグナルを送られるプロセスのユーザ ID と
一致せず、かつユーザ ID がスーパーユーザの ID ではない。
.TP
.B ESRCH
.\"O for a process group which does not exist, and
プロセスグループが存在しない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SUSv2, POSIX.1-2001
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR kill (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR sigqueue (2),
.BR signal (7)
