.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Dec 16 10:10:46 JST 1997
.\"         by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:59:43 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.TH MBLEN 3  "March 29, 1993" "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
mblen \- 一文字あたりのバイト数を求める
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "int mblen(const char *" s ", size_t " n );
.fi
.SH 説明
\fBmblen()\fP 関数は文字列 \fIs\fP の最初の \fIn\fP バイトをスキャンし、
一文字あたりのバイト数を返す。
\fBmblen()\fP 関数は以下の関数と等価である。
.sp
.RS
mbtowc((wchat_t *)0, s, n);
.RE
.sp
ただし、\fBmbtowc()\fP 関数のシフト状態の影響を受けない。
.SH "返り値"
\fBmblen()\fP は一文字あたりのバイト数を返す。
もし文字が無効もしくは 0 、また \fIs\fP が NULL ならば \-1 を返す。
.SH "準拠"
SVID 3, ISO 9899
.SH "関連項目"
.BR mbstowcs "(3), " mbtowc "(3), " wcstombs "(3), " wctomb (3) 

