.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Dec 16 10:29:47 JST 1997
.\"         by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:42:04 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.TH WCSTOMBS 3  "March 29, 1993" "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
wcstombs \- ワイド文字列をマルチバイト文字列に変換する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "size_t wcstombs(char *" s ", const wchar_t *" pwcs ", size_t " n );
.fi
.SH 説明
\fBwcstombs()\fP 関数は \fIpwcs\fP で示される配列のワイド文字の列を
マルチバイト文字の列に変換し、配列 \fIs\fP に \fIn\fP 文字までのマルチ
バイト文字を格納する。
.SH "返り値"
\fBwcstombs()\fP は \fIs\fP に格納されたバイト数を返す。
もし\fIpwcs\fP が無効なワイド文字を含む場合、\-1 を返す。
.SH "準拠"
SVID 3, ISO 9899
.SH "関連項目"
.BR mblen "(3), " mbtowc "(3), " mbstowcs "(3), " wctomb (3)

