.ig \"-*- nroff -*-
Copyright (C) 2000 Stein Gjoen

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.

Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
Translated 2001-04-01, NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
Updated 2001-12-06, NAKANO Takeo
Updated 2005-02-21, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
..
.TH LDP 7 2001-11-15 "LDP"
.\"O .SH "NAME"
.SH 名前
.\"O LDP \- Intro to the Linux Documentation Project, with help, guides and documents
LDP \- Linux Documentaion Project とヘルプ、ガイド、文書の紹介
.\"O .SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SH 説明
.\"O The Linux Documentation Project (LDP) provides a variety of
.\"O free documentation resources including
.\"O guides, FAQs, HOWTOs, and man-pages to the Linux community.
Linux Documentation Project (LDP) は様々なフリードキュメントを
Linux コミュニティに提供するプロジェクトです。
提供しているリソースには guide 文書、 FAQ 文書、HOWTO 文書、
man ページなどがあります。
.\"O .SH "AUTHORS"
.SH 著者
.\"O The various documents in the LDP archives are maintained by individual
.\"O authors, and are listed in the beginning of each HOWTO.
.\"O If you have
.\"O any questions or inputs to a document we encourage you to contact the
.\"O authors directly.
LDP アーカイブに含まれる様々な文書は、
それぞれ個々の著者によって維持・管理されています。
著者の名前は各 HOWTO の先頭に書かれているので、
文書に関して質問や提供情報があったら、
どうぞお気軽に著者に直接連絡を取ってください。
.\"O .SH "WEB PAGES"
.SH "WEB ページ"
.\"O The LDP has its own dedicated web site as do many of
.\"O the various translations projects which are linked from the
.\"O main LDP web site at:
LDP には web サイトがあります。
様々な言語への翻訳プロジェクトへのリンクも集められています。
場所は次の URL です。

.RS
\fBhttp://www\&.tldp\&.org/\fP
.RE
.\"O .SH "MAN PAGES"
.SH "MAN ページ"
.\"O A web page with status information for manual pages and translations
.\"O is found at:
マニュアルページおよびその翻訳に関する情報が書かれた
web ページは以下の URL です。

.RS
\fBhttp://www\&.win\&.tue\&.nl/~aeb/linux/man/\fP
.RE
.\"O .SH "MAILING LISTS"
.SH メーリングリスト
.\"O LDP has a number of mailing lists, such as
LDP には多くのメーリングリストがあります。
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.PD
\fB<announce@en\&.tlpd\&.org>\fP
.\"O Announcements from the LDP project
LDP プロジェクトからのアナウンス
.TP
\fB<discuss@en\&.tldp\&.org>\fP
.\"O General discussion on the LDP project
LDP プロジェクトに関する一般的な議論
.TP
\fB<docbook@en\&.tldp\&.org>\fP
.\"O Questions about the use of DocBook
DocBook の使用に関する質問
.PP
.\"O For subscription information, see the website.
購読に関する情報は、ウェブサイトを参照して下さい。
.PP
.\"O If you are interested in DocBook beyond the simple markup of your LDP
.\"O document, you may want to consider joining one of the OASIS DocBook
.\"O mailing lists.
.\"O Please see
.\"O \fBhttp://docbook\&.org/mailinglist/index\&.html\fP
.\"O for more information.
LDP 文書の単なる組版方法 (markup) としてではなく DocBook 自身に興味を
お持ちならば、 OASIS の DocBook メーリングリストのどれかに参加を考えても
いいかもしれない。詳しい情報は
\fBhttp://docbook\&.org/mailinglist/index\&.html\fP
を見て下さい。
.\"O .SH "FILES"
.SH ファイル
.\"O Most distributions include the HOWTOs and mini-HOWTOs in the installation
ほとんどのディストリビューションは、
HOWTO と mini-HOWTO を以下の場所に置いているようです。
.PD 0
.TP
.\"O \fI/usr/doc/\fP                  (old place for documentation)
\fI/usr/doc/\fP                    (古い文書置き場)
.TP
.\"O \fI/usr/share/doc/\fP             (new place for documentation)
\fI/usr/share/doc\fP               (新しい文書置き場)
.TP
.\"O \fI/usr/share/doc/HOWTO/\fP       (HOWTO files)
\fI/usr/doc/HOWTO/\fP              (HOWTO 文書)
.TP
.\"O \fI/usr/share/doc/HOWTO/mini/\fP  (mini-HOWTO files)
\fI/usr/share/doc/HOWTO/mini/\fP   (mini-HOWTO 文書)
.PD
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR info (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR xman (1x)
.PP
.\"O \fBinfo\fP pages as read with
.\"O .BR emacs (1)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR info (1)
.BR emacs (1)
や
.BR info (1)
で読める各 \fBinfo\fP ページ。
