.\" Copyright (C) 1995 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\" and Copyright 2008, 2015 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Written 11 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified 22 July 1995 by Michael Chastain <mec@duracef.shout.net>:
.\"   Derived from 'readdir.2'.
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 08:11:14 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 22 20:15:56 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Oct 12 JST 2003 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Wed Jul 30 JST 2008 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2009-02-12 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2012-04-30, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@gmail.com>
.\" Updated 2013-03-26, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@gmail.com>
.\"
.TH GETDENTS 2 2020\-11\-01 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
getdents, getdents64 \- ディレクトリエントリーを取得する
.SH 書式
.nf
\fBlong getdents(unsigned int \fP\fIfd\fP\fB, struct linux_dirent *\fP\fIdirp\fP\fB,\fP
\fB             unsigned int \fP\fIcount\fP\fB);\fP
.PP
\fB#define _GNU_SOURCE\fP        /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */
\fB#include <dirent.h>\fP
.PP
\fBssize_t getdents64(int \fP\fIfd\fP\fB, void *\fP\fIdirp\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fIcount\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.PP
\fI注\fP: \fBgetdents\fP() の glibc のラッパー関数は存在しない。「注意」の節を参照。
.SH 説明
これらはあなたの関心を引くようなインターフェースではない。 POSIX 準拠の C ライブラリインターフェースについては \fBreaddir\fP(3)
を見ること。 このページは、カーネルシステムコールの生のインターフェースについて 記載したものである。
.SS getdents()
\fBgetdents\fP()  システムコールは、オープン済みのファイルディスクリプター \fIfd\fP で参照されるディレクトリから
\fIlinux_dirent\fP 構造体をいくつか読み出し、 \fIdirp\fP が指しているバッファーに格納する。 \fIcount\fP
引き数はそのバッファーのサイズを示す。
.PP
\fIlinux_dirent\fP 構造体は以下のように宣言されている:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
struct linux_dirent {
    unsigned long  d_ino;     /* Inode number */
    unsigned long  d_off;     /* Offset to next \fIlinux_dirent\fP */
    unsigned short d_reclen;  /* Length of this \fIlinux_dirent\fP */
    char           d_name[];  /* Filename (null\-terminated) */
                      /* length is actually (d_reclen \- 2 \-
                         offsetof(struct linux_dirent, d_name)) */
    /*
    char           pad;       // Zero padding byte
    char           d_type;    // File type (only since Linux
                              // 2.6.4); offset is (d_reclen \- 1)
    */
}
.EE
.in
.PP
\fId_ino\fP は inode 番号である。 \fId_off\fP はディレクトリの先頭から次の \fIlinux_dirent\fP の先頭までの距離である。
\fId_reclen\fP はこの \fIlinux_dirent\fP 全体のサイズである。 \fId_name\fP はヌル文字で終わるファイル名である。
.PP
\fId_type\fP は、構造体の最後のバイトであり、ファイルタイプを示す。 \fId_type\fP は以下の値の一つを取る
(\fI<dirent.h>\fP で定義されている)。
.TP  12
\fBDT_BLK\fP
ブロックデバイスである。
.TP 
\fBDT_CHR\fP
キャラクターデバイスである。
.TP 
\fBDT_DIR\fP
ディレクトリである。
.TP 
\fBDT_FIFO\fP
名前付きパイプ (FIFO) である。
.TP 
\fBDT_LNK\fP
シンボリックリンクである。
.TP 
\fBDT_REG\fP
通常のファイルである。
.TP 
\fBDT_SOCK\fP
UNIX ドメインソケットである。
.TP 
\fBDT_UNKNOWN\fP
ファイルタイプが不明である。
.PP
\fId_type\fP フィールドは Linux 2.6.4 から実装されている。 これは \fIlinux_dirent\fP
構造体のうち、以前はゼロで埋められていた空間に配置されている。 従って、2.6.3 以前のカーネルでは、このフィールドにアクセスしようとすると 常に値
0 (\fBDT_UNKNOWN\fP)  が返される。
.PP
.\" kernel 2.6.27
.\" The same sentence is in readdir.2
現在のところ、 \fId_type\fP でファイルタイプを返す機能が完全にサポートされているのは、 いくつかのファイルシステムにおいてのみである
(Btrfs, ext2, ext3, ext4 はサポートしている)。 どのアプリケーションも、 \fBDT_UNKNOWN\fP
が返された際に適切に処理できなければならない。
.SS getdents64()
The original Linux \fBgetdents\fP()  system call did not handle large
filesystems and large file offsets.  Consequently, Linux 2.4 added
\fBgetdents64\fP(), with wider types for the \fId_ino\fP and \fId_off\fP fields.  In
addition, \fBgetdents64\fP()  supports an explicit \fId_type\fP field.
.PP
The \fBgetdents64\fP()  system call is like \fBgetdents\fP(), except that its
second argument is a pointer to a buffer containing structures of the
following type:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
struct linux_dirent64 {
    ino64_t        d_ino;    /* 64\-bit inode number */
    off64_t        d_off;    /* 64\-bit offset to next structure */
    unsigned short d_reclen; /* Size of this dirent */
    unsigned char  d_type;   /* File type */
    char           d_name[]; /* Filename (null\-terminated) */
};
.EE
.in
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は、読み込んだバイト数が返される。 ディレクトリの終わりならば 0 が返される。 エラーの場合は \-1 を返され、 \fIerrno\fP
に適切な値が設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP 
\fBEBADF\fP
ファイルディスクリプター \fIfd\fP が不正である。
.TP 
\fBEFAULT\fP
引き数が呼び出したプロセスのアドレス空間外を指している。
.TP 
\fBEINVAL\fP
結果用のバッファーが小さすぎる。
.TP 
\fBENOENT\fP
そのようなディレクトリは存在しない。
.TP 
\fBENOTDIR\fP
ファイルディスクリプターがディレクトリを参照していない。
.SH 準拠
.\" SVr4 documents additional ENOLINK, EIO error conditions.
SVr4.
.SH 注意
Library support for \fBgetdents64\fP()  was added in glibc 2.30; there is no
glibc wrapper for \fBgetdents\fP().  Calling \fBgetdents\fP()  (or \fBgetdents64\fP()
on earlier glibc versions) requires the use of \fBsyscall\fP(2).  In that case
you will need to define the \fIlinux_dirent\fP or \fIlinux_dirent64\fP structure
yourself.
.PP
Probably, you want to use \fBreaddir\fP(3)  instead of these system calls.
.PP
これらのシステムコールは \fBreaddir\fP(2)  を置き換えるものである。
.SH 例
.\" FIXME The example program needs to be revised, since it uses the older
.\" getdents() system call and the structure with smaller field widths.
下記のプログラムは \fBgetdents\fP()  の使用例を示したものである。 以下は、このプログラムを ext2 ディレクトリで実行した際に得られる
出力の例である。
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
$\fB ./a.out /testfs/\fP
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\- nread=120 \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
inode#    file type  d_reclen  d_off   d_name
       2  directory    16         12  .
       2  directory    16         24  ..
      11  directory    24         44  lost+found
      12  regular      16         56  a
  228929  directory    16         68  sub
   16353  directory    16         80  sub2
  130817  directory    16       4096  sub3
.EE
.in
.SS プログラムのソース
\&
.EX
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include <dirent.h>     /* Defines DT_* constants */
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <stdint.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <sys/syscall.h>

#define handle_error(msg) \e
        do { perror(msg); exit(EXIT_FAILURE); } while (0)

struct linux_dirent {
    unsigned long  d_ino;
    off_t          d_off;
    unsigned short d_reclen;
    char           d_name[];
};

#define BUF_SIZE 1024

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int fd;
    long nread;
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];
    struct linux_dirent *d;
    char d_type;

    fd = open(argc > 1 ? argv[1] : ".", O_RDONLY | O_DIRECTORY);
    if (fd == \-1)
        handle_error("open");

    for (;;) {
        nread = syscall(SYS_getdents, fd, buf, BUF_SIZE);
        if (nread == \-1)
            handle_error("getdents");

        if (nread == 0)
            break;

        printf("\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\- nread=%d \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\en", nread);
        printf("inode#    file type  d_reclen  d_off   d_name\en");
        for (long bpos = 0; bpos < nread;) {
            d = (struct linux_dirent *) (buf + bpos);
            printf("%8ld  ", d\->d_ino);
            d_type = *(buf + bpos + d\->d_reclen \- 1);
            printf("%\-10s ", (d_type == DT_REG) ?  "regular" :
                             (d_type == DT_DIR) ?  "directory" :
                             (d_type == DT_FIFO) ? "FIFO" :
                             (d_type == DT_SOCK) ? "socket" :
                             (d_type == DT_LNK) ?  "symlink" :
                             (d_type == DT_BLK) ?  "block dev" :
                             (d_type == DT_CHR) ?  "char dev" : "???");
            printf("%4d %10jd  %s\en", d\->d_reclen,
                    (intmax_t) d\->d_off, d\->d_name);
            bpos += d\->d_reclen;
        }
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
.EE
.SH 関連項目
\fBreaddir\fP(2), \fBreaddir\fP(3), \fBinode\fP(7)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 5.10 の一部である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
\%https://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
