.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt
.\" (michael@moria.de)
.\" Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 15:12:05 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Aug  1 16:27    1995 by Jochen Karrer
.\"                              <cip307@cip.physik.uni-wuerzburg.de>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 08:11:14 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Mon Feb 15 17:28:41 CET 1999 by Andries E. Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified, 27 May 2004, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"     Added notes on capability requirements
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.TH IOPERM 2 2013\-03\-12 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
ioperm \- ポートの入出力許可を設定する
.SH 書式
\fB#include <unistd.h>\fP /* for libc5 */
.br
\fB#include <sys/io.h>\fP /* for glibc */
.sp
\fBint ioperm(unsigned long \fP\fIfrom\fP\fB, unsigned long \fP\fInum\fP\fB, int
\fP\fIturn_on\fP\fB);\fP
.SH 説明
\fBioperm\fP()  sets the port access permission bits for the calling thread for
\fInum\fP bits starting from port address \fIfrom\fP.  If \fIturn_on\fP is nonzero,
then permission for the specified bits is enabled; otherwise it is
disabled.  If \fIturn_on\fP is nonzero, the calling thread must be privileged
(\fBCAP_SYS_RAWIO\fP).

Linux 2.6.8 より前のバージョンでは、この方法で設定できるのは 0x3ff 番地までの
I/Oポートに限られていた。これよりも大きなアドレスのポートに対しては \fBiopl\fP(2) 関数を使わなければならなかった。Linux 2.6.8
以降では、65,536 個の I/O ポートを指定できる。

Permissions are not inherited by the child created by \fBfork\fP(2); following
a \fBfork\fP(2)  the child must turn on those permissions that it needs.
Permissions are preserved across \fBexecve\fP(2); this is useful for giving
port access permissions to unprivileged programs.

このシステムコールはほとんど i386 アーキテクチャのためだけのものである。 その他の多くのアーキテクチャでは存在しないか、常にエラーを返す。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は 0 が返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、 \fIerrno\fP が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP 
\fBEINVAL\fP
\fIfrom\fP または \fInum\fP の値が不正である。
.TP 
\fBEIO\fP
(PowerPC で) このシステムコールはサポートしていない。
.TP 
\fBENOMEM\fP
.\" Could not allocate I/O bitmap.
メモリ不足。
.TP 
\fBEPERM\fP
呼び出し元スレッドに十分な権限がなかった。
.SH 準拠
\fBioperm\fP()  は Linux 特有の関数であり、移植を意図したプログラムで 使用してはならない。
.SH 注意
The \fI/proc/ioports\fP file shows the I/O ports that are currently allocated
on the system.

libc5 ではシステムコールとして扱い \fI<unistd.h>\fP にプロトタイプが存在している。 glibc1
にはプロトタイプは存在しない。 glibc2 は \fI<sys/io.h>\fP と \fI<sys/perm.h>\fP
の両方にプロトタイプを持っている。 後者は i386 のみで利用可能なので、使用すべきではない。
.SH 関連項目
\fBiopl\fP(2), \fBoutb\fP(2), \fBcapabilities\fP(7)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.50 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
