.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from linux/kernel/ioport.c (no copyright notice).
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified Tue Aug  1 16:47    1995 by Jochen Karrer
.\"                              <cip307@cip.physik.uni-wuerzburg.de>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 08:11:14 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Fri Nov 27 14:50:36 CET 1998 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified, 27 May 2004, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"     Added notes on capability requirements
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HORIMOTO Masafumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-09-29, HORIMOTO Masafumi
.\" Modified 1999-04-03, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2003-10-12, Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2005-02-24, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2013-05-06, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@gmail.com>
.\"
.TH IOPL 2 2020\-08\-13 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
iopl \- I/O 特権レベルを変更する
.SH 書式
\fB#include <sys/io.h>\fP
.PP
\fBint iopl(int \fP\fIlevel\fP\fB);\fP
.SH 説明
\fBiopl\fP()  は呼び出し元のスレッドの I/O 特権レベルを \fIlevel\fP の下位 2 ビットで指定した値に変更する。
.PP
通常のスレッドの I/O 特権レベルは 0 である。許可 (permissions) は親から子に継承される。
.PP
This call is deprecated, is significantly slower than \fBioperm\fP(2), and is
only provided for older X servers which require access to all 65536 I/O
ports.  It is mostly for the i386 architecture.  On many other architectures
it does not exist or will always return an error.
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は 0 が返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、 \fIerrno\fP が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP 
\fBEINVAL\fP
引き数 \fIlevel\fP が 3 より大きい。
.TP 
\fBENOSYS\fP
このシステムコールは実装されていない。
.TP 
\fBEPERM\fP
呼び出し元スレッドに \fBiopl\fP()  を呼び出すのに十分な権限がなかった。 I/O 特権レベルを現在の値より上げるには
\fBCAP_SYS_RAWIO\fP ケーパビリティが必要である。
.SH 準拠
\fBipc\fP()  は Linux 特有であり、 移植を意図したプログラムでは 使用してはいけない。
.SH 注意
.\" Libc5 treats it as a system call and has a prototype in
.\" .IR <unistd.h> .
.\" Glibc1 does not have a prototype.
glibc2 は \fI<sys/io.h>\fP と \fI<sys/perm.h>\fP の両方にプロトタイプを持っている。
後者は i386 のみで利用可能なので、使用すべきではない。
.PP
Prior to Linux 5.5 \fBiopl\fP()  allowed the thread to disable interrupts while
running at a higher I/O privilege level.  This will probably crash the
system, and is not recommended.
.PP
Prior to Linux 3.7, on some architectures (such as i386), permissions
\fIwere\fP inherited by the child produced by \fBfork\fP(2)  and were preserved
across \fBexecve\fP(2).  This behavior was inadvertently changed in Linux 3.7,
and won't be reinstated.
.SH 関連項目
\fBioperm\fP(2), \fBoutb\fP(2), \fBcapabilities\fP(7)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 5.10 の一部である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
\%https://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
