.\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" and Copyright (c) 2011, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_4_CLAUSE_UCB)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"     @(#)lseek.2	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-07-23 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1995-06-10 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified 1996-10-31 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 1998-01-17 by Michael Haardt
.\"   <michael@cantor.informatik.rwth-aachen.de>
.\" Modified 2001-09-24 by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified 2003-08-21 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" 2011-09-18, mtk, Added SEEK_DATA + SEEK_HOLE
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.TH LSEEK 2 2011\-09\-25 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
lseek \- ファイルの読み書きオフセットの位置を変える
.SH 書式
\fB#include <sys/types.h>\fP
.br
\fB#include <unistd.h>\fP
.sp
\fBoff_t lseek(int \fP\fIfd\fP\fB, off_t \fP\fIoffset\fP\fB, int \fP\fIwhence\fP\fB);\fP
.SH 説明
\fBlseek\fP()  関数は、ファイルディスクリプタ (descriptor)  \fIfd\fP に対応するオープンされたファイルのオフセットを、
\fIwhence\fP に基づき \fIoffset\fP 引き数の位置へ以下のように変更する:
.TP 
\fBSEEK_SET\fP
オフセットは \fIoffset\fP バイトに設定される。
.TP 
\fBSEEK_CUR\fP
オフセットは現在位置に \fIoffset\fP バイトを足した位置になる。
.TP 
\fBSEEK_END\fP
オフセットはファイルのサイズに \fIoffset\fP バイトを足した位置になる。
.PP
\fBlseek\fP()  関数は、オフセットをファイルの末尾を越えた位置に設定できる (但し、これによりファイルのサイズが変わらない)。
もしデータがこのオフセット位置以降に書き込まれた場合、 間の空隙の部分 ("穴 (hole)") の読み出しがあると、
実際にそこにデータを書き込まれるまでは NULL バイト (\(aq\e0\(aq) の列が返される。
.SS "Seeking file data and holes"
Linux バージョン 3.1 以降では、
\fIwhence\fP に以下の値も指定することができる。
.TP 
\fBSEEK_DATA\fP
Adjust the file offset to the next location in the file greater than or
equal to \fIoffset\fP containing data.  If \fIoffset\fP points to data, then the
file offset is set to \fIoffset\fP.
.TP 
\fBSEEK_HOLE\fP
Adjust the file offset to the next hole in the file greater than or equal to
\fIoffset\fP.  If \fIoffset\fP points into the middle of a hole, then the file
offset is set to \fIoffset\fP.  If there is no hole past \fIoffset\fP, then the
file offset is adjusted to the end of the file (i.e., there is an implicit
hole at the end of any file).
.PP
In both of the above cases, \fBlseek\fP()  fails if \fIoffset\fP points past the
end of the file.

These operations allow applications to map holes in a sparsely allocated
file.  This can be useful for applications such as file backup tools, which
can save space when creating backups and preserve holes, if they have a
mechanism for discovering holes.

.\" https://lkml.org/lkml/2011/4/22/79
.\" http://lwn.net/Articles/440255/
.\" http://blogs.oracle.com/bonwick/entry/seek_hole_and_seek_data
For the purposes of these operations, a hole is a sequence of zeros that
(normally) has not been allocated in the underlying file storage.  However,
a file system is not obliged to report holes, so these operations are not a
guaranteed mechanism for mapping the storage space actually allocated to a
file.  (Furthermore, a sequence of zeros that actually has been written to
the underlying storage may not be reported as a hole.)  In the simplest
implementation, a file system can support the operations by making
\fBSEEK_HOLE\fP always return the offset of the end of the file, and making
\fBSEEK_DATA\fP always return \fIoffset\fP (i.e., even if the location referred to
by \fIoffset\fP is a hole, it can be considered to consist of data that is a
sequence of zeros).
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、 \fBlseek\fP()  は結果のファイル位置をファイルの先頭からのバイト数で返す。 エラーの場合、値 \fI(off_t)\ \-1\fP
が返され、 \fIerrno\fP にエラーが指示される。
.SH エラー
.TP 
\fBEBADF\fP
\fIfd\fP がオープンされたファイルディスクリプタでない。
.TP 
\fBEINVAL\fP
.\" Some systems may allow negative offsets for character devices
.\" and/or for remote file systems.
\fIwhence\fP が有効な値ではない。または、seek の結果、ファイルオフセットが負に
なってしまうか、 seek 可能なデバイスの末尾を越えてしまう。
.TP 
\fBEOVERFLOW\fP
.\" HP-UX 11 says EINVAL for this case (but POSIX.1 says EOVERFLOW)
結果のファイルオフセットを \fIoff_t\fP 型で表現することができない。
.TP 
\fBESPIPE\fP
\fIfd\fP がパイプ、ソケット、FIFO を参照している。
.TP 
\fBENXIO\fP
\fIwhence\fP が \fBSEEK_DATA\fP か \fBSEEK_HOLE\fP で、
現在のファイルオフセットがファイルの末尾を超えた位置である。
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1\-2001.

.\" FIXME . Review http://austingroupbugs.net/view.php?id=415 in the future
\fBSEEK_DATA\fP and \fBSEEK_HOLE\fP are nonstandard extensions also present in
Solaris, FreeBSD, and DragonFly BSD; they are proposed for inclusion in the
next POSIX revision (Issue 8).
.SH 注意
いくつかのデバイスでは seek ができない。 POSIX はどのデバイスが \fBlseek\fP()  に対応すべきかは規定していない。

.\" Other systems return the number of written characters,
.\" using SEEK_SET to set the counter. (Of written characters.)
On Linux, using \fBlseek\fP()  on a terminal device returns \fBESPIPE\fP.

古いコードを変換する時は \fIwhence\fP の値を以下のマクロに置き換えること:
.TS
c c
l l.
old 	new
0	SEEK_SET
1	SEEK_CUR
2	SEEK_END
L_SET	SEEK_SET
L_INCR	SEEK_CUR
L_XTND	SEEK_END
.TE
.\" .PP
.\" SVr1-3 returns \fIlong\fP instead of \fIoff_t\fP,
.\" (ancient) BSD returns \fIint\fP.
.PP
\fBdup\fP(2)  や \fBfork\fP(2)  で作成されたファイルディスクリプタは、現在のファイル位置ポインタ (current file
position pointer) を共有しているので、 このようなファイルで移動を行うと競合状態を引き起こす可能性がある。
.SH 関連項目
\fBdup\fP(2), \fBfork\fP(2), \fBopen\fP(2), \fBfseek\fP(3), \fBlseek64\fP(3),
\fBposix_fallocate\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.50 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
