.\" Copyright (C) 1995, Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Created   Sat Aug 21 1995     Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" typo corrected, aeb, 950825
.\" added layout change from joey, 960722
.\" changed prototype, documented 0xffffffff, aeb, 030101
.\" Modified 2004-11-03 patch from Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.org>
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-02-23, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2003-04-24, Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2007-05-04, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH PERSONALITY 2 2015\-02\-01 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
personality \- プロセスを実行するドメインを設定する
.SH 書式
\fB#include <sys/personality.h>\fP
.sp
\fBint personality(unsigned long \fP\fIpersona\fP\fB);\fP
.SH 説明
Linux は、プロセス毎の異なる実行ドメイン、すなわち パーソナリティ (personality) をサポートしている。 実行ドメインは Linux
にシグナル番号にどのシグナルを割り付けるかを 教えたりする。また、実行ドメインシステムにより、 Linux は、 他の UNIX
風のオペレーティングシステムでコンパイルされたバイナリに対する限定的なサポートを提供している。

\fIpersona\fP が 0xffffffff 以外の場合、 \fBpersonality\fP() は呼び出し元の実行ドメインを \fIpersona\fP
で指定された値に設定する。 \fIpersona\fP に 0xffffffff を指定すると、変更を行わず、現在の persona 値を取得できる。

利用可能な実行ドメインのリストは \fI<sys/personality.h>\fP にある。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、以前の \fIpersona\fP が返される。エラーの場合は、\-1 が返され、 \fIerrno\fP が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP 
\fBEINVAL\fP
カーネルがパーソナリティを変更できなかった。
.SH 準拠
\fBpersonality\fP()  は Linux 固有であり、移植を意図したプログラムで使用すべきではない。
.SH 関連項目
\fBsetarch\fP(8)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.79 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
