.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)sigblock.2	6.7 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 10:09:15 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Fri Aug 11 1995 by Stephen Lee <sl14@cornell.edu>
.\" Modified 1995 by Mike Battersby <mib@deakin.edu.au>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar  3 23:27:30 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	signal			シグナル
.\"WORD:	mask			マスク
.\"WORD:	obsolete		廃止
.\"WORD:	block			禁止(block)
.\"WORD:	prototype		型宣言
.\"
.TH SIGBLOCK 2 1995-08-31 "Linux 1.3" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
sigblock, siggetmask, sigsetmask, sigmask \- シグナルのマスクを操作する
.SH 書式
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int sigblock(int " mask );
.sp
.B int siggetmask(void);
.sp
.BI "int sigsetmask(int " mask );
.sp
.BI "int sigmask(int " signum );
.SH 説明
このインターフェースは
.BR sigprocmask (2)
によって廃止 (obsolete) された。

.BR sigblock ()
システム・コールは
.I mask
で指定したシグナルを現在配送が禁止 (block) されている
シグナルの集合に追加する。
.PP
.BR sigsetmask ()
システム・コールは禁止されているシグナルの集合を
.IR mask 
で指定された新しい集合に完全に置き換える。
シグナルは
.I mask
の対応するビットが 1 の場合に禁止される。
.PP
現在禁止されているシグナルの集合は
.BR siggetmask ()
を使用して得ることができる。
.PP
.BR sigmask ()
マクロは与えられた
.I signum 
のマスクを組み立てるために提供される。

.SH 返り値
.BR siggetmask ()
現在のマスクされたシグナルの集合を返す。

.BR sigsetmask ()
と
.BR sigblock ()
は今までのマスクされたシグナルの集合を返す。
.SH 注意
これらの関数の型宣言(prototype)は全てのシステム・ヘッダが
インクルードされる前に
.B _BSD_SOURCE
が定義されている場合のみ与えられる。
.PP
.B SIGKILL
や
.B SIGSTOP
を禁止することはできない。
\- この制限はシステムによて無言のうちに適用される。

.SH 準拠
4.4BSD. これらの関数は 4.3BSD で登場し、廃止予定である。
新しいプログラムでは POSIX シグナルを使用すること。
.SH 関連項目
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigprocmask (2),
.BR signal (7)
