.\" This page is originally in the net-tools package.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu 13 Ap 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ETHERS 5 "April 26th, 1996" "" "File formats"
.\"O .SH NAME \"{{{roff}}}\"{{{
.\"O ethers \- Ethernet address to IP number database
.\"}}}
.SH 名前
ethers \- イーサーネットアドレスを IP 番号に変換するデータベース
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION \"{{{
.SH 説明
.\"O \fB/etc/ethers\fP contains 48 bit Ethernet addresses and their corresponding
.\"O IP numbers, one line for each IP number:
.B /etc/ethers
は、 48 ビットのイーサーネットアドレスと、
それに対応する IP 番号とからなる。
IP 番号ごとに一行を書く。
.sp
.RS
\fIEthernet-address\fP  \fIIP-number\fP
.RE
.sp
.\"O The two items are separated by any number of SPACE and/or TAB char
.\"O acters.   A \fB#\fP at the beginning of a line starts a comment
.\"O which extends to the end of the line.  The \fIEthernet-address\fP is
.\"O written as
.\"O .IR x : x : x : x : x : x ,
.\"O where \fIx\fP is a hexadecimal number between \fB0\fP and \fBff\fP
.\"O which represents one byte of the address, which is in network byte
.\"O order (big-endian).  The \fIIP-number\fP may be a hostname which
.\"O can be resolved by DNS or a dot separated number.
二つの要素は任意の個数のスペース文字またはタブ文字によって区切る。
\fB#\fP で始まる行は、行末までコメントとみなされる。
\fIEthernet-address\fP の書式は
.\"O .IR x : x : x : x : x : x 
のようなものである。各 \fIx\fP は \fB0\fP から \fBff\fP までの
16 進の整数で、アドレスの各 1 バイトをネットワークバイトオーダー
(big エンディアン) で表す。
\fIIP-number\fP は DNS で解決可能なホスト名か、
ドット区切りの数値である。
.\"}}}
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES \"{{{
.SH 例
08:00:20:00:61:CA  pal
.\"}}}
.\"O .SH FILES \"{{{
.\"O /etc/ethers
.\"}}}
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/ethers
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO" \"{{{
.\"O rarp(8)
.\"}}}
.SH 関連項目
.BR rarp (8)

