.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com), 15 April 1995.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified 1997-01-31 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2004-06-17 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 22 20:03:58 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Feb  3 03:15:15 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	buffer-dirty-flush	バッファー・ダーティー・フラッシュ
.\"WORD:	daemon			デーモン
.\"WORD:	flush			フラッシュ
.\"WORD:	tune			調整
.\"WORD:	long word		ロング・ワード
.\"WORD:	parameter		パラメーター
.\"WORD:	source file		ソース・ファイル
.\"
.TH BDFLUSH 2 2004-06-17 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O bdflush \- start, flush, or tune buffer-dirty-flush daemon
bdflush \- バッファー・ダーティー・フラッシュ・デーモンを起動、フラッシュ、調整する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/kdaemon.h>

.BI "int bdflush(int "  func ", long *" address );
.BI "int bdflush(int "  func ", long " data );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR bdflush ()
.\"O starts, flushes, or tunes the buffer-dirty-flush daemon.
.BR bdflush ()
はバッファー・ダーティー・フラッシュ (buffer-dirty-flush)・
デーモン (daemon) を起動、フラッシュ (flush)、調整 (tune) する。
.\"O Only a privileged process (one with the
.\"O .B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
.\"O capability) may call
.\"O .BR bdflush ().
.RB ( CAP_SYS_ADMIN
ケーパビリティ (capability) を持つ) 特権プロセスのみが
.BR bdflush ()
を呼び出すことができる。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I func
.\"O is negative or 0, and no daemon has been started, then
.\"O .BR bdflush ()
.\"O enters the daemon code and never returns.
.I func
が負か 0 でデーモンが起動されていなれば、
.BR bdflush ()
はデーモンのコードへ入り、戻ってこない。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I func
.\"O is 1,
.\"O some dirty buffers are written to disk.
.I func
が 1 ならば、
汚れた (dirty) バッファーがディスクへと書き込まれる。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I func
.\"O is 2 or more and is even (low bit is 0), then
.\"O .I address
.\"O is the address of a long word,
.\"O and the tuning parameter numbered
.\"O .RI "(" "func" "\-2)/2"
.\"O is returned to the caller in that address.
.I func
が 2 以上で偶数 (最小ビットが 0) ならば、
.I address
にロング・ワードでアドレスを指定し、そのアドレスに
.RI "(" "func" "\-2)/2" 
で指定された調節パラメーターが返される。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I func
.\"O is 3 or more and is odd (low bit is 1), then
.\"O .I data
.\"O is a long word,
.\"O and the kernel sets tuning parameter numbered
.\"O .RI "(" "func" "\-3)/2"
.\"O to that value.
.I func
が 3 以上で奇数 (最小ビットが 1) ならば、
.I data
をロング・ワードで指定し、その値を
.RI "(" "func" "\-3)/2"
で指定された調節パラメーターに設定する。
.PP
.\"O The set of parameters, their values, and their valid ranges
.\"O are defined in the kernel source file
.\"O .IR fs/buffer.c .
パラメーターの集合やその値、有効な範囲はカーネルのソース・ファイルの
.I fs/buffer.c 
に定義されている。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O If
.\"O .I func
.\"O is negative or 0 and the daemon successfully starts,
.\"O .BR bdflush ()
.\"O never returns.
.I func
が負か 0 で、デモーンの起動に成功した場合は
.BR bdflush ()
は返ってこない。
.\"O Otherwise, the return value is 0 on success and \-1 on failure, with
.\"O .I errno
.\"O set to indicate the error.
そうでなければ成功した場合には 0 が返される。失敗した場合には \-1 が返され、
.I errno
にそのエラーが指示される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBUSY
.\"O An attempt was made to enter the daemon code after
.\"O another process has already entered.
他のプロセスが既にデーモン・コードに入っているのに、入ろうと試みた。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O .I address
.\"O points outside your accessible address space.
.I address
がアクセス可能なアドレス空間の外部を指している。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O An attempt was made to read or write an invalid parameter number,
.\"O or to write an invalid value to a parameter.
不正なパラメーターの読み書きを試みたか、パラメーターへ不正な値を
書き込もうとした。
.TP
.B EPERM
.\"O Caller does not have the
.\"O .B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
.\"O capability.
呼び出し元に
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
ケーパビリティがない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O .BR bdflush ()
.\"O is Linux-specific and should not be used in programs
.\"O intended to be portable.
.BR bdflush ()
は Linux 特有であり移植を意図したプログラムで使用すべきではない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fsync (2),
.BR sync (2),
.BR sync (8),
.BR update (8)
