.\" Written by Ralf Baechle (ralf@waldorf-gmbh.de),
.\" Copyright (c) 1994, 1995 Waldorf GMBH
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 22 20:07:45 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2007-06-13, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.55
.\"
.\"WORD:	instruction cache	命令キャッシュ
.\"WORD:	data cache		データキャッシュ
.\"WORD:	flush			フラッシュ
.\"
.TH CACHEFLUSH 2 2007-05-26 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O cacheflush \- flush contents of instruction and/or data cache
cacheflush \- 命令キャッシュやデータキャッシュの内容をフラッシュする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <asm/cachectl.h>
.sp
.BI "int cacheflush(char *" addr ", int "nbytes ", int "cache );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR cacheflush ()
.\"O flushes the contents of the indicated cache(s) for the
.\"O user addresses in the range
.\"O .I addr
.\"O to
.\"O .IR (addr+nbytes-1) .
.\"O .I cache
.\"O may be one of:
.BR cacheflush ()
は
.I addr
から
.I (addr+nbytes-1)
の範囲のユーザアドレスに対応する
指定されたキャッシュをフラッシュする。
.I cache
には以下のいずれかを指定する:
.TP
.B ICACHE
.\"O Flush the instruction cache.
命令 (instruction) キャッシュをフラッシュする。
.TP
.B DCACHE
.\"O Write back to memory and invalidate the affected valid cache lines.
変更があったキャッシュラインをメモリに書き戻し、無効にする。
.TP
.B BCACHE
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR (ICACHE|DCACHE) .
.B (ICACHE|DCACHE)
と同じ。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR cacheflush ()
.\"O returns 0 on success or \-1 on error.
.\"O If errors are detected,
.\"O .I errno
.\"O will indicate the error.
.BR cacheflush ()
は成功した場合は 0 を、失敗した場合は \-1 を返す。エラーが検出された場合は
.I errno
にエラーが指示される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O Some or all of the address range
.\"O .I addr
.\"O to
.\"O .I (addr+nbytes-1)
.\"O is not accessible.
.I addr
から
.I (addr+nbytes-1)
の範囲のアドレスの全てまたは一部が
アクセス可能ではない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I cache
.\"O is not one of
.\"O .BR ICACHE ,
.\"O .BR DCACHE ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR BCACHE .
.I cache
パラメータが
.BR ICACHE ,
.BR DCACHE , 
.B BCACHE
のどれでもない。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
.\"O This Linux-specific system call is only available on MIPS-based systems.
この Linux 特有のシステムコールは MIPS ベースのシステムでのみ有効である。
.\" FIXME This system call was only on MIPS back in 1.2 days, but
.\" by now it is on a number of other architectures (but not i386).
.\" Investigate the details and update this page.
.\"O It should not be used in programs intended to be portable.
移植を意図したプログラムで使用すべきではない。
.\" Irix 6.5 appears to have a cacheflush() syscall -- mtk
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The current implementation ignores the
.\"O .I addr
.\"O and
.\"O .I nbytes
.\"O arguments.
.\"O Therefore, the whole cache is always flushed.
現在の実装では、引き数
.I addr
と
.I nbytes
は無視される。そのため、
常に全てのキャッシュがフラッシュされる。
