.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified 1993-07-21 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1995-04-15 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>:
.\"   Added 'fchdir'. Fixed bugs in error section.
.\" Modified 1996-10-21 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 1997-08-21 by Joseph S. Myers <jsm28@cam.ac.uk>
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Yosiaki Yanagihara
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1996-06-24, Yosiaki Yanagihara <yosiaki@bsd2.kbnes.nec.co.jp>
.\" Modified 1997-12-13, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified 2005-02-05, Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2006-08-12, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.39
.\" Updated 2007-09-04, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.64
.\"
.TH CHDIR 2 2010-09-26 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O chdir, fchdir \- change working directory
chdir, fchdir \- 作業ディレクトリの変更
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int chdir(const char *" path );
.br
.BI "int fchdir(int " fd );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR fchdir ():
.PD 0
.ad l
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED
.br
.\"O || /* Since glibc 2.12: */ _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
|| /* glibc 2.12 以降: */ _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.RE
.ad
.PD
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR chdir ()
.\"O changes the current working directory of the calling process to the
.\"O directory specified in
.\"O .IR path .
.BR chdir ()
は、呼び出し元プロセスの現在の作業ディレクトリ (current working directory) を、
.I path
に指定されたディレクトリに変更する。
.PP
.\"O .BR fchdir ()
.\"O is identical to
.\"O .BR chdir ();
.\"O the only difference is that the directory is given as an
.\"O open file descriptor.
.BR fchdir ()
は、ディレクトリがオープンされたファイル・ディスクリプターとして
指定される以外は、
.BR chdir ()
と同じである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功すると、0 を返す。失敗すると、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
に適切な値をセットする。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O Depending on the file system, other errors can be returned.
.\"O The more
.\"O general errors for
.\"O .BR chdir ()
.\"O are listed below:
ファイルシステムによっては他のエラーが返される事がある。
.BR chdir ()
で一般的なエラーを以下に挙げる:
.TP
.B EACCES
.\"O Search permission is denied for one of the components of
.\"O .IR path .
.\"O (See also
.\"O .BR path_resolution (7).)
.I path
の構成要素のいずれかに検索許可 (search permission) がない
.RB ( path_resolution (7)
も参照すること)。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O .I path
.\"O points outside your accessible address space.
割り当てられたアドレス空間外を
.I path
が指している。
.TP
.B EIO
.\"O An I/O error occurred.
I/O エラーが発生した。
.TP
.B ELOOP
.\"O Too many symbolic links were encountered in resolving
.\"O .IR path .
.I path
を解決する際に遭遇したシンボリック・リンクが多過ぎる。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.\"O .I path
.\"O is too long.
.I path
が長過ぎる。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O The file does not exist.
.\"Osato:
.\"Osato: file ではなく directory の間違いか?
.\"Osato:
そのディレクトリは存在しない。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.\"O Insufficient kernel memory was available.
カーネルに十分なメモリがない。
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.\"O A component of
.\"O .I path
.\"O is not a directory.
.I path
の構成要素がディレクトリではない。
.PP
.\"O The general errors for
.\"O .BR fchdir ()
.\"O are listed below:
.BR fchdir ()
で一般的なエラーを以下に挙げる:
.TP
.B EACCES
.\"O Search permission was denied on the directory open on
.\"O .IR fd .
.I fd
をディレクトリとしてオープンするための検索許可がない。
.TP
.B EBADF
.\"O .I fd
.\"O is not a valid file descriptor.
.I fd
が適切なファイル・ディスクリプターでない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.4BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The current working directory is the starting point for interpreting
.\"O relative pathnames (those not starting with \(aq/\(aq)).
現在の作業ディレクトリは、相対パス名 (\(aq/\(aq) で始まっていないパス名) を
解釈する際の開始点である。

.\"O A child process created via
.\"O .BR fork (2)
.\"O inherits its parent's current working directory.
.\"O The current working directory is left unchanged by
.\"O .BR execve (2).
.BR fork (2)
で作成された子プロセスは、親プロセスの現在の作業ディレクトリを
継承する。
.BR execve (2)
の前後で、現在の作業ディレクトリは変更されない。

.\"O The prototype for
.\"O .BR fchdir ()
.\"O is only available if
.\"O .B _BSD_SOURCE
.\"O is defined, or
.\"O .B _XOPEN_SOURCE
.\"O is defined with the value 500.
.BR fchdir ()
のプロトタイプが有効になるのは、
.B _BSD_SOURCE
を定義した場合か、
.B _XOPEN_SOURCE
を値 500 で定義した場合のみである。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR chroot (2),
.BR getcwd (3),
.BR path_resolution (7)
