.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This file is distributed according to the GNU General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the top level source directory for details.
.\"
.\" 2006-02-09, some reformatting by Luc Van Oostenryck; some
.\" reformatting and rewordings by mtk
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-07-29, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH DELETE_MODULE 2 2006-02-09 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O delete_module \- delete a loadable module entry
delete_module \- ローダブルモジュールのエントリを削除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <linux/module.h>
.sp
.BI "int delete_module(const char *" name );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR delete_module ()
.\"O attempts to remove an unused loadable module entry.
.\"O If
.\"O .I name
.\"O is NULL,
.\"O all unused modules marked auto-clean will be removed.
.\"O This system call requires privilege.
.BR delete_module ()
は、未使用のローダブルモジュールのエントリを削除しようとする。
.I name
が NULL の場合、未使用のモジュールのうち「自動削除 (auto-clean)」
マークがついたものを全て削除する。
このシステムコールを使うには特権が必要である。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功すると 0 を返す。エラーの場合 \-1 を返し、
.I errno
を適切に設定する。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBUSY
.\"O The module is in use.
そのモジュールは使用中である。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O .I name
.\"O is outside the program's accessible address space.
.I name
がプログラムがアクセスできるアドレス空間の外部にある。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I name
.\"O was an empty string.
.I name
が空文字列である。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O No module by that name exists.
その名前のモジュールが存在しない。
.TP
.B EPERM
.\"O The caller was not privileged
.\"O (did not have the
.\"O .B CAP_SYS_MODULE
.\"O capability).
呼び出し元が特権
.RB ( CAP_SYS_MODULE
ケーパビリティ) を持っていなかった。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O .BR delete_module ()
.\"O is Linux-specific.
.BR delete_module ()
は Linux 固有である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR create_module (2),
.BR init_module (2),
.BR query_module (2)
