.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 2006, Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-09-30 by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>, LDP v2.39
.\"
.TH FUTIMESAT 2 2009-12-13 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O futimesat \- change timestamps of a file relative to a \
.\"O directory file descriptor
futimesat \- ディレクトリファイルディスクリプタから相対的な位置にあるファイルのタイムスタンプを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.\"O .B #include <fcntl.h>           /* Definition of AT_* constants */
.B #include <fcntl.h>           /* AT_* 定数の定義 */
.sp
.BI "int futimesat(int " dirfd ", const char *" pathname ,
.BI "              const struct timeval " times [2]);
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR futimesat ():
.br
.\"O Since glibc 2.10: _XOPEN_SOURCE >= 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200809L
glibc 2.10 以降: _XOPEN_SOURCE >= 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200809L
.br
.\"O Before glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 より前:
_ATFILE_SOURCE
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This system call is obsolete.
.\"O Use
.\"O .BR utimensat (2)
.\"O instead.
このシステムコールは廃止予定である。
代わりに
.BR utimensat (2)
を使用すること。

.\"O The
.\"O .BR futimesat ()
.\"O system call operates in exactly the same way as
.\"O .BR utimes (2),
.\"O except for the differences described in this manual page.
.BR futimesat ()
システムコールは、この man ページで説明している違いがある以外は、
.BR utimes (2)
と全く同じように動作する。

.\"O If the pathname given in
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is relative, then it is interpreted relative to the directory
.\"O referred to by the file descriptor
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O (rather than relative to the current working directory of
.\"O the calling process, as is done by
.\"O .BR utimes (2)
.\"O for a relative pathname).
.I pathname
で指定されるパス名が相対パス名である場合、
ファイルディスクリプタ
.I dirfd
で参照されるディレクトリからの相対パス名として解釈される
.RB ( utimes (2)
では、相対パスは呼び出し元プロセスの
カレントワーキングディレクトリからの相対パスとなる)。

.\"O If
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is relative and
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O is the special value
.\"O .BR AT_FDCWD ,
.\"O then
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is interpreted relative to the current working
.\"O directory of the calling process (like
.\"O .BR utimes (2)).
.I pathname
が相対パスであり、かつ
.I dirfd
が特別な値
.B AT_FDCWD
である場合、
.I pathname
は
.RB ( utimes (2)
と同じように) 呼び出し元プロセスの
カレントワーキングディレクトリからの相対パス名として解釈される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is absolute, then
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O is ignored.
.I pathname
が絶対パスである場合、
.I dirfd
は無視される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success,
.\"O .BR futimesat ()
.\"O returns a 0.
成功した場合、
.BR futimesat ()
は 0 を返す。
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to indicate the error.
エラーの場合、\-1 が返されて、
.I errno
にはエラーを示す値が設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O The same errors that occur for
.\"O .BR utimes (2)
.\"O can also occur for
.\"O .BR futimesat ().
.BR utimes (2)
と同じエラーが
.BR futimesat ()
でも起こる。
.\"O The following additional errors can occur for
.\"O .BR futimesat ():
.BR futimesat ()
では、その他に以下のエラーが起こる:
.TP
.B EBADF
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O is not a valid file descriptor.
.I dirfd
が有効なファイルディスクリプタでない。
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is relative and
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O is a file descriptor referring to a file other than a directory.
.I pathname
が相対パスで、かつ
.I dirfd
がディレクトリ以外のファイルを参照するファイルディスクリプタである。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O .BR futimesat ()
.\"O was added to Linux in kernel 2.6.16.
.BR futimesat ()
は Linux カーネル 2.6.16 で追加された。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O This system call is nonstandard.
.\"O It was implemented from a specification that was proposed for POSIX.1,
.\"O but that specification was replaced by the one for
.\"O .BR utimensat (2).
このシステムコールは標準的ではない。
POSIX.1 で提案されていた仕様に由来して実装されたが、
その仕様は
.BR utimensat (2)
で置き換えられた。

.\"O A similar system call exists on Solaris.
Solaris には、これと同じようなシステムコールが存在する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.\"O .SS Glibc Notes
.SH 注意
.SS GLIBC についての注意
.\"O If
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is NULL, then the glibc
.\"O .BR futimesat ()
.\"O wrapper function updates the times for the file referred to by
.\"O .IR dirfd .
.I pathname
が NULL の場合、glibc の
.BR futimesat ()
ラッパー関数は
.I dirfd
で参照されるファイルの時刻を更新する。
.\" The Solaris futimesat() also has this strangeness.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR stat (2),
.BR utimensat (2),
.BR utimes (2),
.BR futimes (3),
.BR path_resolution (7)
