.\" Copyright (C) 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This file is distributed according to the GNU General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the top level source directory for details.
.\"
.\" Written by Kent Yoder.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul  8 03:28:55 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	Thread Local Storage	スレッド局所記憶
.\"
.TH GET_THREAD_AREA 2 2008-11-27 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O get_thread_area \- Get a Thread Local Storage (TLS) area
.SH 名前
get_thread_area \- スレッド局所記憶 (TLS) 領域を取り出す
.\"O .SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SH 書式
.B #include <linux/unistd.h>
.br
.B #include <asm/ldt.h>
.sp
.BI "int get_thread_area(struct user_desc *" u_info );
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR get_thread_area ()
.\"O returns an entry in the current thread's Thread Local Storage (TLS) array.
.\"O The index of the entry corresponds to the value
.\"O of \fIu_info\->entry_number\fP, passed in by the user.
.\"O If the value is in bounds,
.\"O .BR get_thread_info ()
.\"O copies the corresponding
.\"O TLS entry into the area pointed to by \fIu_info\fP.
.BR get_thread_area ()
は、カレント・スレッドのスレッド局所記憶
(Thread Local Storage; TLS) 配列の中のエントリを返す。
エントリのインデックスは、ユーザから引き数として渡される
\fIu_info\->entry_number\fP の値に対応している。
値が範囲内にある場合、
.BR get_thread_info ()
は対応する TLS エントリを
\fIu_info\fP で指された領域にコピーする。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR get_thread_area ()
.\"O returns 0 on success.
.\"O Otherwise, it returns \-1 and sets
.\"O .I errno
.\"O appropriately.
成功した場合、
.BR get_thread_area ()
は 0 を返す。
そうでない場合、 \-1 を返し、
.I errno
に適切な値をセットする。
.\"O .SH "ERRORS"
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O \fIu_info\fP is an invalid pointer.
\fIu_info\fP が不正なポインタである。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O \fIu_info\->entry_number\fP is out of bounds.
\fIu_info\->entry_number\fP が範囲外である。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O A version of
.\"O .BR get_thread_area ()
.\"O first appeared in Linux 2.5.32.
.BR get_thread_area ()
は Linux 2.5.32 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O .BR get_thread_area ()
.\"O is Linux-specific and should not be used in programs
.\"O that are intended to be portable.
.BR get_thread_area ()
は Linux 独自の関数であり、
移植を意図したプログラムでは使用すべきではない。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Glibc does not provide a wrapper for this system call;
.\"O call it using
.\"O .BR syscall (2).
glibc はこのシステムコールに対するラッパー関数を提供していない。
このシステムコールは呼び出すには
.BR syscall (2)
を使うこと。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR modify_ldt (2),
.BR set_thread_area (2)
