.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 1997-08-25 by Nicolas Lichtmaier <nick@debian.org>
.\" Modified 2004-06-17 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Modified 2008-11-27 by mtk
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 SUTO, Mitsuaki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-06-27, SUTO, Mitsuaki <suto@av.crl.sony.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2000-10-03, Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified 2004-12-29, Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-12-26, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.15
.\"
.TH GETDOMAINNAME 2 2009-09-27 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O getdomainname, setdomainname \- get/set domain name
getdomainname, setdomainname \- ドメイン名の取得・設定をする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int getdomainname(char *" name ", size_t " len );
.br
.BI "int setdomainname(const char *" name ", size_t " len );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR getdomainname (),
.BR setdomainname ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || (_XOPEN_SOURCE && _XOPEN_SOURCE\ <\ 500)
.RE
.ad
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O These functions are used to access or to change the domain name of the
.\"O host system.
これらの関数は、ホストシステムのドメイン名を取得・変更するために使われる。

.\"O .BR setdomainname ()
.\"O sets the domain name to the value given in the character array
.\"O .IR name .
.\"O The
.\"O .I len
.\"O argument specifies the number of bytes in
.\"O .IR name .
.\"O (Thus,
.\"O .I name
.\"O does not require a terminating null byte.)
.BR setdomainname ()
は、ドメイン名を、文字配列
.I name
で指定された値に設定する。
引き数
.I len
には、
.I name
のバイト数を指定する
(そのため、
.I name
では文字列終端の NULL バイトは必要ない)。

.\"O .BR getdomainname ()
.\"O returns the null-terminated domain name in the character array
.\"O .IR name ,
.\"O which has a length of
.\"O .I len
.\"O bytes.
.\"O If the null-terminated domain name requires more than \fIlen\fP bytes,
.\"O .BR getdomainname ()
.\"O returns the first \fIlen\fP bytes (glibc) or gives an error (libc).
.BR getdomainname ()
は、NULL 終端されたドメイン名を、
.I len
バイトの長さの文字配列
.I name
に格納して返す。
NULL 終端されたドメイン名が \fIlen\fP バイトより長い場合、
.BR getdomainname ()
は、(glibc では) 始めの \fIlen\fP バイトを返し、(libc では) エラーとなる。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合 0 が返る。失敗した場合 \-1 が返り、
.I errno
がエラーの内容に従って設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O .BR setdomainname ()
.\"O can fail with the following errors:
.BR setdomainname ()
は以下のエラーで失敗する可能性がある。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O .I name
.\"O pointed outside of user address space.
.I name
がユーザアドレス空間の外を指した。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I len
.\"O was negative or too large.
.I len
が負であるか、長すぎる。
.TP
.B EPERM
.\"O the caller is unprivileged (Linux: does not have the
.\"O .B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
.\"O capability).
.BR setdomainname ()
において、呼び出した人に特権がない
(Linux では
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
ケーパビリティ (capability) がない)。
.PP
.\"O .BR getdomainname ()
.\"O can fail with the following errors:
.BR getdomainname ()
は以下のエラーで失敗する可能性がある。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O For
.\"O .BR getdomainname ()
.\"O under libc:
.\"O .I name
.\"O is NULL or
.\"O .I name
.\"O is longer than
.\"O .I len
.\"O bytes.
libc での
.BR getdomainname ()
において、
.I name
が NULL ポインタであるか、
.I len
バイトより長い。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O POSIX does not specify these calls.
.\"O .\" But they appear on most systems...
POSIX では、これら関数は定義されていない。
.\" しかし、ほとんどのシステムにある...
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Since Linux 1.0, the limit on the length of a domain name,
.\"O including the terminating null byte, is 64 bytes.
.\"O In older kernels, it was 8 bytes.
Linux 1.0 以降では、ドメイン名の長さの上限は
終端の NULL バイトを含めて 64 バイトである。
もっと古いカーネルでは 8 バイトであった。

.\"O On most Linux architectures (including x86),
.\"O there is no
.\"O .BR getdomainname ()
.\"O system call; instead, glibc implements
.\"O .BR getdomainname ()
.\"O as a library function that returns a copy of the
.\"O .I domainname
.\"O field returned from a call to
.\"O .BR uname (2).
(x86 を含む) Linux のほとんどのアーキテクチャでは、
.BR getdomainname ()
というシステムコールは存在しない。
その代わり、glibc で
.BR getdomainname ()
がライブラリ関数として実装されており、この関数は
.BR uname (2)
の呼び出しで返された
.I domainname
フィールドのコピーを返す。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR gethostname (2),
.BR sethostname (2),
.BR uname (2)
