.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)getsockname.2	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 16:30:29 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 00:22:35 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Sun Mar 28 21:26:46 1999 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 SUTO, Mitsuaki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jun 26 20:36:49 JST 1997
.\"         by SUTO, Mitsuaki <suto@av.crl.sony.co.jp>
.\" Modified Sat Apr  3 14:56:26 JST 1999
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Feb  5 17:23:11 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH GETSOCKNAME 2 2008-12-03 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O getsockname \- get socket name
getsockname \- ソケットの名前を取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int getsockname(int " sockfd ", struct sockaddr *" addr \
", socklen_t *" addrlen );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR getsockname ()
.\"O returns the current address to which the socket
.\"O .I sockfd
.\"O is bound, in the buffer pointed to by
.\"O .IR addr .
.\"O The
.\"O .I addrlen
.\"O argument should be initialized to indicate
.\"O the amount of space (in bytes) pointed to by
.\"O .IR addr .
.BR getsockname ()
は、ソケット
.I sockfd
に結び付けられている現在のアドレスを、
.I addr
が指すバッファに格納して返す。
.I addrlen
引き数は、
.I addr
が指している領域のサイズ (バイト単位) に初期化しておかなければならない。
.\"O On return it contains the actual size of the socket address.
.\"O returned (in bytes).
関数が返る時には、
.I addrlen
にはソケットアドレスの実際のサイズ (バイト単位) が格納される。

.\"O The returned address is truncated if the buffer provided is too small;
.\"O in this case,
.\"O .I addrlen
.\"O will return a value greater than was supplied to the call.
渡されたバッファが小さ過ぎた場合は、返されるアドレスの末尾が切り詰められる。
この場合には、
.I addrlen
には、呼び出し時に指定された値よりも大きな値が格納される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合 0 を返す。失敗した場合 \-1 を返し、
.I errno
をエラーの内容に従って設定する。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
.\"O The argument
.\"O .I sockfd
.\"O is not a valid descriptor.
引き数
.I sockfd
が有効なディスクリプタ (descriptor) ではない。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O The
.\"O .I addr
.\"O argument points to memory not in a valid part of the
.\"O process address space.
引き数
.I addr
の指しているメモリがプロセスのアドレス空間の有効な部分ではない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I addrlen
.\"O is invalid (e.g., is negative).
.I addrlen
が不正である (例えば、負で場合など)。
.TP
.B ENOBUFS
.\"O Insufficient resources were available in the system
.\"O to perform the operation.
処理をするだけの十分なリソースがシステムに無い。
.TP
.B ENOTSOCK
.\"O The argument
.\"O .I sockfd
.\"O is a file, not a socket.
引き数
.I sockfd
がソケットではなくファイルである。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O SVr4, 4.4BSD (the
.\"O .BR getsockname ()
.\"O function call appeared in 4.2BSD), POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .\" SVr4 documents additional ENOMEM
.\"O .\" and ENOSR error codes.
SVr4, 4.4BSD
.RB ( getsockname ()
関数は 4.2BSD で追加された), POSIX.1-2001.
.\" SVr4 には他に ENOMEM と ENOSR のエラーコードについての記述がある。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The third argument of
.\"O .BR getsockname ()
.\"O is in reality an \fIint *\fP
.\"O (and this is what 4.x BSD and libc4 and libc5 have).
.\"O Some POSIX confusion resulted in the present \fIsocklen_t\fP,
.\"O also used by glibc.
.BR getsockname ()
の三番目の引き数は (4.x BSD や libc4, libc5 と同様に) 実際には \fIint *\fP
である。 glibc でも使われている現在の \fIsocklen_t\fP に関して、
POSIX には少し混乱がある。
.\"O See also
.\"O .BR accept (2).
詳しくは
.BR accept (2)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR bind (2),
.BR socket (2),
.BR getifaddrs (3),
.BR ip (7),
.BR socket (7),
.BR unix (7)
