.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from linux/kernel/ioport.c (no copyright notice).
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Tue Aug  1 16:47    1995 by Jochen Karrer
.\"                              <cip307@cip.physik.uni-wuerzburg.de>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 08:11:14 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Fri Nov 27 14:50:36 CET 1998 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified, 27 May 2004, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"     Added notes on capability requirements
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HORIMOTO Masafumi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-09-29, HORIMOTO Masafumi
.\" Modified 1999-04-03, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2003-10-12, Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2005-02-24, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH IOPL 2 2004-05-27 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O iopl \- change I/O privilege level
iopl \- I/O 特権レベルを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/io.h>
.sp
.BI "int iopl(int " level );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR iopl ()
.\"O changes the I/O privilege level of the calling process, as specified in
.\"O .IR level .
.BR iopl ()
は呼び出し元のプロセスの I/O 特権レベルを
.I level
で指定した値に変更する。

.\"O This call is necessary to allow 8514-compatible X servers to run under
.\"O Linux.
.\"O Since these X servers require access to all 65536 I/O ports, the
.\"O .BR ioperm (2)
.\"O call is not sufficient.
この関数は 8514 互換の X サーバを Linux で動作させるために必要である。
なぜならこの X サーバは 65536 個の I/O ポート全てへのアクセスを要求するので
.BR ioperm (2)
関数では不十分だからである。

.\"O In addition to granting unrestricted I/O port access, running at a higher
.\"O I/O privilege level also allows the process to disable interrupts.
.\"O This will probably crash the system, and is not recommended.
より高い I/O 特権レベルでの動作をさせることによって
I/O ポートアクセスの制限を解除することに加えて、プロセスが割り込みを
無効にすることもできるようになる。この機能は時としてシステムの破壊を
もたらすので勧められない。

.\"O Permissions are inherited by
.\"O .BR fork (2)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR exec (2).
.BR fork (2)
や
.BR exec (2)
を行った場合、特権は継承される。

.\"O The I/O privilege level for a normal process is 0.
通常のプロセスの I/O 特権レベルは 0 である。

.\"O This call is mostly for the i386 architecture.
.\"O On many other architectures it does not exist or will always
.\"O return an error.
このシステムコールはほとんど i386 アーキテクチャのためだけのものである。
その他の多くのアーキテクチャでは存在しないか、常にエラーを返す。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合には 0 を返す。エラーの場合には \-1 を返し、
.I errno
に適切な値が設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I level
.\"O is greater than 3.
引き数
.I level
が 3 より大きい。
.TP
.B ENOSYS
.\"O This call is unimplemented.
このシステムコールは実装されていない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B EPERM
.\"O The calling process has insufficient privilege to call
.\"O .BR iopl ();
.\"O the
.\"O .B CAP_SYS_RAWIO
.\"O capability is required.
呼び出し元プロセスに
.BR iopl ()
を呼び出すのに十分な権限がなかった。
.BR iopl ()
を呼び出すには
.B CAP_SYS_RAWIO
ケーパビリティが必要である。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O .BR iopl ()
.\"O is Linux-specific and should not be used in processes
.\"O intended to be portable.
.BR iopl ()
は Linux 特有の関数であり、移植を意図したプログラムで
使用してはならない。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Libc5 treats it as a system call and has a prototype in
.\"O .IR <unistd.h> .
.\"O Glibc1 does not have a prototype.
.\"O Glibc2 has a prototype both in
.\"O .I <sys/io.h>
.\"O and in
.\"O .IR <sys/perm.h> .
.\"O Avoid the latter, it is available on i386 only.
libc5 ではシステムコールとして扱い
.I <unistd.h>
にプロトタイプが存在している。
glibc1 にはプロトタイプは存在していない。
glibc2 は
.I <sys/io.h>
と
.I <sys/perm.h>
の両方にプロトタイプを持っている。
後者は i386 のみで利用可能なので、使用すべきではない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ioperm (2),
.BR capabilities (7)
