.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 2006, Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-09-27 by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>, LDP v2.39
.\"
.TH OPENAT 2 2009-12-13 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O openat \- open a file relative to a directory file descriptor
openat \- ディレクトリファイルディスクリプタから相対的な位置にあるファイルをオープンする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <fcntl.h>
.sp
.BI "int openat(int " dirfd ", const char *" pathname ", int " flags );
.BI "int openat(int " dirfd ", const char *" pathname ", int " flags \
", mode_t " mode );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR openat ():
.PD 0
.ad l
.RS 4
.TP 4
.\"O Since glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 以降:
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.TP
.\"O Before glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 より前:
_ATFILE_SOURCE
.RE
.ad
.PD
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR openat ()
.\"O system call operates in exactly the same way as
.\"O .BR open (2),
.\"O except for the differences described in this manual page.
.BR openat ()
システムコールは、この man ページで説明している違いがある以外は、
.BR open (2)
と全く同じように動作する。

.\"O If the pathname given in
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is relative, then it is interpreted relative to the directory
.\"O referred to by the file descriptor
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O (rather than relative to the current working directory of
.\"O the calling process, as is done by
.\"O .BR open (2)
.\"O for a relative pathname).
.I pathname
で指定されるパス名が相対パスである場合、
ファイルディスクリプタ
.I dirfd
で参照されるディレクトリからの相対パス名として解釈される
.RB ( open (2)
では、相対パスは呼び出し元プロセスのカレントワーキングディレクトリからの
相対パスとなる)。

.\"O If
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is relative and
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O is the special value
.\"O .BR AT_FDCWD ,
.\"O then
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is interpreted relative to the current working
.\"O directory of the calling process (like
.\"O .BR open (2)).
.I pathname
が相対パスであり、かつ
.I dirfd
が特別な値
.B AT_FDCWD
である場合、
.I pathname
は
.RB ( open (2)
と同じように) 呼び出し元プロセスの
カレントワーキングディレクトリからの相対パス名として解釈される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is absolute, then
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O is ignored.
.I pathname
が絶対パスである場合、
.I dirfd
は無視される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success,
.\"O .BR openat ()
.\"O returns a new file descriptor.
成功した場合、
.BR openat ()
は新しいファイルディスクリプタを返す。
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to indicate the error.
エラーの場合、\-1 が返されて、
.I errno
にはエラーを示す値が設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O The same errors that occur for
.\"O .BR open (2)
.\"O can also occur for
.\"O .BR openat ().
.BR open (2)
と同じエラーが
.BR openat ()
でも起こる。
.\"O The following additional errors can occur for
.\"O .BR openat ():
.BR openat ()
では、その他に以下のエラーが起こる:
.TP
.B EBADF
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O is not a valid file descriptor.
.I dirfd
が有効なファイルディスクリプタでない。
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.\"O .I pathname
.\"O is relative and
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O is a file descriptor referring to a file other than a directory.
.I pathname
が相対パスで、かつ
.I dirfd
がディレクトリ以外のファイルを参照するファイルディスクリプタである。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O .BR openat ()
.\"O was added to Linux in kernel 2.6.16.
.BR openat ()
は Linux カーネル 2.6.16 で追加された。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2008.
.\"O A similar system call exists on Solaris.
Solaris には、これと同じようなシステムコールが存在する。
.\" The 'at' suffix in Solaris is actually double sensed.  It
.\" primarily referred to "extended *at*tributes", which are
.\" handled by Solaris' O_XATTR flag, but was also intended
.\" to refer to the notion of "at a relative location".
.\"
.\" See the following for a discussion of the inconsistent
.\" naming of the *at() functions:
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/austin/mailarchives/ag/msg09103.html
.\" Subject: 	RE: The naming of at()s is a difficult matter
.\" From: 	Don Cragun
.\" Date: 	Tue, 14 Feb 2006 14:56:50 -0800 (PST)
.\"
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O .BR openat ()
.\"O and other similar system calls suffixed "at" are supported
.\"O for two reasons.
.BR openat ()
や "at" が後ろに付いたその他の同様のシステムコールは、
2 つの理由により提供されている。

.\"O First,
.\"O .BR openat ()
.\"O allows an application to avoid race conditions that could
.\"O occur when using
.\"O .BR open (2)
.\"O to open files in directories other than the current working directory.
1 つ目の理由は、
カレントワーキングディレクトリ以外のディレクトリにあるファイル群を
.BR open (2)
でオープンするときに起こる可能性がある競合状態 (race condition) を、
.BR openat ()
によってアプリケーションが回避できるためである。
.\"O These race conditions result from the fact that some component
.\"O of the directory prefix given to
.\"O .BR open (2)
.\"O could be changed in parallel with the call to
.\"O .BR open (2).
これらの競合状態は、
.BR open (2)
に指定されたパスのディレクトリ部分の
(/ で区切られた) いくつかの構成要素 (をオープンする処理) が、
.BR open (2)
を並列に呼び出す処理に変換された場合に起こる。
.\"Osato:
.\"Osato: 上記の訳は、語を補い過ぎかもしれない。
.\"Osato:
.\"O Such races can be avoided by
.\"O opening a file descriptor for the target directory,
.\"O and then specifying that file descriptor as the
.\"O .I dirfd
.\"O argument of
.\"O .BR openat ().
このような競合は、対象ディレクトリのファイルディスクリプタをオープンし、
そのファイルディスクリプタを
.BR openat ()
の
.I dirfd
引き数に指定することで回避できる。

.\"O Second,
.\"O .BR openat ()
.\"O allows the implementation of a per-thread "current working
.\"O directory", via file descriptor(s) maintained by the application.
2 つ目の理由は、
アプリケーションによって管理されるファイルディスクリプタ (群) を使うことで、
.BR openat ()
がスレッド毎のいわゆる「カレントワーキングディレクトリ」を実装できるためである。
.\"O (This functionality can also be obtained by tricks based
.\"O on the use of
.\"O .IR /proc/self/fd/ dirfd,
.\"O but less efficiently.)
(この機能は
.IR /proc/self/fd/ dirfd
を使った裏技でも実現できるが、あまり効率的ではない)。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR faccessat (2),
.BR fchmodat (2),
.BR fchownat (2),
.BR fstatat (2),
.BR futimesat (2),
.BR linkat (2),
.BR mkdirat (2),
.BR mknodat (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR readlinkat (2),
.BR renameat (2),
.BR symlinkat (2),
.BR unlinkat (2),
.BR utimensat (2),
.BR mkfifoat (3),
.BR path_resolution (7)
