.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Paul Gortmaker
.\" (gpg109@rsphy1.anu.edu.au)
.\" Wed Nov 29 10:58:54 EST 1995
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec  4 15:19:14 JST 1996
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Dec 14 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Sun May 23 JST 2004 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Thu Mar 24 JST 2005 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Thu Oct  9 JST 2005 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"WORD:	inline macro		インライン・マクロ
.\"WORD:	unresolved reference	解決できない参照
.\"WORD:	segmentation fault	セグメンテーション違反
.\"
.TH OUTB 2 1995-11-29 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
.\"O outb, outw, outl, outsb, outsw, outsl,
.\"O inb, inw, inl, insb, insw, insl,
.\"O outb_p, outw_p, outl_p, inb_p, inw_p, inl_p \- port I/O
outb, outw, outl, outsb, outsw, outsl,
inb, inw, inl, insb, insw, insl,
outb_p, outw_p, outl_p, inb_p, inw_p, inl_p \- ポート入出力
.SH 説明
.\"O This family of functions is used to do low-level port input and output.
.\"O The out* functions do port output, the in* functions do port input;
.\"O the b-suffix functions are byte-width and the w-suffix functions
.\"O word-width; the _p-suffix functions pause until the I/O completes.
この一連の関数はポートに対する低レベルの入出力に使用する。
out* 関数はポート出力、in* 関数はポート入力を行う。
語尾に b がついている関数はバイト単位、w がついている関数はワード単位である。
_p がついている関数は I/O が終了するまで待つ。
.LP
.\"O They are primarily designed for internal kernel use,
.\"O but can be used from user space.
.\"O .\" , given the following information
.\"O .\" in addition to that given in
.\"O .\" .BR outb (9).
これらの関数はもともとカーネル内部での使用を想定して設計されているが、
ユーザー空間からでも使用できる。
.\" 追加の情報は
.\" .BR outb (9)
.\" にある。

.\"O You compile with \fB\-O\fP or \fB\-O2\fP or similar.
.\"O The functions
.\"O are defined as inline macros, and will not be substituted in without
.\"O optimization enabled, causing unresolved references at link time.
\fB\-O\fP や \fB\-O2\fP などを指定してコンパイルすること。
これらの関数はインライン・マクロとして定義されており、
最適化を行わないと関数の展開が行われず、
リンクの時に「解決できない参照(unresolved reference)」が発生する。

.\"O You use
.\"O .BR ioperm (2)
.\"O or alternatively
.\"O .BR iopl (2)
.\"O to tell the kernel to allow the user space application to access the
.\"O I/O ports in question.
.\"O Failure to do this will cause the application
.\"O to receive a segmentation fault.
ユーザー空間のアプリケーションが I/O ポートにアクセスすることを
カーネルに教えるために
.BR ioperm (2)
もしくは
.BR iopl (2)
を使用すること。これを忘れるとアプリケーションはセグメンテーション違反
(segmentation fault) を受けとることになる。
.SH 準拠
.\"O .BR outb ()
.\"O and friends are hardware-specific.
.\"O The
.\"O .I value
.\"O argument is passed first and the
.\"O .I port
.\"O argument is passed second,
.\"O which is the opposite order from most DOS implementations.
.BR outb ()
とその仲間はハードウェア特有である。
.I value
引数が最初に渡され、
.I port
引数が二番目に渡される。
この順序はほとんどの DOS での実装とは逆である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR ioperm (2),
.BR iopl (2)
