.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de)
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 14:48:00 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 1995 by Mike Battersby (mib@deakin.edu.au)
.\" Modified 2000 by aeb, following Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 SUTO, Mitsuaki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jun 26 21:08:30 JST 1997
.\"         by SUTO, Mitsuaki <suto@av.crl.sony.co.jp>
.\"
.TH PAUSE 2 2008-10-06 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pause \- wait for signal
pause \- シグナルを待つ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 記述
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B int pause(void);
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR pause ()
.\"O causes the calling process (or thread) to sleep
.\"O until a signal is delivered that either terminates the process or causes
.\"O the invocation of a signal-catching function.
.BR pause ()
は、呼び出したプロセス (またはスレッド) を、
そのプロセスを終了させたり、シグナル捕捉関数が起動されるような
シグナルが配送されるまで、スリープさせる。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR pause ()
.\"O only returns when a signal was caught and the
.\"O signal-catching function returned.
.\"O In this case
.\"O .BR pause ()
.\"O returns \-1, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to
.\"O .\" .BR ERESTARTNOHAND .
.\"O .BR EINTR .
.BR pause ()
が返るのは、シグナルを受け取りシグナル捕獲関数から返った場合だけである。
この場合は
.BR pause ()
は \-1 を返し、
.I errno
に
.\" .B ERESTARTNOHAND
.B EINTR
が設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINTR
.\"O a signal was caught and the signal-catching function returned.
シグナルを受け取り、シグナル捕獲関数から帰ってきた。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR kill (2),
.BR select (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR sigsuspend (2)
