.\"
.\" Extended attributes system calls manual pages
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) Andreas Gruenbacher, February 2001
.\" Copyright (C) Silicon Graphics Inc, September 2001
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul  8 04:43:40 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	extended attributes	拡張属性
.\"WORD:	namespace		名前空間
.\"
.TH REMOVEXATTR 2 2001-12-01 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O removexattr, lremovexattr, fremovexattr \- remove an extended attribute
.SH 名前
removexattr, lremovexattr, fremovexattr \- 拡張属性を削除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.fam C
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <attr/xattr.h>
.sp
.BI "int removexattr(const char\ *" path ", const char\ *" name );
.BI "int lremovexattr(const char\ *" path ", const char\ *" name );
.BI "int fremovexattr(int " fd ", const char\ *" name );
.fi
.fam T
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Extended attributes are
.\"O .IR name :\c
.\"O value pairs associated with inodes (files, directories, symbolic links, etc.).
.\"O They are extensions to the normal attributes which are associated
.\"O with all inodes in the system (i.e., the
.\"O .BR stat (2)
.\"O data).
.\"O A complete overview of extended attributes concepts can be found in
.\"O .BR attr (5).
拡張属性は、inode (ファイル、ディレクトリ、シンボリックリンク等) に
関連付けられた
.IR name :\c
.I value
の対である。
これらは、システム上のすべての inode に関連付けられた通常の属性
.RB ( stat (2)
が返すデータ) を拡張するものである。
拡張属性のコンセプトは
.BR attr (5)
に書かれている。
.PP
.\"O .BR removexattr ()
.\"O removes the extended attribute identified by
.\"O .I name
.\"O and associated with the given
.\"O .I path
.\"O in the file system.
.BR removexattr ()
は、ファイルシステム内の指定された
.I path
に対応する、名前
.I name
の拡張属性を削除する。
.PP
.\"O .BR lremovexattr ()
.\"O is identical to
.\"O .BR removexattr (),
.\"O except in the case of a symbolic link, where the extended attribute is
.\"O removed from the link itself, not the file that it refers to.
.BR lremovexattr ()
は
.BR removexattr ()
と同じだが、シンボリックリンクの場合に、リンクが参照しているファイル
ではなく、リンクそのものの情報を削除する点だけが異なる。
.PP
.\"O .BR fremovexattr ()
.\"O is identical to
.\"O .BR removexattr (),
.\"O only the extended attribute is removed from the open file referred to by
.\"O .I fd
.\"O (as returned by
.\"O .BR open (2))
.\"O in place of
.\"O .IR path .
.BR fremovexattr ()
は
.BR removexattr ()
と同じだが、
.I path
の代わりに
.I fd
で参照されたオープン済みファイルから拡張属性を削除するだけである点が異なる
.RI ( fd
は
.BR open (2)
によって返される)。
.PP
.\"O An extended attribute name is a simple null-terminated string.
.\"O The
.\"O .I name
.\"O includes a namespace prefix; there may be several, disjoint
.\"O namespaces associated with an individual inode.
拡張属性の名前は、普通の NULL 終端された文字列である。
.I name
には、名前空間を表す接頭辞 (prefix) が含まれる。
個々の inode に対し、互いに独立な名前空間が複数あってもよい。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On failure, \-1 is returned and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合、0 が返される。
失敗した場合、 \-1 が返され、
.I errno
に適切な値がセットされる。
.PP
.\"O If the named attribute does not exist,
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to
.\"O .BR ENOATTR .
指定された名前の属性が存在しない場合、
.I errno
に
.B ENOATTR
がセットされる。
.PP
.\"O If extended attributes are not supported by the file system, or are disabled,
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to
.\"O .BR ENOTSUP .
拡張属性がそのファイルシステムでサポートされていない場合、
もしくは無効になっている場合、
.I errno
に
.B ENOTSUP
がセットされる。
.PP
.\"O The errors documented for the
.\"O .BR stat (2)
.\"O system call are also applicable here.
.BR stat (2)
システムコールの説明に書かれているエラーは
これらのシステムコールにも適用される。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These system calls have been available on Linux since kernel 2.4;
.\"O glibc support is provided since version 2.3.
これらのシステムコールはカーネル 2.4 以降の Linux で利用できる。
glibc でのサポートはバージョン 2.3 以降で行われている。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O These system calls are Linux-specific.
これらのシステムコールは Linux 独自である。
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHORS
.\" .SH 著者
.\"O .\" Andreas Gruenbacher,
.\"O .\" .RI < a.gruenbacher@computer.org >
.\"O .\" and the SGI XFS development team,
.\"O .\" .RI < linux-xfs@oss.sgi.com >.
.\"O .\" Please send any bug reports or comments to these addresses.
.\" Andreas Gruenbacher,
.\" .RI < a.gruenbacher@computer.org >
.\" と SGI XFS 開発チーム,
.\" .RI < linux-xfs@oss.sgi.com >。
.\" バグレポートやコメントは上記のアドレスまで送って下さい。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR getfattr (1),
.BR setfattr (1),
.BR getxattr (2),
.BR listxattr (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR setxattr (2),
.BR stat (2),
.BR attr (5),
.BR symlink (7)
