'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2007  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2007-10-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.66
.\" 
.TH SGETMASK 2  2007-07-05 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sgetmask, ssetmask \- manipulation of signal mask (obsolete)
sgetmask, ssetmask \- シグナルマスクの操作 (廃止予定)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "long sgetmask(void);"
.sp
.BI "long ssetmask(long " newmask );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O These system calls are obsolete.
.\"O .IR "Do not use them" ;
.\"O use
.\"O .BR sigprocmask (2)
.\"O instead.
これらのシステムコールは廃止予定であり、
「使用しないこと」。
代わりに
.BR sigprocmask (2)
を使用すること。

.\"O .BR sgetmask ()
.\"O returns the signal mask of the calling process.
.BR sgetmask ()
は、呼び出し元プロセスのシグナルマスクを返す。

.\"O .BR ssetmask ()
.\"O sets the signal mask of the calling process to the value given in
.\"O .IR newmask .
.\"O The previous signal mask is returned.
.BR ssetmask ()
は、呼び出し元プロセスのシグナルマスクを
.I newmask
で指定された値に設定し、変更前のシグナルマスクを返す。

.\"O The signal masks dealt with by these two system calls
.\"O are plain bit masks (unlike the
.\"O .I sigset_t
.\"O used by
.\"O .BR sigprocmask (2));
.\"O use
.\"O .BR sigmask (3)
.\"O to create and inspect these masks.
これら二つのシステムコールが扱うシグナルマスクは、
単純なビットマスクである (この点が
.BR sigprocmask (2)
で使用される
.I sigset_t
と異なる)。
これらのマスクを作成したり検査するには
.BR sigmask (3)
を使用すること。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR sgetmask ()
.\"O always successfully returns the signal mask.
.\"O .BR ssetmask ()
.\"O always succeeds, and returns the previous signal mask.
.BR sgetmask ()
は常に成功し、シグナルマスクを返す。
.BR ssetmask ()
は常に成功し、直前のシグナルマスクを返す。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O These system calls always succeed.
これらのシステムコールは常に成功する。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
.\"O These system calls are Linux-specific.
これらのシステムコールは Linux 固有である。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Glibc does not provide wrappers for these system calls; use
.\"O .BR syscall (2).
glibc はこれらのシステムコールに対するラッパー関数を提供していない。
.BR syscall (2)
を使用すること。

.\"O These system calls are unaware of signal numbers greater than 31
.\"O (i.e., real-time signals).
これらのシステムコールは、
31 より大きいシグナル番号 (つまり、リアルタイムシグナル) を扱えない。

.\"O It is not possible to block
.\"O .B SIGSTOP
.\"O or
.\"O .BR SIGKILL .
.B SIGSTOP
や
.B SIGKILL
をブロックすることはできない。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR sigprocmask (2),
.BR signal (7)
