.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Michael Kerrisk
.\" based on earlier work by faith@cs.unc.edu and
.\" Mike Battersby <mib@deakin.edu.au>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" 2005-09-15, mtk, Created new page by splitting off from sigaction.2
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2005-10-03, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SIGPROCMASK 2 2008-10-17 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sigprocmask \- examine and change blocked signals
sigprocmask \- 禁止するシグナルの確認と変更
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int sigprocmask(int " how ", const sigset_t *" set ,
.BI "sigset_t *" oldset );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR sigprocmask ():
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 1 || _XOPEN_SOURCE || _POSIX_SOURCE
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR sigprocmask ()
.\"O is used to fetch and/or change the signal mask of the calling thread.
.\"O The signal mask is the set of signals whose delivery is currently
.\"O blocked for the caller
.\"O (see also
.\"O .BR signal (7)
.\"O for more details).
.BR sigprocmask ()
を使うと、呼び出したスレッドのシグナルマスクの取得/変更ができる。
シグナルマスクは、呼び出し元に対して現在配送が禁止されているシグナルの
集合のことである (詳細については
.BR signal (7)
も参照のこと)。

.\"O The behavior of the call is dependent on the value of
.\"O .IR how ,
.\"O as follows.
このコールの動作は
.I how
の値によって決まる:
.TP
.B SIG_BLOCK
.\"O The set of blocked signals is the union of the current set and the
.\"O .I set
.\"O argument.
禁止されたシグナルの集合は現在の値と
.I set
引き数を結合したものとなる。
.TP
.B SIG_UNBLOCK
.\"O The signals in
.\"O .I set
.\"O are removed from the current set of blocked signals.
.\"O It is permissible to attempt to unblock a signal which is not blocked.
現在禁止されているシグナルの集合から
.I set
にあるシグナルを取り除く。禁止されていないシグナルを取り除こうと
することも認められている。
.TP
.B SIG_SETMASK
.\"O The set of blocked signals is set to the argument
.\"O .IR set .
禁止されているシグナルの集合に
.I set
引き数を設定する。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I oldset
.\"O is non-NULL, the previous value of the signal mask is stored in
.\"O .IR oldset .
.I oldset
が NULL でなければ、シグナルマスクの今までの値を
.I oldset
に格納する。

.\"O If
.\"O .I set
.\"O is NULL, then the signal mask is unchanged (i.e.,
.\"O .I how
.\"O is ignored),
.\"O but the current value of the signal mask is nevertheless returned in
.\"O .I oldset
.\"O (if it is not NULL).
.I set
が NULL であれば、シグナルマスクは変更されない (すなわち、
.I how
は無視される)。
.I set
の値にかかわらず、現在のシグナルマスクの値は
.I oldset
に入れて返される (但し、
.I oldset
が NULL でない場合)。

.\"O The use of
.\"O .BR sigprocmask ()
.\"O is unspecified in a multithreaded process; see
.\"O .BR pthread_sigmask (3).
マルチスレッドのプロセスで
.BR sigprocmask ()
を使用した場合の動作は規定されていない。
.BR pthread_sigmask (3)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR sigprocmask ()
.\"O returns 0 on success and \-1 on error.
.BR sigprocmask ()
は成功すれば 0 を返し、エラーならば \-1 を返す。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.B EINVAL
.\"O The value specified in
.\"O .I how
.\"O was invalid.
.I how
に指定された値が有効ではない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O It is not possible to block
.\"O .BR SIGKILL " or " SIGSTOP .
.\"O Attempts to do so are silently ignored.
.B SIGKILL
や
.B SIGSTOP
を禁止することはできない。
禁止しようとしても黙って無視される。

.\"O Each of the threads in a process has its own signal mask.
プロセス内の各スレッドはそれぞれ専用のシグナルマスクを持つ。

.\"O A child created via
.\"O .BR fork (2)
.\"O inherits a copy of its parent's signal mask;
.\"O the signal mask is preserved across
.\"O .BR execve (2).
.BR fork (2)
経由で作成された子プロセスは親プロセスのシグナルマスクのコピーを継承する。
.BR execve (2)
の前後でシグナルマスクは保持される。

.\"O If
.\"O .BR SIGBUS ,
.\"O .BR SIGFPE ,
.\"O .BR SIGILL ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B SIGSEGV
.\"O are generated
.\"O while they are blocked, the result is undefined,
.\"O unless the signal was generated by the
.\"O .BR kill (2),
.\"O .BR sigqueue (2),
.\"O or
.\"O .BR raise (3).
シグナル
.BR SIGBUS ,
.BR SIGFPE ,
.BR SIGILL ,
.B SIGSEGV
が禁止されている間に生成された場合で、
そのシグナルが
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigqueue (2),
.BR raise (3)
によって生成されたものでないときには、
その後の動作は未定義である。
.PP
.\"O See
.\"O .BR sigsetops (3)
.\"O for details on manipulating signal sets.
シグナル集合の操作に関する詳細は
.BR sigsetops (3)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR kill (2),
.BR pause (2),
.BR sigaction (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR sigpending (2),
.BR sigqueue (2),
.BR sigsuspend (2),
.BR pthread_sigmask (3),
.BR sigsetops (3),
.BR signal (7)
