.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Michael Kerrisk
.\" based on earlier work by faith@cs.unc.edu and
.\" Mike Battersby <mib@deakin.edu.au>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" 2005-09-15, mtk, Created new page by splitting off from sigaction.2
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2005-10-03, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-12-05, Akihiro MOTOKI, Catch up to LDP man-pages 2.16
.\"
.\"WORD:	pending			処理待ちの
.\"
.TH SIGPENDING 2 2008-10-04 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sigpending \- examine pending signals
sigpending \- 処理待ちのシグナルの検査
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int sigpending(sigset_t *" set );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR sigpending ():
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 1 || _XOPEN_SOURCE || _POSIX_SOURCE
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.PP
.\"O .BR sigpending ()
.\"O returns the set of signals that are pending for delivery to the calling
.\"O thread (i.e., the signals which have been raised while blocked).
.\"O The mask of pending signals is returned in
.\"O .IR set .
.BR sigpending ()
は、呼び出し元のスレッドへの配送を待っている (pending) シグナル集合
(すなわち、禁止中に発生したシグナル) を返す。
処理待ちのシグナルのマスクが
.I set
に格納される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR sigpending ()
.\"O returns 0 on success and \-1 on error.
.BR sigpending ()
は成功すれば 0 を返し、エラーならば \-1 を返す。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O .I set
.\"O points to memory which is not a valid part of the process address space.
.I set
が指しているメモリが、プロセスのアドレス空間の有効な部分ではない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O See
.\"O .BR sigsetops (3)
.\"O for details on manipulating signal sets.
シグナル集合の操作に関する詳細は
.BR sigsetops (3)
を参照のこと。

.\"O The set of signals that is pending for a thread
.\"O is the union of the set of signals that is pending for that thread
.\"O and the set of threads that is pending for the process as a whole; see
.\"O .BR signal (7).
あるスレッドに対する処理待ちのシグナルの集合は、
そのスレッド自体への処理待ちのシグナル集合と、プロセス全体への処理待ちの
シグナル集合をあわせたものである。
.BR signal (7)
参照。

.\"O A child created via
.\"O .BR fork (2)
.\"O initially has an empty pending signal set;
.\"O the pending signal set is preserved across an
.\"O .BR execve (2).
.BR fork (2)
経由で作成された子プロセスの処理待ちシグナル集合は最初は空である。
.BR execve (2)
の前後で、処理待ちシグナル集合は保持される。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O In versions of glibc up to and including 2.2.1,
.\"O there is a bug in the wrapper function for
.\"O .BR sigpending ()
.\"O which means that information about pending real-time signals
.\"O is not correctly returned.
バージョン 2.2.1 以前の glibc では、
.BR sigpending ()
のラッパー関数に、処理待ちのリアルタイムシグナルに関する情報が
正しく返されないというバグがある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigaction (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR sigprocmask (2),
.BR sigsuspend (2),
.BR sigsetops (3),
.BR signal (7)
