.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)socketpair.2	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1996-10-22 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2002-07-22 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Modified 2004-06-17 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" 2008-10-11, mtk: Add description of SOCK_NONBLOCK and SOCK_CLOEXEC
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-03-03, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2002-09-24, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-02-24, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-11-09, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.13
.\"
.\"WORD:	socket			ソケット
.\"WORD:	pair			ペア
.\"WORD:	domain			ドメイン
.\"WORD:	descriptor		ディスクリプタ
.\"WORD:	family			ファミリ
.\"WORD:	implement		実装
.\"
.TH SOCKETPAIR 2 2008-10-11 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O socketpair \- create a pair of connected sockets
.SH 名前
socketpair \- 接続されたソケットのペアを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .BR "#include <sys/types.h>" "          /* See NOTES */"
.BR "#include <sys/types.h>" "          /* 「注意」参照 */"
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int socketpair(int " domain ", int " type ", int " protocol \
", int " sv [2]);
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR socketpair ()
.\"O call creates an unnamed pair of connected sockets in the specified
.\"O .IR domain ,
.\"O of the specified
.\"O .IR type ,
.\"O and using the optionally specified
.\"O .IR protocol .
.BR socketpair ()
は、指定されたドメイン
.I domain
に指定された種類
.I type
で名前のないソケットの接続されたペアを作成する。
.I protocol
が指定されると、このプロトコルを用いる。
.\"O For further details of these arguments, see
.\"O .BR socket (2).
これらの引き数の詳細は
.BR socket (2)
を参照のこと。

.\"O The descriptors used in referencing the new sockets are returned in
.\"O .IR sv [0]
.\"O and
.\"O .IR sv [1].
新しいソケットの参照に使用するディスクリプタ (descriptor) が
.IR sv [0]
と
.IR sv [1]
に返される。
.\"O The two sockets are indistinguishable.
二つのソケットは全く同じである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合はゼロを返す、エラーの場合は \-1 を返し、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EAFNOSUPPORT
.\"O The specified address family is not supported on this machine.
このマシンでは指定されたアドレス・ファミリがサポートされていない。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O The address
.\"O .I sv
.\"O does not specify a valid part of the process address space.
アドレス
.I sv
がこのプロセスで使えるアドレス空間を指定していない。
.TP
.B EMFILE
.\"O Too many descriptors are in use by this process.
このプロセスが使用しているディスクリプタの数が多すぎる。
.TP
.B ENFILE
.\"O The system limit on the total number of open files has been reached.
オープンされたファイルの総数がシステム全体の上限に達した。
.TP
.B EOPNOTSUPP
.\"O The specified protocol does not support creation of socket pairs.
指定されたプロトコルではソケットのペアの作成がサポートされていない。
.TP
.B EPROTONOSUPPORT
.\"O The specified protocol is not supported on this machine.
このマシンでは指定されたプロトコルがサポートされていない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O 4.4BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O The
.\"O .BR socketpair ()
.\"O function call appeared in 4.2BSD.
.\"O It is generally portable to/from
.\"O non-BSD systems supporting clones of the BSD socket layer (including
.\"O System V variants).
4.4BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.BR socketpair ()
関数コールは 4.2BSD で現われた。一般に (System V の変種を含めて)
BSD のソケット層のクローンをサポートしている、BSD 以外のシステムと、
互いに移植性がある。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O On Linux, the only supported domain for this call is
.\"O .B AF_UNIX
.\"O (or synonymously,
.\"O .BR AF_LOCAL ).
.\"O (Most implementations have the same restriction.)
Linux では、この関数でサポートされているドメインは
.B AF_UNIX
(または同義語である
.BR AF_LOCAL )
だけである。
(ほとんどの実装で同じ制限がある)

.\"O Since Linux 2.6.27,
.\"O .BR socketpair ()
.\"O supports the
.\"O .BR SOCK_NONBLOCK
.\"O and
.\"O .BR SOCK_CLOEXEC
.\"O flags described in
.\"O .BR socket (2).
Linux 2.6.27 以降では、
.BR socketpair ()
は、フラグ
.B SOCK_NONBLOCK
と
.B SOCK_CLOEXEC
に対応している。フラグの説明は
.BR socket (2)
を参照のこと。

.\"O POSIX.1-2001 does not require the inclusion of
.\"O .IR <sys/types.h> ,
.\"O and this header file is not required on Linux.
.\"O However, some historical (BSD) implementations required this header
.\"O file, and portable applications are probably wise to include it.
POSIX.1-2001 では
.I <sys/types.h>
のインクルードは必須とされておらず、
Linux ではこのヘッダファイルは必要ではない。
しかし、歴史的には、いくつかの実装 (BSD 系) でこのヘッダファイルが
必要であり、移植性が必要なアプリケーションではこのファイルを
インクルードするのが賢明であろう。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR pipe (2),
.BR read (2),
.BR socket (2),
.BR write (2),
.BR socket (7),
.BR unix (7)
