.\" Copyright (C) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 2003-08-17 by Walter Harms
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Dec 12 00:25:54 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jun  2 20:25:46 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 18 16:48:08 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Sep  7 00:52:44 JST 2003 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jan  9 22:35:28 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated 2006-07-21, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.36
.\"
.\"WORD:	file system		ファイル・システム
.\"WORD:	mount			マウント
.\"WORD:	pointer			ポインター
.\"WORD:	descriptor		ディスクリプター
.\"WORD:	open			オープン
.\"WORD:	symbolic link		シンボリック・リンク
.\"WORD:	open			オープン
.\"
.TH STATFS 2 2010-09-04 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O statfs, fstatfs \- get file system statistics
statfs, fstatfs \- ファイル・システムの統計を得る
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .BR "#include <sys/vfs.h>    " "/* or <sys/statfs.h> */"
.BR "#include <sys/vfs.h>    " "/* または <sys/statfs.h> */"
.sp
.BI "int statfs(const char *" path ", struct statfs *" buf );
.br
.BI "int fstatfs(int " fd ", struct statfs *" buf );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 書式
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR statfs ()
.\"O returns information about a mounted file system.
関数
.BR statfs ()
はマウントされたファイル・システムについての情報を返す。
.\"O .I path
.\"O is the pathname of any file within the mounted file system.
.I path
はマウントされたファイル・システムにあるファイルのパス名である。
.\"O .I buf
.\"O is a pointer to a
.\"O .I statfs
.\"O structure defined approximately as follows:
.I buf
は
.I statfs
構造体へのポインターで、およそ以下のように定義される:

.in +4n
.nf
.\"O #if __WORDSIZE == 32		/* System word size */
#if __WORDSIZE == 32		/* システムのワードサイズ */
# define __SWORD_TYPE           int
#else /* __WORDSIZE == 64 */
# define __SWORD_TYPE		long int
#endif

struct statfs {
.\"O     __SWORD_TYPE f_type;    /* type of file system (see below) */
.\"O     __SWORD_TYPE f_bsize;   /* optimal transfer block size */
.\"O     fsblkcnt_t   f_blocks;  /* total data blocks in file system */
.\"O     fsblkcnt_t   f_bfree;   /* free blocks in fs */
.\"O     fsblkcnt_t   f_bavail;  /* free blocks available to
.\"O                                unprivileged user */
.\"O     fsfilcnt_t   f_files;   /* total file nodes in file system */
.\"O     fsfilcnt_t   f_ffree;   /* free file nodes in fs */
.\"O     fsid_t       f_fsid;    /* file system id */
.\"O     __SWORD_TYPE f_namelen; /* maximum length of filenames */
.\"O     __SWORD_TYPE f_frsize;  /* fragment size (since Linux 2.6) */
.\"O     __SWORD_TYPE f_spare[5];
    __SWORD_TYPE f_type;    /* ファイルシステムの種別 (下記参照) */
    __SWORD_TYPE f_bsize;   /* 最適な転送ブロックサイズ */
    fsblkcnt_t   f_blocks;  /* ファイルシステムの総データブロック数 */
    fsblkcnt_t   f_bfree;   /* ファイルシステムの空きブロック数 */
    fsblkcnt_t   f_bavail;  /* 非特権ユーザが利用可能な空きブロック数 */
    fsfilcnt_t   f_files;   /* ファイルシステムの総ファイルノード数 */
    fsfilcnt_t   f_ffree;   /* ファイルシステムの空きファイルノード数 */
    fsid_t       f_fsid;    /* ファイルシステムの ID */
    __SWORD_TYPE f_namelen; /* ファイル名の最大長 */
    __SWORD_TYPE f_frsize;  /* フラグメントサイズ (Linux 2.6 以降) */
    __SWORD_TYPE f_spare[5];
};

.\"O File system types:
ファイル・システムの型:

   ADFS_SUPER_MAGIC      0xadf5
   AFFS_SUPER_MAGIC      0xADFF
   BEFS_SUPER_MAGIC      0x42465331
   BFS_MAGIC             0x1BADFACE
   CIFS_MAGIC_NUMBER     0xFF534D42
   CODA_SUPER_MAGIC      0x73757245
   COH_SUPER_MAGIC       0x012FF7B7
   CRAMFS_MAGIC          0x28cd3d45
   DEVFS_SUPER_MAGIC     0x1373
   EFS_SUPER_MAGIC       0x00414A53
   EXT_SUPER_MAGIC       0x137D
   EXT2_OLD_SUPER_MAGIC  0xEF51
   EXT2_SUPER_MAGIC      0xEF53
   EXT3_SUPER_MAGIC      0xEF53
   EXT4_SUPER_MAGIC      0xEF53
   HFS_SUPER_MAGIC       0x4244
   HPFS_SUPER_MAGIC      0xF995E849
   HUGETLBFS_MAGIC       0x958458f6
   ISOFS_SUPER_MAGIC     0x9660
   JFFS2_SUPER_MAGIC     0x72b6
   JFS_SUPER_MAGIC       0x3153464a
.\"O    MINIX_SUPER_MAGIC     0x137F /* orig. minix */
   MINIX_SUPER_MAGIC     0x137F /* オリジナルの minix */
.\"O    MINIX_SUPER_MAGIC2    0x138F /* 30 char minix */
   MINIX_SUPER_MAGIC2    0x138F /* 30 文字ファイル名の minix */
   MINIX2_SUPER_MAGIC    0x2468 /* minix V2 */
.\"O    MINIX2_SUPER_MAGIC2   0x2478 /* minix V2, 30 char names */
   MINIX2_SUPER_MAGIC2   0x2478 /* minix V2, 30 文字ファイル名 */
   MSDOS_SUPER_MAGIC     0x4d44
   NCP_SUPER_MAGIC       0x564c
   NFS_SUPER_MAGIC       0x6969
   NTFS_SB_MAGIC         0x5346544e
   OPENPROM_SUPER_MAGIC  0x9fa1
   PROC_SUPER_MAGIC      0x9fa0
   QNX4_SUPER_MAGIC      0x002f
   REISERFS_SUPER_MAGIC  0x52654973
   ROMFS_MAGIC           0x7275
   SMB_SUPER_MAGIC       0x517B
   SYSV2_SUPER_MAGIC     0x012FF7B6
   SYSV4_SUPER_MAGIC     0x012FF7B5
   TMPFS_MAGIC           0x01021994
   UDF_SUPER_MAGIC       0x15013346
   UFS_MAGIC             0x00011954
   USBDEVICE_SUPER_MAGIC 0x9fa2
   VXFS_SUPER_MAGIC      0xa501FCF5
   XENIX_SUPER_MAGIC     0x012FF7B4
   XFS_SUPER_MAGIC       0x58465342
   _XIAFS_SUPER_MAGIC    0x012FD16D
.fi
.in
.PP
.\"O Nobody knows what
.\"O .I f_fsid
.\"O is supposed to contain (but see below).
.I f_fsid
にどんな値が入るべきなのかは誰も知らない (但し、下記を参照)。
.PP
.\"O Fields that are undefined for a particular file system are set to 0.
.\"O .BR fstatfs ()
.\"O returns the same information about an open file referenced by descriptor
.\"O .IR fd .
それぞれのファイル・システムにおいて未定義のフィールドには 0 が
設定される。
.BR fstatfs ()
はディスクリプター
.I fd
によって参照されるオープンされたファイルについて、同じ情報を返す。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功すれば 0 が返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EACCES
.\"O .RB ( statfs ())
.\"O Search permission is denied for a component of the path prefix of
.\"O .IR path .
.RB ( statfs ()
の場合)
.I path
のディレクトリ部分に検索許可が与えられていない
.\"O (See also
.\"O .BR path_resolution (7).)
.RB ( path_resolution (7)
も参照すること)。
.TP
.B EBADF
.\"O .RB ( fstatfs ())
.\"O .I fd
.\"O is not a valid open file descriptor.
.RB ( fstatfs ()
の場合)
.I fd
は有効なオープンされたファイル・ディスクリプターではない。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O .I buf
.\"O or
.\"O .I path
.\"O points to an invalid address.
.I buf
または
.I path
が不正なアドレスを指している。
.TP
.B EINTR
.\"O This call was interrupted by a signal.
この呼び出しがシグナルで中断された。
.TP
.B EIO
.\"O An I/O error occurred while reading from the file system.
ファイル・システムの読み込みの間に I/O エラーが発生した。
.TP
.B ELOOP
.\"O .RB ( statfs ())
.\"O Too many symbolic links were encountered in translating
.\"O .IR path .
.RB ( statfs ()
の場合)
.I path
を解決するのに辿るべきシンボリック・リンクが多すぎる。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.\"O .RB ( statfs ())
.\"O .I path
.\"O is too long.
.RB ( statfs ()
の場合)
.I path
が長過ぎる。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O .RB ( statfs ())
.\"O The file referred to by
.\"O .I path
.\"O does not exist.
.RB ( statfs ()
の場合)
.I path
によって参照されるファイルが存在しない。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.\"O Insufficient kernel memory was available.
カーネルに十分なメモリがない。
.TP
.B ENOSYS
.\"O The file system does not support this call.
ファイル・システムがこの呼び出しをサポートしていない。
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.\"O .RB ( statfs ())
.\"O A component of the path prefix of
.\"O .I path
.\"O is not a directory.
.RB ( statfs ()
の場合)
.I path
のディレクトリ部分がディレクトリでない。
.TP
.B EOVERFLOW
.\"O Some values were too large to be represented in the returned struct.
値が大き過ぎるため、返り値の構造体で表現できない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O Linux-specific.
.\"O The Linux
.\"O .BR statfs ()
.\"O was inspired by the 4.4BSD one
.\"O (but they do not use the same structure).
Linux 固有である。
Linux の
.BR statfs ()
は 4.4BSD のものに影響を受けている。
(しかし同じ構造体を使用しているわけではない)
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The kernel has system calls
.\"O .BR statfs (),
.\"O .BR fstatfs (),
.\"O .BR statfs64 (),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR fstatfs64 ()
.\"O to support this library call.
このライブラリコールをサポートするため、
カーネルにはシステムコール
.BR statfs (),
.BR fstatfs (),
.BR statfs64 (),
.BR fstatfs64 ()
がある。

.\"O Some systems only have \fI<sys/vfs.h>\fP, other systems also have
.\"O \fI<sys/statfs.h>\fP, where the former includes the latter.
.\"O So it seems
.\"O including the former is the best choice.
\fI<sys/vfs.h>\fP しか持たないシステムもあり、
\fI<sys/statfs.h>\fP も持っているシステムもある。
前者は後者をインクルードするので、
前者をインクルードするのが良いと考えられる。

.\"O LSB has deprecated the library calls
.\"O .BR statfs ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR fstatfs ()
.\"O and tells us to use
.\"O .BR statvfs (2)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR fstatvfs (2)
.\"O instead.
LSB ではライブラリコール
.BR statfs (),
.BR fstatfs ()
を非推奨として、代わりに
.BR statvfs (2),
.BR fstatvfs (2)
を使うように指示している。
.\"O .SS The f_fsid field
.SS f_fsid フィールド
.\"O Solaris, Irix and POSIX have a system call
.\"O .BR statvfs (2)
.\"O that returns a
.\"O .I "struct statvfs"
.\"O (defined in
.\"O .IR <sys/statvfs.h> )
.\"O containing an
.\"O .I "unsigned long"
.\"O .IR f_fsid .
Solaris, Irix, POSIX にはシステムコール
.BR statvfs (2)
があり、
.I "struct statvfs"
を返す
.RI ( <sys/statvfs.h>
で定義されている)。
この構造体には、
.I "unsigned long"
.I f_fsid
が含まれている。
.\"O Linux, SunOS, HP-UX, 4.4BSD have a system call
.\"O .BR statfs ()
.\"O that returns a
.\"O .I "struct statfs"
.\"O (defined in
.\"O .IR <sys/vfs.h> )
.\"O containing a
.\"O .I fsid_t
.\"O .IR f_fsid ,
.\"O where
.\"O .I fsid_t
.\"O is defined as
.\"O .IR "struct { int val[2]; }" .
Linux, SunOS, HP-UX, 4.4BSD にはシステムコール
.BR statfs ()
があり、
.I "struct statfs"
を返す
.RI ( <sys/vfs.h>
で定義されている)。
この構造体には
.I fsid_t
.IR f_fsid ,
が含まれており、
.I fsid_t
は
.I "struct { int val[2]; }"
と定義されている。
.\"O The same holds for FreeBSD, except that it uses the include file
.\"O .IR <sys/mount.h> .
FreeBSD でも同じであるが、インクルードファイル
.I <sys/mount.h>
を使う。

.\"O The general idea is that
.\"O .I f_fsid
.\"O contains some random stuff such that the pair
.\"O .RI ( f_fsid , ino )
.\"O uniquely determines a file.
.I f_fsid
はあるランダムな値を持ち、
.RI ( f_fsid , ino )
という 1 組の値でファイルを一意に決定できるようにする、
というのが基本的な考え方である。
.\"O Some operating systems use (a variation on) the device number, or the device number
.\"O combined with the file-system type.
いくつかの OS では、デバイス番号 (の変種) を使ったり、
デバイス番号とファイル・システムタイプを組み合わせて使ったりしている。
.\"O Several OSes restrict giving out the
.\"O .I f_fsid
.\"O field to the superuser only (and zero it for unprivileged users),
.\"O because this field is used in the filehandle of the file system
.\"O when NFS-exported, and giving it out is a security concern.
OS の中には
.I f_fsid
フィールドの取得をスーパーユーザに限定しているものもある
(非特権ユーザが取得すると 0 となる)。
NFS でエクスポートされる場合、
このフィールドがファイル・システムのファイルハンドルで使われており、
この値を提供するとセキュリティ上の問題がある。
.LP
.\"O Under some operating systems the
.\"O .I fsid
.\"O can be used as second argument to the
.\"O .BR sysfs (2)
.\"O system call.
いくつかの OS では、
.I fsid
を
.BR sysfs (2)
システムコールの第 2 引き数として使用できる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR stat (2),
.BR statvfs (2),
.BR path_resolution (7)
