.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 1992 Drew Eckhardt;
.\"                               1993 Michael Haardt, Ian Jackson.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith
.\" Modified 1996-04-26 by Nick Duffek <nsd@bbc.com>
.\" Modified 1996-11-06 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 1997-01-31 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Dec 12 00:32:12 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modifed Sat Feb 12 11:20:18 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	symbolic link		シンボリック・リンク
.\"WORD:	directory		ディレクトリ
.\"WORD:	soft link		ソフト・リンク
.\"WORD:	hard link		ハード・リンク
.\"WORD:	dangling link		壊れたリンク
.\"WORD:	sticky bit		スティッキー・ビット
.\"WORD:	ownership		所有権
.\"WORD:	file system		ファイル・システム
.\"WORD:	effective uid		実効ユーザーID
.\"WORD:	kernel			カーネル
.\"WORD:	entry			エントリ
.\"
.TH SYMLINK 2 2010-09-20 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O symlink \- make a new name for a file
symlink \- ファイルに新しい名前を付ける
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int symlink(const char *" oldpath ", const char *" newpath );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR symlink ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L
.RE
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR symlink ()
.\"O creates a symbolic link named
.\"O .I newpath
.\"O which contains the string
.\"O .IR oldpath .
.BR symlink ()
は
.I oldpath
という文字列をファイルの内容として持つ
.I newpath
というシンボリック・リンク (symbolic link) を作成する。

.\"O Symbolic links are interpreted at run time as if the contents of the
.\"O link had been substituted into the path being followed to find a file or
.\"O directory.
シンボリック・リンクは実行時に解釈され、
リンクの内容でパスを置き換えて、そのパスを辿ることで、
ファイルやディレクトリに到達する。

.\"O Symbolic links may contain
.\"O .I ..
.\"O path components, which (if used at the start of the link) refer to the
.\"O parent directories of that in which the link resides.
シンボリック・リンクはパスの部分に
.I ..
を含むかもしれない。これは (もしリンクの最初に使用された場合は) リンクの
存在するディレクトリの親ディレクトリが参照される。

.\"O A symbolic link (also known as a soft link) may point to an existing
.\"O file or to a nonexistent one; the latter case is known as a dangling
.\"O link.
シンボリック・リンクは (ソフト・リンク (soft link) とも呼ばれ)
存在するファイルを指しているかもしれないし、
存在しないファイルを指しているかもしれない;
後者の場合は壊れたリンク (dangling link) とも呼ばれる。

.\"O The permissions of a symbolic link are irrelevant; the ownership is
.\"O ignored when following the link, but is checked when removal or
.\"O renaming of the link is requested and the link is in a directory with
.\"O the sticky bit
.\"O .RB ( S_ISVTX )
.\"O set.
シンボリック・リンクの許可 (permission) は無意味である;
リンクを追跡する場合には所有権 (ownership) は無視される。
ただし、リンクの削除や名前の変更が要求され、かつリンクが存在する
ディレクトリにスティッキー・ビット (sticky bit)
.RB ( S_ISVTX )
が設定されている場合には、所有権のチェックが行われる。

.\"O If
.\"O .I newpath
.\"O exists it will
.\"O .I not
.\"O be overwritten.
.I newpath
が既に存在する場合には上書きは\fBされない\fR。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合には 0 を返す。エラーの場合には \-1 を返し、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EACCES
.\"O Write access to the directory containing
.\"O .I newpath
.\"O is denied, or one of the directories in the path prefix of
.\"O .I newpath
.\"O did not allow search permission.
.\"O (See also
.\"O .BR path_resolution (7).)
.I newpath
を含んでいるディレクトリへの書き込みが拒否されたか、
.I newpath
に含まれているディレクトリのどれかに検索許可が与えられていない
.RB ( path_resolution (7)
も参照すること)。
.TP
.B EEXIST
.\"O .I newpath
.\"O already exists.
.I newpath
が既に存在している。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O .IR oldpath " or " newpath " points outside your accessible address space."
.IR oldpath " や " newpath " がアクセス可能なアドレス空間の外を指している。"
.TP
.B EIO
.\"O An I/O error occurred.
I/O エラーが発生した。
.TP
.B ELOOP
.\"O Too many symbolic links were encountered in resolving
.\"O .IR newpath .
.I newpath
を解決する際に遭遇したシンボリック・リンクが多過ぎる。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.\"O .IR oldpath " or " newpath " was too long."
.IR oldpath " または " newpath " が長過ぎる。"
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O A directory component in
.\"O .I newpath
.\"O does not exist or is a dangling symbolic link, or
.\"O .I oldpath
.\"O is the empty string.
.I newpath
に含まれるディレクトリ部分が存在しないか、壊れたリンクであるか、
.I oldpath
が空文字列である。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.\"O Insufficient kernel memory was available.
十分なカーネル (kernel) のメモリーがない。
.TP
.B ENOSPC
.\"O The device containing the file has no room for the new directory
.\"O entry.
ファイルが含まれているデバイスに新しいディレクトリ・エントリ
(directory entry) を作成するだけの十分な容量がない。
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.\"O A component used as a directory in
.\"O .I newpath
.\"O is not, in fact, a directory.
.I newpath
に含まれるディレクトリ部分が、実際には、ディレクトリではない。
.TP
.B EPERM
.\"O The file system containing
.\"O .I newpath
.\"O does not support the creation of symbolic links.
.I newpath
を含んでいるファイル・システム (file system) が
シンボリック・リンクの作成をサポートしていない。
.TP
.B EROFS
.\"O .I newpath
.\"O is on a read-only file system.
.I newpath
が読み込み専用のファイル・システムに存在している。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .\" SVr4 documents additional error codes EDQUOT and ENOSYS.
.\" SVr4 には他に EDQUOT, ENOSYS エラーについての記述がある。
.\"O .\" See
.\"O .\" .BR open (2)
.\"O .\" re multiple files with the same name, and NFS.
.\" .BR open (2)
.\" を見て、同じ名前の重複と NFS について参照すること。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O No checking of
.\"O .I oldpath
.\"O is done.
.I oldpath
についてのチェックは行なわれない。

.\"O Deleting the name referred to by a symlink will actually delete the
.\"O file (unless it also has other hard links).
.\"O If this behavior is not desired, use
.\"O .BR link (2).
symlink によって参照される名前を削除すると (それが他にハード・リンク
(hard link) を持たなければ) 実際にファイルが削除される。
この動作が望んだものでない場合は、
.BR link (2)
を使用すること。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ln (1),
.BR lchown (2),
.BR link (2),
.BR lstat (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR readlink (2),
.BR rename (2),
.BR symlinkat (2),
.BR unlink (2),
.BR path_resolution (7),
.BR symlink (7)
