.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1993 by Dan Miner (dminer@nyx.cs.du.edu)
.\"
.\"  Permission is granted to freely distribute or modify this file
.\"  for the purpose of improving Linux or its documentation efforts.
.\"  If you modify this file, please put a date stamp and HOW you
.\"  changed this file.  Thanks.   -DM
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 12:35:12 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 22:29:51 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Mon Aug 25 16:06:11 1997 by Nicolas Lichtmaier <nick@debian.org>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Mar  4 00:04:15 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Modified Mon Sep 23 21:56:40 JST 2000
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	library			ライブラリ
.\"WORD:	statistic		統計
.\"WORD:	pointer			ポインター
.\"WORD:	prototype		型宣言
.\"
.TH SYSINFO 2 2007-11-15 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sysinfo \- returns information on overall system statistics
sysinfo \- システム全体の統計情報を返す。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/sysinfo.h>
.sp
.BI "int sysinfo(struct sysinfo *" info );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Until Linux 2.3.16,
.\"O .BR sysinfo ()
.\"O used to return information in the following structure:
Linux 2.3.16 までは
.BR sysinfo ()
は以下の構造体に情報を入れて返す。

.nf
.in +4n
struct sysinfo {
    long uptime;             /* Seconds since boot */
    unsigned long loads[3];  /* 1, 5, and 15 minute load averages */
    unsigned long totalram;  /* Total usable main memory size */
    unsigned long freeram;   /* Available memory size */
    unsigned long sharedram; /* Amount of shared memory */
    unsigned long bufferram; /* Memory used by buffers */
    unsigned long totalswap; /* Total swap space size */
    unsigned long freeswap;  /* swap space still available */
    unsigned short procs;    /* Number of current processes */
    char _f[22];             /* Pads structure to 64 bytes */
};
.in
.fi
.PP
.\"O and the sizes were given in bytes.
ここでバイト単位で与えられる。

.\"O Since Linux 2.3.23 (i386), 2.3.48
.\"O (all architectures) the structure is:
Linux 2.3.23 (i386)、2.3.48 (全てのアーキテクチャ) からは構造体は

.nf
.in +4n
struct sysinfo {
    long uptime;             /* Seconds since boot */
    unsigned long loads[3];  /* 1, 5, and 15 minute load averages */
    unsigned long totalram;  /* Total usable main memory size */
    unsigned long freeram;   /* Available memory size */
    unsigned long sharedram; /* Amount of shared memory */
    unsigned long bufferram; /* Memory used by buffers */
    unsigned long totalswap; /* Total swap space size */
    unsigned long freeswap;  /* swap space still available */
    unsigned short procs;    /* Number of current processes */
    unsigned long totalhigh; /* Total high memory size */
    unsigned long freehigh;  /* Available high memory size */
    unsigned int mem_unit;   /* Memory unit size in bytes */
    char _f[20\-2*sizeof(long)\-sizeof(int)]; /* Padding for libc5 */
};
.in
.fi
.PP
.\"O and the sizes are given as multiples of \fImem_unit\fP bytes.
となり、大きさは \fImem_unit\fP バイトの倍数で与えられる。

.\"O .BR sysinfo ()
.\"O provides a simple way of getting overall system statistics.
.\"O This is more
.\"O portable than reading \fI/dev/kmem\fP.
.BR sysinfo ()
はシステム全体の統計を取得する簡単な方法を提供する。
これは \fI/dev/kmem\fP を読むよりも移植性の高い方法である。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合はゼロが返される。エラーならば \-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O pointer to \fIstruct\ sysinfo\fP is invalid
.I sysinfo 構造体
へのポインターが不正である。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O This function is Linux-specific, and should not be used in programs
.\"O intended to be portable.
この関数は Linux 特有であり、移植を意図したプログラムでは
使用してはいけない。
.sp
.\"O The Linux kernel has a
.\"O .BR sysinfo ()
.\"O system call since 0.98.pl6.
Linux カーネルは 0.98.pl6 から
.BR sysinfo ()
システムコールを持っている。
.\"O Linux libc contains a
.\"O .BR sysinfo ()
.\"O routine since 5.3.5, and
.\"O glibc has one since 1.90.
Linux の libc は 5.3.5 より、glibc では 1.90 より
.BR sysinfo ()
ルーチンを含んでいる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR proc (5)
