.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1996-10-22 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\" Modified 2005-01-09 by aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 SUTO Mitsuaki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-06-26, SUTO Mitsuaki <suto@av.crl.sony.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2000-01-13,Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-02-28, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-04-20, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	Linux-specific		Linux 特有
.\"
.TH USELIB 2 2005-01-09 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O uselib \- select shared library
uselib \- 共有ライブラリを選択する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int uselib(const char *" library );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The system call
.\"O .BR uselib ()
.\"O serves to load
.\"O a shared library to be used by the calling process.
.\"O It is given a pathname.
.\"O The address where to load is found
.\"O in the library itself.
.\"O The library can have any recognized
.\"O binary format.
システムコール
.BR uselib ()
は、呼び出し元プロセスが使用する
共有ライブラリをロードする際に使用される。
このシステムコールにはライブラリのパス名を指定する。
ライブラリをロードするアドレスはライブラリ自身に書かれている。
ライブラリは認識可能なバイナリ形式であればどんな形式でもよい。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合 0 を返す。失敗した場合 \-1 を返し、
.I errno
をエラーの内容に従って設定する。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O In addition to all of the error codes returned by
.\"O .BR open (2)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR mmap (2),
.\"O the following may also be returned:
.BR open (2)
と
.BR mmap (2)
が返すエラーコードに加えて、以下のエラーコードが設定されることがある。
.TP
.B EACCES
.\"O The library specified by
.\"O .I library
.\"O does not have read or execute permission, or the caller does not have
.\"O search permission for one of the directories in the path prefix.
.\"O (See also
.\"O .BR path_resolution (7).)
.I library
で指定されたライブラリに対する読み込み許可、または実行許可がない。
もしくは
.I library
が存在するディレクトリかその上位のいずれかに対する検索許可がない
.RB ( path_resolution (7)
も参照)。
.TP
.B ENFILE
.\"O The system limit on the total number of open files has been reached.
オープンされたファイルの総数がシステム全体の上限に達した。
.TP
.B ENOEXEC
.\"O The file specified by
.\"O .I library
.\"O is not an executable of known type,
.\"O e.g., does not have the correct magic numbers.
.I library
で指定されたファイルが、実行可能ファイルと認識されるファイル種別では
ない、つまり正しいマジック・ナンバーが付いていない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O .BR uselib ()
.\"O is Linux-specific, and should not be used in programs
.\"O intended to be portable.
.BR uselib ()
は Linux 特有の関数であり、移植性を持たせたいプログラム
には使用すべきでない。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O .BR uselib ()
.\"O was used by early libc startup code to load
.\"O the shared libraries with names found in an array of names
.\"O in the binary.
初期の libc の起動コードは、
.BR uselib ()
を使って、
バイナリ中のリストに書かれている共有ライブラリを
リスト中のそのままの名前でロードしていた。
.LP
.\" libc 4.3.1f - changelog 1993-03-02
.\"O Since libc 4.3.2, startup code tries to prefix these names
.\"O with "/usr/lib", "/lib" and "" before giving up.
libc 4.3.2 以降では、これらの名前の前に "/usr/lib", "/lib", "" を
つけて共有ライブラリを探すようになった。
.\" libc 4.3.4 - changelog 1993-04-21
.\"O In libc 4.3.4 and later these names are looked for in the directories
.\"O found in
.\"O .BR LD_LIBRARY_PATH ,
.\"O and if not found there,
.\"O prefixes "/usr/lib", "/lib" and "/" are tried.
libc 4.3.4 以降では、これらの名前の共有ライブラリをまず
.B LD_LIBRARY_PATH
で指定されたディレクトリで探し、見つからなければ、
名前の前に "/usr/lib", "/lib", "/" をつけて探す。
.LP
.\"O From libc 4.4.4 on only the library "/lib/ld.so" is loaded,
.\"O so that this dynamic library can load the remaining libraries needed
.\"O (again using this call).
.\"O This is also the state of affairs in libc5.
libc 4.4.4 以降では、ライブラリ "/lib/ld.so" だけがロードされ、その後で
この動的ライブラリが (このシステムコールをもう一度使って)
必要な残りのライブラリをロードできるようになっている。
.LP
.\"O glibc2 does not use this call.
glibc2 は、このシステムコールを使用しない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ar (1),
.BR gcc (1),
.BR ld (1),
.BR ldd (1),
.BR mmap (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR dlopen (3),
.BR capabilities (7),
.BR ld.so (8)
