.\"
.\" Original man-page is part of at-3.1.14.
.\"
.\" This is the Debian GNU/Linux prepackaged version of the deferred
.\" execution scheduler called at.
.\"
.\" This package was debianized by its author Thomas Koenig
.\" <ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de>, taken over and re-packaged first by Martin
.\" Schulze <joey@debian.org> and then by Siggy Brentrup <bsb@winnegan.de>,
.\" and then taken over by Ryan Murray <rmurray@debian.org>.
.\"
.\" In August 2009 the upstream development and Debian packaging were taken over
.\" by Ansgar Burchardt <ansgar@debian.org> and Cyril Brulebois <kibi@debian.org>.
.\"
.\" This may be considered the experimental upstream source, and since there
.\" doesn't seem to be any other upstream source, the only upstream source.
.\"
.\"    Copyright: 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 (c) Thomas Koenig
.\"               1993 (c) David Parsons
.\" 	      2002, 2005 (c) Ryan Murray
.\"
.\"    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"    (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"    GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 22 Jun 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" Modified to reflect changes at-3.1.14
.\" Fri 1 Aug 2014, by Takayuki Ogawa <takayuki@compusophia.com>
.\"
.TH ATRUN 8 "Nov 1996" local "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
atrun \- 後で起動するためにキューに入れられたジョブを実行する
.SH 書式
.B atrun
.RB [ -l
.IR load_avg ]
.RB [ -d ]
.SH 説明
.B atrun
は
.BR at (1)
によってキューに入れられたジョブを実行する。
これは
.B /usr/sbin/atd
を
.I \-s
オプションを指定して起動するシェルスクリプトである。昔に
インストールされたシステムに対する互換性を保つために用意された。
.SH 関連項目
.BR at (1),
.BR atd (8)
.SH 作者
at のほとんどの部分を書いたのは Thomas Koenig, ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de である。
