.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all right reserved,
.\" Translated e Nov  6 18:27:31 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@aisys-jp.com>
.\"
.TH ncftpget 1 NcFTP Software
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ncftpget - Internet file transfer program for scripts
.SH 名前
ncftpget - スクリプト用のインターネットファイル転送プログラム
.\"O .SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SH "書式"
.PP
.B ncftpget
.RI [ "options" ]
.I "remote-host" "local-directory" "remote-files..."
.PP
.B ncftpget
-f login.cfg
.RI [ "options" ]
.I "local-directory" "remote-files..."
.PP
.B ncftpget
.RI [ "options" ]
.I "ftp://url.style/host/path/name"
.\"-------
.\"O .SH "OPTIONS"
.SH "オプション"
.\"-------
.SS
.\"O Command line flags:
コマンドラインフラグ:
.TP 8
.BI "-u " "XX"
.\"O Use username
.\"O .I XX
.\"O instead of anonymous.
ユーザ名としてanonymous の代わりに
.I XX
を使用する。
.TP 8
.BI "-p " "XX"
.\"O Use password
.\"O .I XX
.\"O with the username.
ユーザ名と共にパスワード
.I XX
を使用する。
.TP 8
.BI "-P " "XX"
.\"O Use port number
.\"O .I XX
.\"O instead of the default FTP service port (21).
デフォルトの FTP サービスポート (21) の代わりにポート番号
.I XX
を使用する。
.TP 8
.BI "-j " "XX"
.\"O Use account
.\"O .I XX
.\"O in supplement to the username and password (deprecated).
ユーザ名とパスワードに加えてアカウント名として
.I XX
を使用する（これは殆ど使用されなくなった）。
.TP 8
.BI "-d " "XX"
.\"O Use the file
.\"O .I XX
.\"O for debug logging.
デバッグログにファイル
.I XX
を使用する。
.TP 8
.B -a
.\"O Use ASCII transfer type instead of binary.
転送のタイプにバイナリ転送ではなく ASCII 転送を使用する。
.TP 8
.BI "-t " "XX"
.\"O Timeout after
.\"O .I XX
.\"O seconds.
.I XX
秒でタイムアウトする。
.TP 8
.BR "-v" "/" "-V"
.\"O Do (do not) use progress meters.
.\"O The default is to use progress meters if the output stream is a TTY.
経過メーターを使用する(しない)。
デフォルトでは、出力ストリームが TTY である場合、経過メータを使用する。
.TP 8
.BI "-f " "XX"
.\"O Read the file
.\"O .I XX
.\"O for host, user, and password information.
ホスト、ユーザ及びパスワード情報をファイル
.I XX
から読む。
.TP 8
.B -A
.\"O Append to local files, instead of overwriting them.
上書きするかわりにローカルファイルに追加する。
.TP 8
.BR "-z" "/" "-Z"
.\"O Do (do not) try to resume transfers.
.\"O The default is to try to resume (\-z).
転送を再開しようとする（再開しない）。
デフォルトは再開しようとする (\-Z)。
.TP 8
.B -E
.\"O Use regular (PORT) data connections.
通常の (PORT) データ接続を使用する。
.TP 8
.B -F
.\"O Use passive (PASV) data connections.
.\"O The default is to use passive, but to fallback to
.\"O regular if the passive connection fails or times out.
パッシブ (PASV) データ接続を使用する。
デフォルトはパッシブモードを使用する。パッシブ接続が失敗または
タイムアウトになった場合、通常の接続を試そうとする。
使用する。
.TP 8
.B -DD
.\"O Delete remote file after successfully downloading it.
ダウンロードに成功した後リモートファイルを削除する。
.TP 8
.B -R
.\"O Recursive mode; copy whole directory trees.
再起的なモード；ディレクトリーツリー全体をコピーする。
.TP 8
.B -T
.\"O Do not use automatic on-the-fly TAR mode for downloading whole directory trees.
.\"O .I ncftpget
.\"O uses TAR whenever possible since this usually preserves symbolic links
.\"O and file permissions.
.\"O TAR mode can also result in faster transfers for directories containing many
.\"O small files, since a single data connection can be used rather than an FTP
.\"O data connection for each small file.
.\"O The downside to using TAR is that it forces downloading of the whole directory,
.\"O even if you had previously downloaded a portion of it earlier, so you may
.\"O want to use this option if you want to resume downloading of a directory.
全体のディレクトリーツリー全体のダウンロードする際、
自動的な on-the-fly (その場の) TAR モードを使用しない。
.I ncftpget
は、可能な場合は必ず TAR モードを利用する。
なぜならこのモードはシンボリックリンクやファイルの
許可属性を保存するからである。
また小さなファイルをたくさん含むディレクトリ構造を転送する場合、
TAR モードは高速な転送ができることが多い。
小さなファイルそれぞれに FTP データ接続を張る必要がなく、
単一のデータ接続を使用することができるからである。
TAR を使用する際のデメリットは、以前にディレクトリの一部を
ダウンロードしてしまうことである。したがって、ディレクトリの
ダウンロードを再開する時には、このオプションを使用するほうが
いいかもしれない。
.TP 8
.BI "-r " "XX"
.\"O Redial a maximum of 
.\"O .I XX
.\"O times until connected to the remote FTP server.
リモート FTP サーバーに接続されるまで最大
.I XX
回までリダイアルする。
.TP 8
.B -b
.\"O Run in background (by submitting a job to
.\"O .IR ncftpbatch ")."
.IR (ncftpbatch 
にジョブを登録することによって）
バックグラウンドで実行する。
.TP 8
.BI "-B " "XX"
.\"O Try setting the TCP/IP socket buffer size to
.\"O .I XX
.\"O bytes.
TCP/IP ソケットバッファサイズを
.I XX
バイトに設定しようとする。
.\"-------
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH "説明"
.\"-------
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O purpose of
.\"O .I ncftpget
.\"O is to do file transfers from the command-line
.\"O without entering an interactive shell.
.\"O This lets you write shell scripts or other unattended
.\"O processes that can do FTP.
.\"O It is also useful for advanced users who
.\"O want to retrieve files from the shell command line without
.\"O entering an interactive FTP program such as
.\"O .IR ncftp "."
.I ncftpget
の目的は対話型のシェルに入らずに、コマンドラインからのファイル転送を行うことである。
これを用いると、シェルスクリプトや無人実行プロセスに
FTP を行わせることができる。
.IR ncftp
のような対話型の FTP プログラムに入らずに
シェルのコマンドラインからのファイルを取得したいような
上級ユーザにも便利である。
.PP
.\"O One particularly useful feature of this program is that
.\"O you can give it a
.\"O .I uniform resource locator
.\"O as the only argument and the program will download
.\"O that file.
.\"O You can then copy and paste from your web browser
.\"O or newsreader and use that URL.
このプログラムの特に便利な機能を 1 つ挙げると、
このプログラムに
.I uniform resource locator
をひとつ引数を与えれば、そのファイルをダウンロードできるということである。
したがって、web ブラウザやニュースリーダから URL をコピー/ペーストできる。
.\"O Example:
例：
.RS 4
.sp
$ cd /tmp
.br
$ ncftpget ftp://ftp.ncftp.com/pub/ncftp/ncftp.tar.Z
.br
$ zcat ncftp.tar.Z | tar xf -
.br
.RE
.PP
.\"O By default the program tries to open the remote host
.\"O and login anonymously, but you can specify a username
.\"O and password information.
デフォルトでは、このプログラムはリモートホストをオープンし、匿名でログインしようとする。
しかしユーザー名とパスワードの情報を指定することもできる。
.\"O The
.\"O .B -u
.\"O option is used to specify the username to login as,
.\"O and the
.\"O .B -p
.\"O option is used to specify the password.
.B -u
オプションはログインするユーザー名を指定するために使用される。また
.B -p
オプションはパスワードを指定するために使用される。
.\"O If you are running the program from the shell, you may
.\"O omit the
.\"O .B -p
.\"O option and the program will prompt you for the password.
シェルからプログラムを実行する場合、
.B -p
オプションを省略することができる。
するとプログラムはパスワードの入力を要求する。
.PP
.\"O Using the 
.\"O .B -u
.\"O and
.\"O .B -p
.\"O options are not recommended, because your account information
.\"O is exposed to anyone who can see your shell script or your
.\"O process information.  For example, someone using the
.\"O .I ps
.\"O program could see your password while the program runs.
.B -u
および
.B -p
オプションの使用は、推奨できない。
なぜなら、あなたのアカウント情報は、あなたのシェルスクリプトやプロセス情報を
見ることができる誰もにばれてしまうからである。例えば誰かが
.I ps
プログラムを使用すれば、
プログラムが実行している間あなたのパスワードを見ることができてしまう。
.PP
.\"O You may use the
.\"O .B -f
.\"O option instead to specify a file with the account information.
.\"O However, this is still not secure because anyone who
.\"O has read access to the information file can see the
.\"O account information.
上記のようにユーザ名・パスワードを指定する代わりに、
.B -f
オプションを使用してアカウント情報を含むファイルを指定してもよい。
しかし、情報ファイルへの読める権限を持つ人は
アカウント情報を見ることができてしますので、
これもまだ安全ではない。
.\"O Nevertheless, if you choose to use the
.\"O .B -f
.\"O option the file should look something like this:
いずれにしても、
.B -f
オプションを使用することに決めたのなら、
ファイルは以下のような感じにする:
.RS 4
.sp
host sphygmomanometer.ncftp.com
.br
user gleason
.br
pass mypasswd
.br
.sp
.RE
.\"O Don't forget to change the permissions on this file
.\"O so no one else can read them.
このファイルの読み込み属性を誰にも読まれないように変更することを
忘れてはいけない。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B -d
.\"O option is very useful when you are trying to diagnose
.\"O why a file transfer is failing.
.B -d
オプションは、なぜファイル転送が失敗しているのかを分析する場合に非常に有用である。
.\"O It prints out the
.\"O entire FTP conversation to the file you specify, so
.\"O you can get an idea of what went wrong.  
指定したファイルｈの FTP 応答全体を出力する。
したがって、なにがうまくいっていないのかがわかる。
.\"O If you specify the special name
.\"O .I stdout
.\"O as the name of the debugging output file, the output
.\"O will instead print to the screen.  Example:
デバッグ出力ファイルの名前として、特殊な意味を持つ名前である
.I stdout
を指定すると、出力はファイルではなくスクリーンに出力される。例：
.RS 4
.sp
$ ncftpget -d stdout bowser.nintendo.co.jp . /pub/README
.br
.\"O 220: FTP server ready.
220: FTP server ready.
.br
.\"O Connected to bowser.nintendo.co.jp.
Connected to bowser.nintendo.co.jp.
.br
.\"O Cmd: USER anonymous
Cmd: USER anonymous
.br
.\"O 331: Guest login ok, send your complete e-mail address as password.
331: Guest login ok, send your complete e-mail address as password.
.br
.\"O Cmd: PASS xxxxxxxx
Cmd: PASS xxxxxxxx
.br
.\"O 230: Welcome!
230: Welcome!
.br
.\"O Logged in to bowser.nintendo.co.jp as anonymous.
Logged in to bowser.nintendo.co.jp as anonymous.
.br
Cmd: TYPE I
.br
.\"O 200: Type set to I.
200: Type set to I.
.br
Cmd: PORT 192,168,9,37,6,76
.br
.\"O 200: PORT command successful.
200: PORT command successful.
.br
Cmd: RETR /pub/README
.br
.\"O 550: /pub/README: File in use.
550: /pub/README: File in use.
.br
Cmd: QUIT
.br
.\"O 221: Goodbye.
221: Goodbye.
.br
.RE
.PP
.\"O Using ASCII mode is helpful when the text format of your host
.\"O differs from that of the remote host.
あなたのホストのテキスト形式がリモートホストの形式と異なる場合、
ASCII モードのを使うと便利である。
.\"O For example, if you are retrieving a \.TXT file from
.\"O a Windows-based host to a UNIX system, you could use the
.\"O .B -a
.\"O flag which would use ASCII transfer mode so that the file
.\"O created on the UNIX system would be in the UNIX text
.\"O format instead of the MS\-DOS text format.
例えば、OS が Windows のホストから UNIX システムへ \.TXT ファイルを検索する場合、
.B -a
フラグを使って ASCII 転送モードを用いれば、UNIX テキスト上に作成されるテキストは
MS\-DOS テキスト形式ではなく UNIX テキスト形式になる。
.PP
.\"O You can retrieve an entire directory tree of files by
.\"O using the
.\"O .B -R
.\"O flag.
.\"O However, this will work only if the remote FTP server
.\"O is a UNIX server, or emulates UNIX's list output.
.\"O Example:
.B -R
フラグを使用するば、ディレクトリツリーの全ファイルを
取得できる。しかしこれは、リモートの FTP サーバが UNIX サーバであるか、
UNIX のリスト出力をエミュレートする場合のみ動作する。
作する。
例：
.RS 4
.sp
$ ncftpget -R ftp.ncftp.com /tmp /pub/ncftp
.br
.sp
.RE
.\"O This would create a /tmp/ncftp hierarchy.
これは /tmp/ncftp 階層を作成する。

.\"-------
.\"O .SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
.SH "返り値"
.\"-------
.PP
.\"O .I ncftpget
.\"O returns the following exit values:
.I ncftpget
は次の終了ステータスを返す：
.TP 8
0
.\"O Success.
成功。
.TP 8
1
.\"O Could not connect to remote host.
リモートホストに接続できなかった。
.TP 8
2
.\"O Could not connect to remote host - timed out.
リモートホストに接続できなかった（タイムアウトした）。
.TP 8
3
.\"O Transfer failed.
転送に失敗した。
.TP 8
4
.\"O Transfer failed - timed out.
転送に失敗した（タイムアウトした）。
.TP 8
5
.\"O Directory change failed.
ディレクトリ変更に失敗した。
.TP 8
6
.\"O Directory change failed - timed out.
ディレクトリ変更に失敗した（タイムアウトした）。
.TP 8
7
.\"O Malformed URL.
URL の形式がおかしい。
.TP 8
8
.\"O Usage error.
使用法が間違っている。
.TP 8
9
.\"O Error in login configuration file.
login 設定ファイルにエラーがある。
.TP 8
10
.\"O Library initialization failed.
ライブラリの初期化に失敗した。
.TP 8
11
.\"O Session initialization failed.
セッションの初期化に失敗した。
.\"-------
.\"O .SH "AUTHOR"
.SH "著者"
.\"-------
.PP
Mike Gleason, NcFTP Software (mgleason@ncftp.com).
.\"-------
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
.\"-------
.PP
.IR ncftpput (1),
.IR ncftp (1),
.IR ftp (1),
.IR rcp (1),
.IR tftp (1).
.PP
.IR "LibNcFTP" " (http://www.ncftp.com/libncftp/)."
