.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all right reserved,
.\" Translated Tue Nov  6 18:29:32 JST 2001
.\" by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@aisys-jp.com>
.\"
.TH ncftpbatch 1 NcFTP Software
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ncftpbatch - Batch FTP job processor daemon
.SH 名前
ncftpbatch - バッチ FTP ジョブの処理用デーモン
.\"O .SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SH "書式"
.PP
.B ncftpbatch
\-d
.PP
.B ncftpbatch
\-l
.PP
.B ncftpbatch
\-D
.\"-------
.\"O .SH "OPTIONS"
.SH "オプション"
.\"-------
.SS
.\"O Command line flags:
コマンドラインフラグ：
.TP 8
.B "-d"
.\"O Begin background processing of FTP jobs in the current user's
.\"O $HOME/.ncftp/spool directory.
.\"O This returns immediately, because a daemon process is spawned
.\"O and ran in the background.
カレントユーザの $HOME/.ncftp/spool　ディレクトリでの
FTP ジョブのバックグラウンドプロセスを始める。
デーモンプロセスは別のプロセスになり、バックグラウンドで動作するので、
ncftpbatch -d はすぐに終了する。
.TP 8
.B \-l
.\"O Lists the contents of the user's job queue.
ユーザのジョブキューの内容をリストする。
.TP 8
.B \-D
.\"O This is like
.\"O .BR \-d ","
.\"O except that the process does not become a daemon.
これは、プロセスがデーモンにならないということを除いては
.BR \-d ","
に似ている。
.\"-------
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH "説明"
.\"-------
.PP
.\"O This program is responsible for processing background FTP requests.
.\"O It is normally only run by
.\"O .I ncftp
.\"O and not manually by a human being, however you can run it to manually
.\"O process the FTP job queue.
このプログラムはバックグラウンドの FTP リクエストを処理する。
通常このプログラムは ncftp によってのみ軌道され、人間が手動で
起動することはない。ただし FTP ジョブキューを手動で処理したい
場合には起動することもできる。
.PP
.\"O The jobs are spool files written to a user's
.\"O $HOME/.ncftp/spool directory and have a special format and file-naming
.\"O convention (which contains when the job is to be run).
ジョブはユーザの $HOME/.ncftp/spool ディレクトリに書かれたスプールファイルで、
フォーマットとファイル名の指定方式は特殊なものになっている
（いつジョブを実行するかの情報も含まれる）。
.\"O .I ncftp
.\"O runs this program when it needs to, but if the
.\"O .I ncftpbatch
.\"O daemon dies unexpectedly the jobs that are left in the queue will
.\"O not be processed until another instance of
.\"O .I ncftpbatch
.\"O is run.
.I ncftp
は必要に応じてこのプログラムを実行する。しかし
.I ncftpbatch
デーモンが予想しなかったかたちで
終了させられた場合は、キューに残ったジョブは、別の
.I ncftpbatch
プロセスが起動するまで処理されない。
.PP
.\"O .I ncftpget
.\"O and
.\"O .I ncftpput
.\"O can also be used to submit jobs for batch processing, using
.\"O those utilities'
.\"O .B \-b
.\"O command-line flag.
.I ncftpget
や
.I ncftpput
をバッチ処理の登録に用いることもできる。
この場合はこれらのユーティリティの
.B \-b
コマンドラインフラグを用いる。
.\"O If desired, you can also manually create the spool files
.\"O although this procedure is not documented here.
望むならば手動でスプールファイルを作成することもできる
（やり方はここには述べないが）。
.\"-------
.\"O .SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
.SH "返り値"
.\"-------
.PP
.\"O .I ncftpbatch
.\"O writes to its own log file, the 
.\"O $HOME/.ncftp/batchlog file.
.I ncftpbatch
は、それ自身のログファイル、 $HOME/.ncftp/batchlog ファイルに書く。
.\"O This file should be examined to determine if any
.\"O .I ncftpbatch
.\"O processes are actively working on jobs.
このファイルはいずれかの
.I ncftpbatch
プロセスがジョブを実行中かどうかを判断するために調べられる。
.\"-------
.\"O .SH "AUTHOR"
.SH "著者"
.\"-------
.PP
Mike Gleason, NcFTP Software (mgleason@ncftp.com).
.\"-------
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
.\"-------
.PP
.IR ncftp (1),
.IR ncftpput (1),
.IR ncftpget (1).
