.\" Copyright 2003 Derek D. Martin ( code at pizzashack dot org ).
.\" 
.\" The software can be redistributed under the terms of the modified Berkely
.\" software license, as follows:
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO
.\" EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
.\" PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
.\" BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
.\" IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (C) 2003
.\"	System Design and Research Institute Co., Ltd. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Translated on Sun Mar  2 23:08:54 JST 2003
.\" by System Design and Research Institute Co., Ltd. <info@sdri.co.jp>
.\" Updated on Sat Feb 26 15:24:12 EST 2005
.\" by Tatsuo Sekine <tsekine@sdri.co.jp>
.\"
.TH RSSH.CONF 5 "7 Jul 2003" "man pages" "Derek D. Martin"
.\"O .SH NAME 
.\"O ${prefix}/etc/rssh.conf \- configuration file for rssh
/etc/rssh.conf \- rssh の設定ファイル
.\"O .SH OVERVIEW
.SH 概要
.\"O .B rssh.conf
.\"O is the configuration file for \fBrssh\fP.  It allows the system administrator
.\"O to control the behavior of the shell.  Configuration keywords are either used
.\"O by themselves on a line, or followed by an equal sign ('=') and a
.\"O configuration value.  Comments start with a hash ('#') and can occur anywhere
.\"O on the line.  Configuration options are case insensitive. Spaces at the
.\"O beginning or end of line, or between the equal sign and the configuration
.\"O keywords or values are ignored.  If the value of a configuration option
.\"O contains spaces, it (or at least the space) must be enclosed in either single
.\"O or double quotes.
.B rssh.conf
は
.B rssh
の設定ファイルである。
これにより、システム管理者はシェルの動きを制御できるようになる。
設定に使うキーワードは、それ自身で行を構成するか、
またはそれに続くイコール記号('=')と設定値とともに使われる。
コメントはクロスハッチ('#')で始まり、行の任意の場所に置くことができる。
設定オプションでは大文字と小文字を区別しない。
行の先頭や行の終り、イコール記号とキーワードや値との間の空白は無視される。
もし設定値が空白を含むのであれば、それ(少なくともその空白)は
シングルクォートまたはダブルクォートで囲まれていなければならない。
.P
.\"O A default configuration file is provided with the source distribution of
.\"O \fBrssh\fP.  If no configuration file is used, rssh will assume a default
.\"O umask of 022, and allow only \fIscp\fP.  If a config file is present, the
.\"O default is to lock out users if neither scp nor sftp have been explicitly
.\"O allowed.
デフォルトの設定ファイルは、
.B rssh
のソースとともに提供される。
設定ファイルがない場合は次のデフォルト値が使われる。
umask は 022 で
.I scp
のみが許可される。
設定ファイルがある場合は、scp と sftp のどちらも明示的に
許可されていなければ、ユーザは閉め出される。
.P
.\"O New in v2.1 is the ability to configure options on a per-user basis, using the
.\"O user keyword.  More details are below.
v2.1 からは、user キーワードを使ったユーザごとの設定オプションが
使用できる。詳細は追って説明する。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH CONFIGURATION KEYWORDS 
.SH 設定キーワード
.TP
.B allowscp
.\"O .RS
.\"O Tells the shell that scp is allowed.
scp が許可されていることを示す。
.\"O .RE
.\"O .P
.TP
.B allowsftp
.\"O .RS
.\"O Tells the shell that sftp is allowed.
sftp が許可されていることを示す。
.\"O .RE
.\"O .P
.TP
.B allowcvs
.\"O .RS
.\"O Tells the shell that cvs is allowed.
cvs が許可されていることを示す。
.\"O .RE
.\"O .P
.TP
.B allowrdist
.\"O .RS
.\"O Tells the shell that rdist is allowed.
rdist が許可されていることを示す。
.\"O .RE
.\"O .P
.TP
.B allowrsync
.\"O .RS
.\"O Tells the shell that rsync is allowed.
rsync が許可されていることを示す。
.\"O .RE
.\"O .P
.TP
.B umask
.\"O .RS
.\"O Sets the umask value for file creations in the scp/sftp session.  This is
.\"O normally set at login time by the user's shell.  In order not to use the
.\"O system default, \fBrssh\fP must set the umask.
scp/sftp セッションで作成したファイルの umask 値を設定する。
通常は、ログイン時にユーザのシェルによって設定される。
システムデフォルトを使わないようにするために、
.B rssh
は umask を設定しなければならない。
.\"O .RE
.\"O .P
.TP
.B logfacility
.\"O Allows the system administrator to control what syslog facility
.\"O .B rssh
.\"O logs to.  The facilities are the same as those used by \fIsyslogd.conf\fP(5),
.\"O or the C macros for the facilities can be used instead.  For example:
.\"O .P
.\"O logfacility=user
.\"O .br
.\"O logfacility=LOG_USER
.\"O .P
.\"O are equivalent, and tell
.\"O .B rssh
.\"O to use the user facility for logging to syslog.
.B rssh
がログ出力しようとする syslog の機能分類(facility)を指定する。
機能分類は
.IR syslogd.conf (5)
で使われているものと同じものである。
代わりに C のマクロを使って指定することもできる。
たとえば、

.nf
logfacility=user
logfacility=LOG_USER
.fi

は全く同じで、
.B rssh
に機能分類 user を使って syslog へのログ出力を行わせる。
.\"O .P
.TP
.B chrootpath
.\"O .RS
.\"O Causes \fBrssh\fP (actually a helper program) to call the 
.\"O .I chroot() 
.\"O system call, changing the root of the file system to whatever directory is
.\"O specified.  For example:
.\"O .P
.\"O chrootpath=/usr/chroot
.\"O .P
.\"O will change the root of the virtual file system to /usr/chroot, preventing the
.\"O user from being able to access anything below /usr/chroot in the file system,
.\"O and making /usr/chroot appear to be the root directory.  Care must be taken to
.\"O set up a proper chroot jail; see the file CHROOT in the rssh source
.\"O distribution for hints about how to do this.  See also the \fIchroot\fP(2) man
.\"O page.
.B rssh
(実際には補助プログラム)が
.IR chroot ()
システムコールを呼んで、指定されたディレクトリにファイルシステムの
ルートディレクトリを変更する。例えば、

.nf
chrootpath=/usr/chroot
.fi

は仮想的なファイルシステムのルートを /usr/chroot に変更し、
ファイルシステムの /usr/chroot の下以外にユーザがアクセスできないようにし、
/usr/chroot がルートディレクトリとして見えるようにする。
chroot jail を適切に設定するように注意すること。
どのようにしたらよいかのヒントについては、rssh ソースとともに配布される
CHROOT ファイルを見ること。また
.IR chroot (2)
の man ページも参照すること。
.\"O .P
.\"O If the user's home directory (as specified in /etc/password) is underneath the
.\"O path specified by this keyword, then the user will be chdir'd into their home
.\"O directory.  If it is not, then they will be chdir'd to the root of the chroot
.\"O jail.

もし(/etc/password で指定される)ユーザのホームディレクトリが、
このキーワードで示されるパス以下であれば、ユーザはホームディレクトリ
へと chdir される。
そうでなければ、chroot jail の / へと chdir される。
.TP
.B user
.\"O .RS
.\"O The user keyword allows for the configuration of options on a per-user basis.
.\"O .B THIS KEYWORD OVERRIDES ALL OTHER KEYWORDS FOR THE SPECIFIED USER.
.\"O That is, if you use a user keyword for user foo, then foo will use only the
.\"O settings in that user line, and not any of the settings set with the keywords
.\"O above.  The user keyword's argument consists of a group of fields separated by
.\"O a colon (':'), as shown below.  The fields are, in order:
user キーワードはユーザごとのオプション設定を可能にする。
\fBこのキーワードは、指定されたユーザのすべての他のキーワードを
上書きする。\fP
すなわち、ユーザ foo に user キーワードを使用したなら、
user 行にある設定だけがユーザ foo に使用され、今までに述べた
キーワードによるすべての設定は無視される。
user キーワードの引数は、コロン(':')で区切られた、以下に示す
フィールドのかたまりからなる。
フィールドは、順番に:
.RS
.\"O .B username
.TP
.B username
.\"O .RS
.\"O The username of the user for whom the entry provides options
このエントリがオプションを提供するユーザ名
.\"O .RE
.TP
.B umask
.\"O .RS
.\"O The umask for this user, in octal, just as it would be specified to the shell
そのユーザーの 8 進数での umask 値で、シェルで設定するのと同じ意味である。
.\"O .RE
.\"O access bit
.TP
.B access bit
.\"O .RS
.\"O Five binary digits, which indicate whether the user is allowed to use rsync,
.\"O rdist, cvs, sftp, and scp, in that order.  One means the command is allowed,
.\"O zero means it is not.
5個の 0/1 で、rsync, rdist, cvs, sftp, scp の順に、
ユーザーがそれらを許可されるかを示す。
1 はコマンドが許可され、0 は許可されないことを意味する。
.\"O .RE
.TP
.B path
.\"O .RS
.\"O The path to which this user should be chrooted
そのユーザーが chroot されるべきパス。
.\"O .RE
.P
.\"O For example, you might have something like this:
例えば、以下のような行になる。
.P
.nf
user = luser:022:00001:
.fi
.P
.\"O This does the following: for the user with the username "luser", set the umask
.\"O to 022, disallow sftp, and allow scp.  Because there is no chroot path
.\"O specified, the user will 
.\"O .I not 
.\"O be chrooted, 
.\"O .B regardless of default options set with the keywords above.
.\"O If you wanted this user to be chrooted, you would need to specify the chroot
.\"O path explicitly, even if it should be the same as that set using the
.\"O chrootpath keyword.  Remember that if there are spaces in the path, you need
.\"O to quote it, something like this:
これは次のような意味になる。
ユーザ名 "luser" について、umask を 022 に設定し、
sftp を許可せず、scp を許可する。
chroot パスが指定されていないので、
\fB他のキーワードでのデフォルトオプションにかかわらず\fP、
ユーザは chroot され\fIない\fP。
このユーザーが chroot されるようにしたならば、たとえ chrootpath
キーワードを使って設定したものと同じであっても、
明示的に chroot パスを指定する必要がある。
もし path に空白があれば、以下のようにそれを括る必要があることを
思い出して欲しい。
.P
.nf
user = "luser:022:00001:/usr/local/chroot dir"
.fi
.P
.\"O See the default rssh.conf file for more examples.
さらなる例については、デフォルトの rssh.conf ファイルを参照のこと。
.RE
.\"O 
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O \fIrssh\fP(1), \fIsshd\fP(8), \fIssh\fP(1), \fIscp\fP(1), \fIsftp\fP(1),
.\"O \fIsyslogd.conf\fP(5), \fIchroot\fP(2).
.\"O 
.\"O 
.IR rssh (1),
.IR sshd (8),
.IR ssh  (1),
.IR scp  (1),
.IR sftp (1),
.IR syslogd.conf (5),
.IR chroot (2).
