.\"
.\" Copyright (c) Christos Zoulas 2003.
.\" All Rights Reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice immediately at the beginning of the file, without modification,
.\"    this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003-2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jun  3 03:07:43 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 31 21:47:17 JST 2004 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.\"WORD:        
.\"
.Dd March 22, 2003
.Dt MAGIC 3
.Os
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm magic_open ,
.Nm magic_close ,
.Nm magic_error ,
.Nm magic_file ,
.Nm magic_buffer ,
.Nm magic_setflags ,
.Nm magic_check ,
.Nm magic_compile ,
.Nm magic_load
.\"O .Nd Magic number recognition library.
.Nd マジックナンバー識別ライブラリ
.\"O .Sh LIBRARY
.Sh ライブラリ
.Lb libmagic
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.In magic.h
.Ft magic_t
.Fn magic_open "int flags"
.Ft void
.Fn magic_close "magic_t cookie"
.Ft const char *
.Fn magic_error "magic_t cookie"
.Ft int
.Fn magic_errno "magic_t cookie"
.Ft const char *
.Fn magic_file "magic_t cookie, const char *filename"
.Ft const char *
.Fn magic_buffer "magic_t cookie, const void *buffer, size_t length"
.Ft int
.Fn magic_setflags "magic_t cookie, int flags"
.Ft int
.Fn magic_check "magic_t cookie, const char *filename"
.Ft int
.Fn magic_compile "magic_t cookie, const char *filename"
.Ft int
.Fn magic_load "magic_t cookie, const char *filename"
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O These functions
.\"O operate on the magic database file
.\"O which is described
.\"O in
.\"O .Xr magic 4 .
これらの関数は
.Xr magic 4
に記述されている magic データベースファイルを操作する。
.Pp
.\"O The function
.\"O .Fn magic_open
.\"O creates a magic cookie pointer and returns it. It returns NULL if
.\"O there was an error allocating the magic cookie. The 
.\"O .Ar flags
.\"O argument specifies how the other magic functions should behave:
関数
.Fn magic_open
はマジッククッキーポインタを生成して返す。
マジッククッキーの割り当てにエラーがあった場合、
この関数は NULL を返す。
.Ar flags
引き数は、他のマジック関数の挙動を指定する。
.Bl -tag -width MAGIC_COMPRESS
.It Dv MAGIC_NONE
.\"O No special handling.
特別な処理を行わない。
.It Dv MAGIC_DEBUG
.\"O Print debugging messages to stderr.
標準エラー出力にデバッグメッセージを表示する。
.It Dv MAGIC_SYMLINK
.\"O If the file queried is a symlink, follow it.
クエリしたファイルがシンボリックリンクであった場合は、それを辿る。
.It Dv MAGIC_COMPRESS
.\"O If the file is compressed, unpack it and look at the contents.
ファイルが圧縮されていた場合は、展開して内容を読み込む。
.It Dv MAGIC_DEVICES
.\"O If the file is a block or character special device, then open the device
.\"O and try to look in its contents.
ファイルがブロックスペシャルデバイスまたは
キャラクタスペシャルデバイスであった場合、
デバイスをオープンして内容を読み込もうとする。
.It Dv MAGIC_MIME
.\"O Return a mime string, instead of a textual description.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: textual description の適切な訳語が分かりません。
.\"Osato: 
説明文ではなく mime 文字列を返す。
.It Dv MAGIC_CONTINUE
.\"O Return all matches, not just the first.
最初にマッチしたものだけではなく、マッチした全てを返す。
.It Dv MAGIC_CHECK
.\"O Check the magic database for consistency and print warnings to stderr.
magic データベースの整合性をチェックし、
標準エラー出力に警告を表示する。
.It Dv MAGIC_PRESERVE_ATIME
.\"O On systems that support
.\"O .Xr utime 2
.\"O or
.\"O .Xr utimes 2 ,
.\"O attempt to preserve the access time of files analyzed.
.Xr utime 2
または
.Xr utimes 2
をサポートするシステムでは、
解析されたファイルのアクセス時刻を保存しようとする。
.It Dv MAGIC_RAW
.\"O Don't translate unprintable characters to a \eooo octal representation.
印刷不能文字を \eooo のような 8 進数表現に変換しない。
.It Dv MAGIC_ERROR
.\"O Treat operating system errors while trying to open files and follow symlinks
.\"O as real errors, instead of printing them in the magic buffer.
ファイルやシンボリックリンクをオープンしようとしている間に
OS のエラーが起こった場合、
マジックバッファにエラーを表示せず、実際のエラーとして扱う。
.El
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_close
.\"O function closes the
.\"O .Xr magic 4
.\"O database and deallocates any resources used.
.Fn magic_close
関数は
.Xr magic 4
データベースをクローズして、使用されている全てのリソースを解放する。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_error
.\"O function returns a textual explanation of the last error, or NULL if there was
.\"O no error.
.Fn magic_error
関数は最後に発生したエラーの説明文を返す。
エラーがない場合は NULL を返す。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_errno
.\"O function returns the last operating system error number (
.\"O .Xr errno 3 )
.\"O that was encountered by a system call.
.Fn magic_errno
関数はシステムコールによって最後に発生した OS エラーの番号
.Xr ( errno 3 )
を返す。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_file
.\"O function returns a textual description of the contents of the
.\"O .Ar filename
.\"O argument, or NULL if an error occurred.
.Fn magic_file
関数は
.Ar filename
引き数で指定されたファイルの内容についての説明文を返す。
エラーが起った場合は NULL を返す。
.\"O If the
.\"O .Ar filename
.\"O is NULL, then stdin is used.
.Ar filename
が NULL の場合は標準入力を使う。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_buffer
.\"O function returns a textual description of the contents of the
.\"O .Ar buffer
.\"O argument with
.\"O .Ar length
.\"O bytes size.
.Fn magic_buffer
関数はバイトサイズ
.Ar length
の引き数
.Ar buffer
の内容について、説明文を返す。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_setflags
.\"O function, sets the 
.\"O .Ar flags
.\"O described above.
.Fn magic_setflags
関数は上記の
.Ar flags
を設定する。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_check
.\"O function can be used to check the validity of entries in the colon
.\"O separated database files passed in as
.\"O .Ar filename ,
.\"O or NULL for the default database. It returns 0 on success and -1 on
.\"O failure.
.Fn magic_check
関数を使って、データベースファイルのエントリが有効であるかを検証できる。
検証されるデータベースは、コロン区切りのファイルリストの形式で、
.Ar filename
で指定される。
.Ar filename
が NULL の場合はデフォルトのデータベースを検証する。
検証が成功した場合は 0 を返し、
失敗した場合は -1 を返す。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_compile
.\"O function can be used to compile the the colon
.\"O separated list of database files passed in as
.\"O .Ar filename ,
.\"O or NULL for the default database. It returns 0 on success and -1 on
.\"O failure. The compiled files created are named from the
.\"O .Xr basename 1
.\"O of each file argument with ".mgc" appended to it.
.Fn magic_compile
関数を使って、データベースをコンパイルできる。
コンパイルされるデータベースは、コロン区切りのファイルリストの形式で、
.Ar filename
で指定される。
.Ar filename
が NULL の場合は、デフォルトのデータベースがコンパイルされる。
コンパイルが成功した場合は 0 を返し、
失敗した場合は -1 を返す。
コンパイルして生成されたファイルの名前は、
各ファイル引き数に
.Xr basename 1
を適用して ".mgc" を追加したものになる。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_load
.\"O function must be used to load the the colon
.\"O separated list of database files passed in as
.\"O .Ar filename ,
.\"O or NULL for the default database file
.\"O before any magic queries can performed.
何かマジッククエリを実行する前には、
.Fn magic_load
関数を使ってデータベースファイルをロードしなければならない。
ロードするデータベースは、コロン区切りのファイルリストの形式で、
.Ar filename
で指定される。
.Ar filename
が NULL の場合は、デフォルトのデータベースがロードされる。
.Pp
.\"O The default database file is named by the MAGIC environment variable.  If
.\"O that variable is not set, the default database file name is /usr/share/file/magic.
デフォルトのデータベースファイルは、
環境変数 MAGIC によって名前が指定される。
この環境変数が設定されない場合、
デフォルトのデータベースファイル名は /usr/share/file/magic である。
.Pp
.\"O .Fn magic_load
.\"O adds ".mime" and/or ".mgc" to the database filename as appropriate.
.Fn magic_load
データベースファイル名に ".mime" と ".mgc" を適宜追加する
(どちらか一方の場合もある)。
.\"O .Sh RETURN VALUES
.Sh 返り値
.\"O The function
.\"O .Fn magic_open
.\"O returns a magic cookie on success and NULL on failure setting errno to
.\"O an appropriate value. It will set errno to EINVAL if an unsupported
.\"O value for flags was given.
関数
.Fn magic_open
が成功した場合はマジッククッキーが返される。
失敗した場合は NULL が返されて、
errno が適切な値に設定される。
サポートされていない値がフラグに指定された場合、
errno が EINVAL に設定される。
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_load ,
.\"O .Fn magic_compile ,
.\"O and
.\"O .Fn magic_check
.\"O functions return 0 on success and -1 on failure.
.Fn magic_load ,
.Fn magic_compile ,
.Fn magic_check
関数が成功した場合は 0 が返され、失敗した場合は -1 が返される。
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn magic_file ,
.\"O and
.\"O .Fn magic_buffer 
.\"O functions return a string on success and NULL on failure. The
.\"O .Fn magic_error
.\"O function returns a textual description of the errors of the above
.\"O functions, or NULL if there was no error.
.Fn magic_file ,
.Fn magic_buffer 
関数が成功した場合は文字列が返され、失敗した場合は NULL が返される。
.Fn magic_error
関数は上記の関数のエラーの説明文を返す。
エラーがない場合は NULL を返す。
.\"O Finally,
.\"O .Fn magic_setflags
.\"O returns -1 on systems that don't support
.\"O .Xr utime 2 ,
.\"O or
.\"O .Xr utimes 2
.\"O when
.\"O .Dv MAGIC_PRESERVE_ATIME
.\"O is set.
そして、
.Xr utime 2
または
.Xr utimes 2
がサポートされていないシステムで
.Dv MAGIC_PRESERVE_ATIME
が設定されると、
.Fn magic_setflags
は -1 を返す。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/file/magic.mime.mgc -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/file/magic.mime
.\"O The non-compiled default magic mime database.
コンパイルされていないデフォルトの magic mime データベース。
.It Pa /usr/share/file/magic.mime.mgc
.\"O The compiled default magic mime database.
コンパイル済みのデフォルトの magic mime データベース。
.It Pa /usr/share/file/magic
.\"O The non-compiled default magic database.
コンパイルされていないデフォルトの magic データベース。
.It Pa /usr/share/file/magic.mgc
.\"O The compiled default magic database.
コンパイル済みのデフォルトの magic データベース。
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr file 1 ,
.Xr magic 4 
.\"O .Sh AUTHORS
.Sh 著者
.\"O Mans Rullgard Initial libmagic implementation,
.\"O and configuration.
.\"O Christos Zoulas API cleanup, error code and allocation handling.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: 最初の著者の方の名前は EUC だと
.\"Osato: a の上に◯が付いた文字がうまく保存できないので、
.\"Osato: a に変更させていただいた。
.\"Osato: 
Mans Rullgard が最初の libmagic の実装と構成を行った。
Christos Zoulas は API を整理し、
エラーコードと (マジッククッキーの) 割り当てを実装した。
