.\"
.\" Generated automatically from makewhatis.8.in by the
.\" configure script.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Ottavio G. Rizzo <rizzo@pluto.linux.it>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 6 Dec 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" Updated Fri 4 Mar 2011 by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@kc5.so-net.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH MAKEWHATIS 8 "September 19, 2005"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O makewhatis \- Create the whatis database
.SH 名前
makewhatis \- whatis データベースを生成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.\"O .BI "makewhatis [-u] [-v] [-w] [-s " sections " ] [-c [" catpath "]] [" manpath "]"
.SH 書式
.\"O .BI "makewhatis [-u] [-v] [-w] [-s " sections " ] [-c [" catpath "]] [" manpath "]"
.\":tati:ソースを確認すると、コマンドラインは以下でないといけないように見える
.BI "makewhatis [-u] [-v] [-s " sections " ] [-w] [" manpath "] [-c [" catpath "]]"

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O .B makewhatis
.\"O reads all the manual pages contained in the given
.\"O .IR sections " of " manpath 
.\"O or the preformatted pages contained in the given
.\"O .IR sections " of " catpath .
.\"O For each page, it writes a line in the whatis database; each line
.\"O consists of the name of the page and a short description, separated
.\"O by a dash. The description is extracted using the content of the
.\"O NAME section of the manual page.
.SH 説明
.B makewhatis
は \fImanpath\fP 中の \fIsections\fP にある全てのマニュアルページや、
\fIcatpath\fP 中の \fIsections\fP にある全ての整形済みページを読み込む。
それぞれのページに対し、
.B makewhatis
は一行の情報を whatis データベースに書き込む。
各行にはページの名前と簡単な説明が、ダッシュ (\-) で区切られたかたちで
記述される。説明はマニュアルページの NAME (名前・名称) セクション
の内容から抽出される。
.LP
.\"O Since other languages use a different term for the NAME section,
.\"O .B makewhatis
.\"O recognizes the equivalent terms in Czech, Italian, Finnish, French,
.\"O German and Spanish.
言語によって NAME セクションの見出しに使う用語が異なっている。
そこで
.B makewhatis
は英語の NAME に相当する、チェコ語、イタリア語、フィンランド語、フランス語、
ドイツ語、スペイン語の単語を認識するようになっている。
.LP
.BR 訳注 :
JM にある日本語パッチを当てた makewhatis は、
日本語のタイトルに対応しています。
.LP
.\"O If no
.\"O .I manpath
.\"O argument is given,
.\"O .I /usr/man
.\"O is assumed by default.
.I manpath
引数が指定されなければ、デフォルトの
.I /usr/man
を用いる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -u
.\"O Update database with new pages.
データベースを新しいページの情報で更新する。
.TP
.B -v
.\"O Verbose output
饒舌な出力をする。
.TP
.B -w
.\"O Use manpath obtained from `man --path`
manpath を `man --path` で得られる値にする。
.TP 
.BI -s " sections"
.\"O Looks in the
.\"O .I sections
.\"O of
.\"O .IR manpath " or " catpath .
.\"O If the option is absent, the MANSECT env var will be used.  If it too
.\"O is absent, the MANSECT setting in man.conf will be used.
.IR manpath " または " catpath
の
.I sections
を見る。
このオプションを省略すると、MANSECT 環境変数が用いられる。
MANSECT 環境変数も設定されていない場合は、man.conf にある MANSECT の
設定が用いられる。
.TP 
.BI -c " catpath"
.\"O The preformatted manual pages located in
.\"O .I catpath
.\"O are scanned. If the argument is not provided, it is assumed to be the
.\"O first existing directory between
.\"O .IR /usr/man/preformat " and " /usr/man .
.I catpath
に置かれた整形済みのマニュアルページをスキャンする。
このオプションの引数を省略すると、
.IR /usr/man/preformat " と " /usr/man
のうち、存在する最初のディレクトリを引数に指定したと見なされる。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.PP
.\"O To rebuild only 
.\"O .IR /usr/X11R6/man/whatis " and " /usr/local/man/whatis
.IR /usr/X11R6/man/whatis " と " /usr/local/man/whatis
だけを再構築する。
.IP 
makewhatis /usr/X11R6/man /usr/local/man
.PP
.\"O To rebuild all the databases, including those of the Finnish, French
.\"O and Italian translations
フィンランド語、フランス語、イタリア語の翻訳を含め、
全てのデータベースを再構築する。
.IP
LANGUAGE=fi:fr:it makewhatis -w
.\"O .SH BUGS
.\"O .B makewhatis
.\"O may not handle too well manual pages written with non-standard troff
.\"O macros, such as the Tcl/Tk pages.
.SH バグ
.B makewhatis
は、マニュアルページが、 Tcl/Tk のそれのように、
標準的ではない troff マクロで記述されていると、そうしたページを
あまり上手に処理できないかもしれない。
.PP
.B makewhatis
.\"O does not work on preformatted translations.
は翻訳版の整形済みページを処理できない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O John W. Eaton was the original author of 
.\"O .BR "man" . 
.\"O Zeyd M. Ben-Halim released man 1.2, and Andries Brouwer followed up with versions 1.3 thru 1.5p.
.\"O Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> is the current maintainer.
.SH 作者
.B "man"
パッケージの原作者は John W. Eaton である。
Zeyd M. Ben-Halim が man 1.2 をリリースし、引き続いて Andries Brouwer が
versions 1.3 から 1.5p までをリリースした。
現在のメンテナーは Federico Lucifredi <flucifredi@acm.org> である。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR apropos (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR whatis (1)
