.\" @(#)bootparamd.8
.\"
.\"    $Id: bootparamd.8,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Thu Dec 14 18:22:51 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd November 8, 1989
.Dt BOOTPARAMD 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm bootparamd 
.\"O .Nd boot parameter server
.Nd ブートパラメータサーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm rpc.bootparamd
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl s
.Op Fl r Ar router
.Op Fl f Ar file
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm bootparamd
.\"O is a server process that provides information to diskless clients
.\"O necessary for booting. It consults the
.\"O .Pa /etc/bootparams
.\"O file to find the information it needs.
.Nm bootparamd
は、ディスクレスクライアントに対して
ブートに必要な情報を提供するサーバプロセスである。
このサーバは、必要とされる情報を見つけるために
.Pa /etc/bootparams
ファイルを参照する。
.Pp
.\"O This version will allow the use of aliases on the hostname in the
.\"O .Pa /etc/bootparams
.\"O file. The returned hostname to the whoami request done by the booting client
.\"O will be the name that appears in 
.\"O .Pa /etc/bootparams
.\"O and not the canonical name. In this way you can keep the answer short enough
.\"O so that machines that cannot handle long hostnames won't fail during boot.
このバージョンでは
.Pa /etc/bootparams
においてホスト名のエイリアスを使うことができる。
ブート中のクライアントが発行した whoami リクエストに対して返されるホスト名は、
.Pa /etc/bootparams
に書かれたホスト名であり、正式名ではない。
この方法により、
長いホスト名を扱うことができないマシンが起動に失敗しないように、
短い名前を答えることができる。
.\"O .Sh OPTIONS
.Sh オプション
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl d
.\"O Display debugging information.
デバッグ情報を表示しない。
.It Fl s
.\"O Log the debugging information to syslog. 
デバッグ情報を syslog で記録する。
.It Fl r Ar router
.\"O The default router (a machine or an IP-address).
.\"O This defaults to the machine running the server.
デフォルトルータを、ホスト名または IP アドレスで指定する。
指定しない場合のデフォルトルータは、サーバが動作しているマシンになる。
.It Fl f Ar file
.\"O The file to use as boot parameter file instead of /etc/bootparams.
/etc/bootparams の代わりに使われる
ブートパラメータファイルを指定する。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Pa /etc/bootparams
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O You may find the syslog loggings too verbose.
syslog の記録が詳細過ぎると思うかも知れない。
.\"O .Sh AUTHOR
.Sh 著者
.\"O Written by Klas Heggemann <klas@nada.kth.se>
Klas Heggemann <klas@nada.kth.se> が作成した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
