.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)comsat.8	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	$Id: comsat.8,v 1.2 2000/12/14 09:58:59 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Thu Dec 14 18:22:51 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"O .Dd July 31, 1999"
.Dd July 31, 1999
.Dt COMSAT 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm comsat
.\"O .Nd biff server
.Nd biff サーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm comsat
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Comsat
.\"O is the server process which receives reports of incoming mail
.\"O and notifies users if they have requested this service.
.\"O .Nm Comsat
.\"O receives messages on a datagram port associated with the
.\"O .Dq biff
.\"O service
.\"O specification (see
.\"O .Xr services 5
.\"O and
.\"O .Xr inetd 8 ) .
.\"O The one line messages are of the form:
.Nm comsat
は、受信メールのレポートを受け取り、
サービスを要求しているユーザーに対して通知を行う、サーバプロセスである。
.Nm comsat
は
.Dq biff
サービス仕様
.Ns ( Xr services 5
と
.Xr inetd 8
を参照) に関連するデータグラムポートのメッセージを受信する。
1 行メッセージは次の形式である:
.Pp
.Dl user@mailbox-offset
.Pp
.\"O If the
.\"O .Em user
.\"O specified is logged in to the system and the associated terminal has
.\"O the owner execute bit turned on (by a
.\"O .Dq Li biff y ) ,
.\"O the
.\"O .Em offset
.\"O is used as a seek offset into the appropriate mailbox file and
.\"O the first 7 lines or 560 characters of the message are printed
.\"O on the user's terminal.  Lines which appear to be part of
.\"O the message header other than the
.\"O .Dq From 
.\"O or
.\"O .Dq Subject
.\"O lines are not included in the output.
ここで指定されているユーザー
.Em user
がシステムにログインしていて、
割り当てられた端末の所有者の実行ビットが
.Ns ( Dq Li biff y )
によって ON になっている場合、
.Em offset
がメールボックスファイルのシークオフセットとして使われ、
メッセージの先頭 7 行または先頭 560 文字がユーザーの端末に表示される。
.Dq From 
と
.Dq Subject
以外のメッセージヘッダの一部とみなされる行は、
表示される行には含まれない。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /var/run/utmp -compact
.It Pa /var/run/utmp
.\"O to find out who's logged on and on what terminals
誰がどの端末でログインしているかを見つけるためのファイル
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr biff 1 ,
.Xr inetd 8
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O The message header filtering is prone to error.
.\"O The density of the information presented is near the theoretical minimum.
メッセージヘッダのフィルタリングは誤りがちである。
表示される情報の量は、理論的な最小限の量に近い。
.Pp
.\"O Users should be notified of mail which arrives on other
.\"O machines than the one to which they are currently logged in.
現在ログインしているマシンへのメール到着ではなく、
他のマシンにメールが届いたことがユーザーに通知されるべきである。
.Pp
.\"O The notification should appear in a separate window so it
.\"O does not mess up the screen.
通知は別のウインドウに表示されるべきである。
そうすれば、スクリーンの表示が乱されない。
.Pp
.\"O Please report bugs to netbug@ftp.uk.linux.org and include diffs/patches,
.\"O compiler error logs or as complete a bug report as you are able.
バグは、diff/patch・コンパイラエラー・
できる限り完全なバグレポートとともに、
netbug@ftp.uk.linux.org に送って下さい。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O daemon appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm
デーモンは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
