.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)fingerd.8	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	$Id: fingerd.8,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Dec 11 04:32:48 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd August 29, 1996
.Dt FINGERD 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm fingerd
.\"O .Nd remote user information server
.Nd リモートユーザー情報のサーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm fingerd
.Op Fl wulf
.Op Fl pL Ar path
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Fingerd
.\"O is a simple daemon based on
.\"O .%T RFC1196
.\"O that provides an interface to the
.\"O .Dq finger
.\"O program at most network sites.
.\"O The program is supposed to return a friendly,
.\"O human-oriented status report on either the system at the moment
.\"O or a particular person in depth. 
.Nm fingerd
は、多くのネットワークサイトの
.Dq finger
プログラムのインターフェースを提供する
.%T RFC1196
に基づく簡単なデーモンである。
このプログラムは、ある時点でのシステムと特定の人物の両方について、
親しみやすく人が読みやすい状態レポートを返す。
.Pp
.\"O If the
.\"O .Fl w
.\"O option is given, remote users will get an additional 
.\"O .Dq Welcome to ...
.\"O banner
.\"O which also shows some informations (e.g. uptime, operating system name and
.\"O release) about the system the
.\"O .Nm fingerd
.\"O is running on. Some sites may consider this a security risk as it
.\"O gives out information that may be useful to crackers. 
.Fl w
オプションが指定されると、
.Nm fingerd
が実行されているシステムの (稼働時間、
オペレーティングシステムの名前・リリース番号といった)
いくつかの情報を表示する
.Dq Welcome to ...
というバーナーをリモートユーザーに表示する。
このバーナーはクラッカーにとって有用となりえる情報を与えるので、
セキュリティ上のリスクと考えるサイトもあるかもしれない。
.Pp
.\"O If the 
.\"O .Fl u
.\"O option is given, requests of the form
.\"O .Dq finger @host
.\"O are rejected.
.Fl u
オプションが指定されると、
.Dq finger @host
という形式のリクエストは拒否される。
.Pp
.\"O If the
.\"O .Fl l
.\"O option is given, information about requests made is logged. This
.\"O option probably violates users' privacy and should not be used on
.\"O multiuser boxes.
.Fl l
オプションが指定されると、リクエストされたという情報がログに記録される。
このオプションは、ユーザーのプライバシーの侵害になるかもしれないので、
複数のユーザーが使う計算機では使用すべきでない。
.Pp
.\"O If the
.\"O .Fl f
.\"O option is given, finger forwarding (user@host1@host2) is allowed.
.\"O Useful behind firewalls, but probably not wise for security and
.\"O resource reasons.
.Fl f
オプションが指定されると、
finger のフォワード (user@host1@host2) が許可される。
ファイアーウォールの後ろにある計算機に対しては役に立つが、
セキュリティやリソースの点から考えると、賢明ではないかもしれない。
.Pp
.\"O The 
.\"O .Fl p
.\"O option allows specification of an alternate location for fingerd to find
.\"O the 
.\"O .Dq finger
.\"O program. The
.\"O .Fl L
.\"O option is equivalent.
.Fl p
オプションを使うと、fingerd が
.Dq finger
プログラムを見つけるために、別な場所を指定することが可能になる。
.Fl L
オプションと等価である。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl t
.\"O option specifies the time to wait for a request before closing the
.\"O connection.  A value of 0 waits forever.  The default is 60 seconds.
.Fl t
オプションにより、接続を閉じる前にリクエストを待つ時間を指定する。
値が 0 の場合は、永久に待ち続ける。
デフォルトは 60 秒である。
.Pp
.\"O Options to fingerd should be specified in 
.\"O .Pa /etc/inetd.conf .
fingerd のオプションは
.Pa /etc/inetd.conf
で指定すべきである。
.Pp
.\"O The finger protocol consists mostly of specifying command arguments.
.\"O The 
.\"O .Xr inetd 8
.\"O .Dq super-server
.\"O runs
.\"O .Nm fingerd
.\"O for 
.\"O .Tn TCP
.\"O requests received on port 79.
finger プロトコルは、大部分がコマンド引き数の指定で構成されている。
.Dq スーパーサーバ
である
.Xr inetd 8
は、79 番ポートで受け取った
.Tn TCP
リクエストに対して、
.Nm fingerd
を実行する。
.\"O Once connected 
.\"O .Nm fingerd
.\"O reads a single command line
.\"O terminated by a
.\"O .Aq Tn CRLF
.\"O which is passed to
.\"O .Xr finger 1 .
.\"O It closes its connections as soon as all output is finished.
一度接続されると、
.Nm fingerd
は
.Aq Tn CRLF
で終端されている 1 行を読み込む。
この行は
.Xr finger 1
に渡される。
fingerd は、出力が終るとすぐに接続を閉じる。
.Pp
.\"O If the line is empty (i.e. just a
.\"O .Aq Tn CRLF
.\"O is sent) then 
.\"O .Xr finger
.\"O returns a
.\"O .Dq default
.\"O report that lists all people logged into
.\"O the system at that moment. This feature is blocked by the 
.\"O .Fl u
.\"O option.
行が空行の場合 (つまり
.Aq Tn CRLF
だけが送られた場合)、
.Xr finger
は、
.Dq デフォルトの
報告 (その時点でシステムにログインしている全員のリスト) を返す。
この機能は、
.Fl u
オプションを使うと無効にされる。
.Pp
.\"O If a user name is specified (e.g.
.\"O .Pf eric Aq Tn CRLF )
.\"O then the
.\"O response lists more extended information for only that particular user,
.\"O whether logged in or not.
.\"O Allowable
.\"O .Dq names
.\"O in the command line include both
.\"O .Dq login names
.\"O and
.\"O .Dq user names .
.\"O If a name is ambiguous, all possible derivations are returned.
(例えば
.Pf eric Aq Tn CRLF
のように) ユーザー名が指定されると、
そのユーザーがログインしているか否かに係わらず、
指定した特定のユーザーについてのみ詳細な情報をリストする。
コマンドラインで指定できる
.Dq 名前
は
.Dq ログイン名
と
.Dq ユーザー名
のどちらでもよい。
名前が曖昧な場合は、マッチするもの全てについての情報が返される。
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr finger 1 ,
.Xr inetd 8
.\"O .Sh RESTRICTIONS
.Sh 制限
.\"O Connecting directly to the server from a
.\"O .Tn TIP
.\"O or an equally narrow-minded
.\"O .Tn TELNET Ns \-protocol
.\"O user program can result
.\"O in meaningless attempts at option negotiation being sent to the
.\"O server, which will foul up the command line interpretation.
サーバに対して、
.Tn TIP
や、それと同じくらいに見識の狭い
.Tn TELNET Ns プロトコル
を使ったユーザープログラムで接続すると、
サーバーにオプションネゴシエーションを送る意味のない試みをすることになり、
不正なコマンドライン解釈を行わせることになる。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The finger daemon appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.3 .
finger デーモンは
.Bx 4.3
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
