.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1988, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)ftpd.8	8.2 (Berkeley) 4/19/94
.\"	NetBSD: ftpd.8,v 1.8 1996/01/14 20:55:23 thorpej Exp
.\"	OpenBSD: ftpd.8,v 1.9 1996/12/03 03:07:16 deraadt Exp
.\"	OpenBSD: ftpd.8,v 1.12 1997/05/01 14:45:36 deraadt Exp
.\"	OpenBSD: ftpd.8,v 1.22 1999/07/09 13:35:50 aaron Exp
.\"     $Id: ftpd.8,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Dec 11 04:32:48 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	anonymous	匿名
.\"WORD:	transfer	転送
.\"WORD:	Trademark	商標
.\"
.Dd September 14, 1999
.Dt FTPD 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm ftpd
.Nd
.\"O Internet File Transfer Protocol server
インターネットファイル転送プロトコルサーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm ftpd
.Op Fl AdDhlMPSU
.Op Fl T Ar maxtimeout
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Op Fl u Ar mask
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Ftpd
.\"O is the
.\"O Internet File Transfer Protocol
.\"O server process.  The server uses the
.\"O .Tn TCP
.\"O protocol
.\"O and listens at the port specified in the
.\"O .Dq ftp
.\"O service specification; see
.Nm ftpd
はインターネットファイル転送プロトコルサーバプロセスである。
このサーバは
.Tn TCP
プロトコルを用いて、
.Dq ftp
サービスの仕様で指定されたポートを listen する。
.Xr services 5
を参照すること。
.Pp
.\"O Available options:
使用可能なオプションは以下の通りである:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl A
.\"O Permit only anonymous ftp connections or accounts listed in
.\"O .Pa /etc/ftpchroot.
.\"O Other connection attempts are refused.
匿名 ftp 接続、または
.Pa /etc/ftpchroot
にリストされたアカウントによる接続のみを許可する。
他の接続は拒否される。
.It Fl d
.\"O Debugging information is written to the syslog using LOG_FTP.
デバッグ情報が LOG_FTP を使って syslog に書き込まれる。
.It Fl D
.\"O With this option set,
.\"O .Nm ftpd
.\"O will detach and become a daemon, accepting connections on the FTP port and
.\"O forking child processes to handle them. This has lower overhead than
.\"O starting
.\"O .Nm ftpd
.\"O from
.\"O .Xr inetd 8
.\"O and is thus useful on busy servers to reduce load.
このオプションが設定されると、
.Nm ftpd
は制御端末を切り離してデーモンとなり、FTP ポートへの接続を受け付け、
接続を処理するために子プロセスを fork する。
この方式は
.Nm ftpd
を
.Xr inetd 8
から起動するよりオーバーヘッドが少ないため、
処理量の多いサーバで負荷を低減するのに役立つ。
.It Fl h
.\"O The server will use data ports in the high port range for passive connections.
.\"O This range is defined by the
.\"O .Ev IPPORT_HIFIRSTAUTO
.\"O and
.\"O .Ev IPPORT_HILASTAUTO
.\"O defines in <netinet/in.h>.  In
.\"O .Ox
.\"O they are set to 49152 and 65535 respectively.
サーバがパッシブ接続のために大きい番号の範囲にあるデータポートを使う。
この範囲は <netinet/in.h> にある
.Ev IPPORT_HIFIRSTAUTO
と
.Ev IPPORT_HILASTAUTO
で定義される。
.Ox
では、この値はそれぞれ 49152 と 65535 に設定される。
.It Fl l
.\"O Each successful and failed
.\"O .Xr ftp 1
.\"O session is logged using syslog with a facility of LOG_FTP.
.\"O If this option is specified twice, the retrieve (get), store (put), append,
.\"O delete, make directory, remove directory and rename operations and
.\"O their filename arguments are also logged.
成功または失敗した各
.Xr ftp 1
セッションを syslog の LOG_FTP ファシリティ (facility) を用いてログに記録する。
このオプションを 2 つ指定すると、
retrieve (get), store (put), append,
delete, make directory, remove directory, rename の各操作、 
およびそれらの引き数として指定されたファイル名についてもログに記録する。
.It Fl M
.\"O Enables multihomed mode.  Instead of simply using
.\"O .Pa ~ftp
.\"O for anonymous transfers, a directory matching the fully qualified name of
.\"O the IP number the client connected to, and located inside
.\"O .Pa ~ftp
.\"O is used instead.
複数ホームモードを有効にする。
匿名ファイル転送のために単に
.Pa ~ftp
を使うのではなく、接続されたクライアントの IP アドレスから
完全なドメイン名付きのホスト名にマッチする
.Pa ~ftp
内部にあるディレクトリを使う。
.It Fl p
.\"O Disable passive mode ftp connections.  This is useful if you are behind
.\"O a firewall that refuses connections to arbitrary high numbered ports.
.\"O Many ftp clients try passive mode first and do not always react gracefully
.\"O to a server that refuses connections to the port it asked the client to
.\"O connect to.
パッシブモード ftp 接続を無効にする。
大きな番号のポートでの接続を拒否する
ファイアーウォールの後ろにいる場合に役立つ。
多くの ftp クライアントは始めにパッシブモードを試み、
クライアントが接続するのに指定したポートへの接続を拒否する
サーバに対して常にうまく対応する訳ではない。
.It Fl P
.\"O Permit illegal port numbers or addresses for PORT command initiated connects.
.\"O By default
.\"O .Xr ftpd 8
.\"O violates the RFC and thus constrains the PORT command to non-reserved ports
.\"O and requires it use the same source address as the connection came from.
.\"O This prevents the "FTP bounce attack" against services on both the local
.\"O machine and other local machines.
正式なポート番号や接続を初期化する PORT コマンドの
正式なアドレスの使用を許可する。
デフォルトでは、
.Xr ftpd 8
は RFC を守っていないので、
PORT コマンドを予約されていないポート番号で行わせたり、
接続元のアドレスが同じアドレスである必要がある。
これにより、ローカルマシンと他のローカルマシンに対して
"FTP バウンス攻撃" を防止することができる。
.It Fl S
.\"O With this option set,
.\"O .Nm ftpd
.\"O logs all anonymous transfers to the file
.\"O .Pa /var/log/ftpd
.\"O when this file exists.
このオプションが設定されると、
.Nm ftpd
は、ファイル
.Pa /var/log/ftpd
がある場合、このファイルに全ての匿名ファイル転送についてログを記録する。
.It Fl U
.\"O Each concurrent
.\"O .Xr ftp 1
.\"O session is logged to the file
.\"O .Pa /var/run/utmp ,
.\"O making them visible to commands such as
.\"O .Xr who 1 .
.\"O This option at present is unsupporte and will always silently fail.
同時に起こる各
.Xr ftp 1
セッションは、ファイル
.Pa /var/run/utmp
にログが記録され、
.Xr who 1
のようなコマンドに見えるようにされる。
このオプションは現在のところサポートされておらず、
常に何も表示せずに失敗する。
.It Fl T
.\"O A client may also request a different timeout period;
.\"O the maximum period allowed may be set to
.\"O .Ar timeout
.\"O seconds with the
.\"O .Fl T
.\"O option.
.\"O The default limit is 2 hours.
クライアントが他のタイムアウト時間をリクエストできる。
タイムアウトの最長時間は、
.Fl T
オプションを使って
.Ar timeout
秒に設定することができる。
デフォルトのタイムアウト時間は 2 時間である。
.It Fl t
.\"O The inactivity timeout period is set to
.\"O .Ar timeout
.\"O seconds (the default is 15 minutes).
無活動タイムアウト時間を
.Ar timeout
秒に設定する
(デフォルトは 15 分である)。
.It Fl u
.\"O Change the default umask from 027 to
.\"O .Ar mask .
デフォルトの umask を 027 から
.Ar mask
に変更する。
.El
.Pp
.\"O The file
.\"O .Pa /etc/nologin
.\"O can be used to disable ftp access.
.\"O If the file exists,
.\"O .Nm
.\"O displays it and exits.
.\"O If the file
.\"O .Pa /etc/ftpwelcome
.\"O exists,
.\"O .Nm
.\"O prints it before issuing the
.\"O .Dq ready
.\"O message.
ファイル
.Pa /etc/nologin
は ftp アクセスを不可にするために使われる。
このファイルが存在すると、
.Nm
はそのファイル内容を表示して終了する。
ファイル
.Pa /etc/ftpwelcome
が存在する場合、
.Nm
は
.Dq ready
メッセージを表示する前に、
そのファイルの内容を表示する。
.\"O If the file
.\"O .Pa /etc/motd
.\"O exists,
.\"O .Nm
.\"O prints it after a successful login.  If the file
.\"O .Pa .message
.\"O exists in a directory,
.\"O .Nm
.\"O prints it when that directory is entered.
.Pa /etc/motd
が存在する場合、
.Nm
はログインが成功した後、そのファイルの内容を表示する。
ディレクトリに
.Pa .message
ファイルが存在する場合、
.Nm
そのディレクトリに入ったときに、このファイルの内容を表示する。
.Pp
.\"O The ftp server currently supports the following ftp requests.
.\"O The case of the requests is ignored.
ftp サーバは現在のところ以下の ftp リクエストをサポートしている。
リクエストの文字の大文字小文字は無視される。
.\"O .Bl -column "Request" -offset indent
.\"O .It Request Ta "Description"
.Bl -column "リクエスト" -offset indent
.It リクエスト Ta "説明"
.\"O .It ABOR Ta "abort previous command"
.\"O .It ACCT Ta "specify account (ignored)"
.\"O .It ALLO Ta "allocate storage (vacuously)"
.\"O .It APPE Ta "append to a file"
.\"O .It CDUP Ta "change to parent of current working directory"
.It ABOR Ta "直前のコマンドを中断 (abort) する"
.It ACCT Ta "アカウントを指定する (無視される)"
.It ALLO Ta "(空の) ストレージを確保する"
.It APPE Ta "ファイルを追加する"
.It CDUP Ta "カレントワーキングディレクトリの親ディレクトリを変更する"
.\"O .It CWD Ta "change working directory"
.\"O .It DELE Ta "delete a file"
.\"O .It HELP Ta "give help information"
.\"O .It LIST Ta "give list files in a directory" Pq Dq Li "ls -lgA"
.\"O .It MKD Ta "make a directory"
.It CWD Ta "ワーキングディレクトリを変更する"
.It DELE Ta "ファイルを削除する"
.It HELP Ta "ヘルプ情報を表示する"
.It LIST Ta "ディレクトリ中のファイルのリストを表示する" Pq Dq Li "ls -lgA"
.It MKD Ta "ディレクトリを作成する"
.\"O .It MDTM Ta "show last modification time of file"
.\"O .It MODE Ta "specify data transfer" Em mode
.\"O .It NLST Ta "give name list of files in directory"
.\"O .It NOOP Ta "do nothing"
.\"O .It PASS Ta "specify password"
.It MDTM Ta "ファイルの最終修正時刻を表示する"
.It MODE Ta "データ転送モードを" Em mode "に指定する"
.It NLST Ta "ディレクトリ中のファイル名リストを表示する"
.It NOOP Ta "何もしない"
.It PASS Ta "パスワードを指定する"
.\"O .It PASV Ta "prepare for server-to-server transfer"
.\"O .It PORT Ta "specify data connection port"
.\"O .It PWD Ta "print the current working directory"
.\"O .It QUIT Ta "terminate session"
.\"O .It REST Ta "restart incomplete transfer"
.It PASV Ta "サーバからサーバへの転送の準備をする"
.It PORT Ta "データ接続ポートを指定する"
.It PWD Ta "カレントワーキングディレクトリの名前を表示する"
.It QUIT Ta "セッションを終了する"
.It REST Ta "不完全だった転送を再開する"
.\"O .It RETR Ta "retrieve a file"
.\"O .It RMD Ta "remove a directory"
.\"O .It RNFR Ta "specify rename-from file name"
.\"O .It RNTO Ta "specify rename-to file name"
.\"O .It SITE Ta "non-standard commands (see next section)"
.It RETR Ta "ファイルを取得する"
.It RMD Ta "ディレクトリを削除する"
.It RNFR Ta "名前変更前のファイル名を指定する"
.It RNTO Ta "名前変更後のファイル名を指定する"
.It SITE Ta "標準でないコマンド (次のセクションを参照すること)"
.\"O .It SIZE Ta "return size of file"
.\"O .It STAT Ta "return status of server"
.\"O .It STOR Ta "store a file"
.\"O .It STOU Ta "store a file with a unique name"
.\"O .It STRU Ta "specify data transfer" Em structure
.It SIZE Ta "ファイルのサイズを返す"
.It STAT Ta "サーバのステータスを返す"
.It STOR Ta "ファイルを格納する"
.It STOU Ta "ファイルを他のものと重複のない名前で格納する"
.It STRU Ta "データ転送構造を" Em structure "に指定する"
.\"O .It SYST Ta "show operating system type of server system"
.\"O .It TYPE Ta "specify data transfer" Em type
.\"O .It USER Ta "specify user name"
.\"O .It XCUP Ta "change to parent of current working directory (deprecated)"
.\"O .It XCWD Ta "change working directory (deprecated)"
.It SYST Ta "サーバシステムのオペレーティングシステムのタイプを表示する"
.It TYPE Ta "データ転送タイプを" Em type "に指定する"
.It USER Ta "ユーザー名を指定する"
.It XCUP Ta "カレントワーキングディレクトリの親ディレクトリを変更する (反対される)"
.It XCWD Ta "ワーキングディレクトリを変更する (反対される)"
.\"O .It XMKD Ta "make a directory (deprecated)"
.\"O .It XPWD Ta "print the current working directory (deprecated)"
.\"O .It XRMD Ta "remove a directory (deprecated)"
.It XMKD Ta "ディレクトリを作成する (反対される)"
.It XPWD Ta "カレントワーキングディレクトリの名前を表示する (反対される)"
.It XRMD Ta "ディレクトリを削除する (反対される)"
.El
.Pp
.\"O The following non-standard or
.\"O .Tn UNIX
.\"O specific commands are supported
.\"O by the
.\"O SITE request.
以下の標準でないコマンドや
.Tn UNIX
特有のコマンドは、
SITE リクエストを使うことでサポートされる。
.Pp
.\"O .Bl -column Request -offset indent
.\"O .It Sy Request Ta Sy Description
.\"O .It UMASK Ta change umask, e.g. ``SITE UMASK 002''
.\"O .It IDLE Ta set idle-timer, e.g. ``SITE IDLE 60''
.\"O .It CHMOD Ta change mode of a file, e.g. ``SITE CHMOD 755 filename''
.\"O .It HELP Ta give help information.
.Bl -column リクエスト -offset indent
.It Sy リクエスト Ta Sy 説明
.It UMASK Ta umask を変更する。例 ``SITE UMASK 002''
.It IDLE Ta アイドルタイマを設定する。例 ``SITE IDLE 60''
.It CHMOD Ta ファイルのモードを指定する。例 ``SITE CHMOD 755 filename''
.It HELP Ta ヘルプ情報を表示する。
.El
.Pp
.\"O The remaining ftp requests specified in Internet RFC 959
.\"O are
.\"O recognized, but not implemented.
.\"O MDTM and SIZE are not specified in RFC 959, but will appear in the
.\"O next updated FTP RFC.
インターネット RFC 959 で規定されている
他の ftp リクエストも認識されるが、
今のところ実装されてはいない。
MDTM と SIZE は RFC 959 で規定されていないが、
次に改訂される FTP RFC には登場するだろう。
.Pp
.\"O The ftp server will abort an active file transfer only when the
.\"O ABOR
.\"O command is preceded by a Telnet "Interrupt Process" (IP)
.\"O signal and a Telnet "Synch" signal in the command Telnet stream,
.\"O as described in Internet RFC 959.
.\"O If a
.\"O STAT
.\"O command is received during a data transfer, preceded by a Telnet IP
.\"O and Synch, transfer status will be returned.
ftp サーバがアクティブなファイル転送プロセスを中断 (abort) するのは、
ABOR コマンドの前に、
Telnet "Interrupt Process" (IP) シグナルや
Telnet "Synch" シグナルが
Telnet  ストリーム内にある場合だけである。
これはインターネット RFC 959 に記述されている。
データ転送中に STAT コマンドを受け取り、
その前に Telnet IP や Synch があった場合、
転送ステータスが返される。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Ftpd
.\"O interprets file names according to the
.\"O .Dq globbing
.\"O conventions used by
.\"O .Xr csh 1 .
.\"O This allows users to utilize the metacharacters
.\"O .Dq Li \&*?[]{}~ .
.Nm ftpd
は、
.Xr csh 1
で使われている
.Dq ファイル名展開
による変換に基づいて、ファイル名を解釈する。
これにより、ユーザーはメタキャラクタ
.Dq Li \&*?[]{}~
を利用できる。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Ftpd
.\"O authenticates users according to five rules.
.Nm ftpd
は 5 つのルールに従ってユーザーの認証をする。
.Pp
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
.\"O The login name must be in the password data base,
.\"O .\" .Pa /etc/pwd.db ,
.\"O .Pa /etc/passwd ,
.\"O and not have a null password.
.\"O In this case a password must be provided by the client before any
.\"O file operations may be performed.
ログイン名はパスワードデータベース
.\" .Pa /etc/pwd.db ,
.Pa /etc/passwd
になければならず、
空のパスワードであってはならない。
この場合、あらゆるファイル転送に先だって、
クライアントからパスワードが提供されなければならない。
.\"O If the user has an S/Key key, the response from a successful USER
.\"O command will include an S/Key challenge. The client may choose to respond
.\"O with a PASS command giving either a standard password or an S/Key
.\"O one-time password. The server will automatically determine which type of
.\"O password it has been given and attempt to authenticate accordingly. See
.\"O .Xr skey 1
.\"O for more information on S/Key authentication. S/Key is a Trademark of
.\"O Bellcore.
ユーザーが S/Key のキーを持っている場合、
USER コマンドが成功した際の応答が S/Key チャレンジに含めて送られる。
クライアントは、それに対して PASS コマンドを使って応答する際に、
通常のパスワードと S/Key のワンタイムパスワードの
どちらをつけて応答するかを選択できる。
サーバはどちらのタイプのパスワードを受け取ったかを自動的に判定し、
それに応じて認証を試みる。
S/Key 認証についての詳細は
.Xr skey 1
を参照すること。
S/Key は Bellcore 社の商標である。
.It
.\"O The login name must not appear in the file
.\"O .Pa /etc/ftpusers .
ログイン名はファイル
.Pa /etc/ftpusers
にあってはならない。
.It
.\"O The user must have a standard shell returned by
.\"O .Xr getusershell 3 .
ユーザーは
.Xr getusershell 3
が返す標準のシェルを持っていなければならない。
.It
.\"O If the user name appears in the file
.\"O .Pa /etc/ftpchroot
.\"O the session's root will be changed to the user's login directory by
.\"O .Xr chroot 2
.\"O as for an
.\"O .Dq anonymous
.\"O or
.\"O .Dq ftp
.\"O account (see next item).  However, the user must still supply a password.
.\"O This feature is intended as a compromise between a fully anonymous account
.\"O and a fully privileged account.  The account should also be set up as for an
.\"O anonymous account.
ユーザー名がファイル
.Pa /etc/ftpchroot
にある場合、
.Dq anonymous
アカウントや
.Dq ftp
アカウントの場合 (次の項目を参照) と同様に、
セッションのルートディレクトリは
.Xr chroot 2
によってユーザーのログインディレクトリに変更される。
しかし、この場合でもユーザーはパスワードを与える必要がある。
この特徴は、完全に匿名なアカウントと完全な特権のあるアカウントの
妥協的な利用を意図している。
このアカウントは匿名アカウントとして設定されていなければならない。
.It
.\"O If the user name is
.\"O .Dq anonymous
.\"O or
.\"O .Dq ftp ,
.\"O an
.\"O anonymous ftp account must be present in the password
.\"O file (user
.\"O .Dq ftp ) .
.\"O In this case the user is allowed
.\"O to log in by specifying any password (by convention an email address for
.\"O the user should be used as the password).
ユーザー名が
.Dq anonymous
または
.Dq ftp
である場合、
匿名 ftp アカウントがパスワードファイルで (ユーザー
.Dq ftp
として) 提供されていなければならない。
この場合、ユーザーはどのようなパスワードを指定してもログインが許可される
(慣例として、ユーザーの email アドレスがパスワードとして使われる)。
.El
.Pp
.\"O In the last case,
.\"O .Nm ftpd
.\"O takes special measures to restrict the client's access privileges.
.\"O The server performs a
.\"O .Xr chroot 2
.\"O to the home directory of the
.\"O .Dq ftp
.\"O user.
.\"O In order that system security is not breached, it is recommended
.\"O that the
.\"O .Dq ftp
.\"O subtree be constructed with care, following these rules:
最後のケースでは、
.Nm ftpd
は、クライアントのアクセス権を制限するために、特別な評価を行う。
サーバは
.Dq ftp
ユーザのホームディレクトリに対して
.Xr chroot 2
を実行する。
システムのセキュリティが侵害されないためには、
.Dq ftp
サブツリーを以下の規則に従って慎重に構築することを推奨する:
.Bl -tag -width "~ftp/pub" -offset indent
.It Pa ~ftp
.\"O Make the home directory owned by
.\"O .Dq root
.\"O and unwritable by anyone (mode 555).
ホームディレクトリを
.Dq root
の所有とし、誰も書き込みできないように (モードを 555 に) すること。
.It Pa ~ftp/bin
.\"O Make this directory owned by
.\"O .Dq root
.\"O and unwritable by anyone (mode 511).
このディレクトリを
.Dq root
の所有とし、誰も書き込みできないように (モードを 511 に) すること。
.\"O .\"This directory is optional unless you have commands you wish
.\"O .\"the anonymous ftp user to be able to run (the
.\"O .\".Xr ls 1
.\"O .\"command exists as a builtin).
.\"O .\"  -- not in the Linux port (yet?)
.\"匿名 ftp ユーザーに実行させたいコマンドがない限り、
.\"このディレクトリはなくても構わない
.\".Ns ( Xr ls 1
.\"コマンドは組み込みコマンドとして存在する)。
.\"  -- 組み込みの ls コマンドは Linux 版にはない (まだなかったかな？)
.\"O This directory is required, and should contain at least a statically
.\"O linked copy of
.\"O .Xr ls 1.
.\"O Any programs in this directory should be mode 111 (executable only).
このディレクトリは必要で、
少なくとも静的にリンクされた
.Xr ls 1
のコピーがなければならない。
このディレクトリにあるプログラムのモードは、
111 (実行属性のみ) でなければならない。
.It Pa ~ftp/etc
.\"O Make this directory owned by
.\"O .Dq root
.\"O and unwritable by anyone (mode 511).
.\"O The files 
.\"O .\" pwd.db (see
.\"O .\" .Xr pwd_mkdb 8 )
.\"O .Xr passwd 5
.\"O and
.\"O .Xr group 5
.\"O must be present for the
.\"O .Xr ls
.\"O command to be able to produce owner names rather than numbers.
このディレクトリを
.Dq root
の所有とし、誰も書き込みできないように (モードを 511 に) すること。
.Xr ls
コマンドが所有者を数字ではなく名前で表示できるようにするために、
ファイル
.\" pwd.db
.\" .Ns ( Xr pwd_mkdb 8
.\" を参照)
.Xr passwd 5
と
.Xr group 5
が必要である。
.\"O The password field in
.\"O .\" .Xr pwd.db
.\"O .Pa passwd
.\"O is not used, and should not contain real passwords.
.\"O The file
.\"O .Pa motd ,
.\"O if present, will be printed after a successful login.
.\"O These files should be mode 444.
.\" .Xr pwd.db
.Pa passwd
のパスワードフィールドは使用されないので、
実際のパスワードを入れてはならない。
ファイル
.Pa motd
が存在すると、ログイン成功後、その内容が表示される。
このファイルはモードが 444 でなければならない。
.It Pa ~ftp/pub
.\"O Make this directory mode 555 and owned by
.\"O .Dq root .
.\"O This is traditionally where publically accessible files are
.\"O stored for download.
このディレクトリのモードを 555 とし、
.Dq root
の所有とすること。
このディレクトリには、伝統的に、ダウンロードのための
公開アクセス可能なファイルが格納される。
.El
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /etc/ftpwelcome -compact
.It Pa /etc/ftpusers
.\"O List of unwelcome/restricted users.
歓迎されない/制限を受けるユーザーのリスト。
.It Pa /etc/ftpchroot
.\"O List of normal users who should be chroot'd.
chroot しなければならない一般ユーザーのリスト。
.It Pa /etc/ftpwelcome
.\"O Welcome notice.
歓迎のメッセージ。
.It Pa /etc/motd
.\"O Welcome notice after login.
ログイン後の歓迎のメッセージ。
.It Pa /etc/nologin
.\"O Displayed and access refused.
表示されて、アクセスが拒否される。
.It Pa /var/run/utmp
.\"O List of users on the system.
システム上のユーザーのリスト。
.It Pa /var/log/ftpd
.\"O Log file for anonymous transfers.
匿名ファイル転送のログファイル。
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr ftp 1 ,
.Xr skey 1 ,
.Xr who 1 ,
.Xr getusershell 3 ,
.Xr ftpusers 5 ,
.Xr syslogd 8
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O The server must run as the super-user
.\"O to create sockets with privileged port numbers.  It maintains
.\"O an effective user ID of the logged in user, reverting to
.\"O the super-user only when binding addresses to sockets.  The
.\"O possible security holes have been extensively
.\"O scrutinized, but are possibly incomplete.
特権ポート番号を用いてソケットを作成するために、
サーバはスーパーユーザーとして実行しなければならない。
サーバーはログインしたユーザーの実行ユーザー ID を管理する (使う)。
そして、アドレスをソケットにバインドする場合にのみ、
スーパーユーザーに戻る (その権限を使う)。
考えられるセキュリティホールについては、かなり綿密に調べたが、
それでも不完全かもしれない。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
