.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)inetd.8	6.7 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	$Id: inetd.8,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\" jpman %Id: inetd.8,v 1.2 1997/05/16 07:22:24 yugawa Stab %
.\"
.\" Modified for JM style on Tue Dec 14 18:07:00 JST 1999
.\"	by Tatsuo SEKINE <tsekine@isoternet.org>
.\" Update and Modified on Tue Mar 13 21:08:37 JST 2001
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: socket listen queue	ソケット監視キュー
.\"WORD: suffix		サフィックス
.\"WORD: group id	グループ ID
.\"
.Dd August 22, 1999
.Dt INETD 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm inetd
.\"O .Nd internet
.\"O .Dq super-server
.Nd インターネット
.Dq スーパーサーバー
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm inetd
.Op Fl di
.Op Fl q Ar queuelength
.Op Ar configuration file
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Inetd
.\"O should be run at boot time by
.\"O .Pa /etc/rc.local
.\"O (see
.\"O .Xr rc 8 ) .
.Nm inetd
は通常ブート時に
.Pa /etc/rc.local
によって起動される
.Ns ( Xr rc 8
を参照)。(訳注: ディストリビューションによって異なる)。
.\"O If your 
.\"O .Xr init 8
.\"O can respawn arbitrary daemons,
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O can be run from init instead; then init will restart it if it crashes.
使用している
.Xr init 8
が任意のデーモンを再起動できる場合、
.Nm inetd
は (/etc/rc.local ではなく) init から実行できる。
そうすれば、クラッシュした場合に再起動できる。
.\"O You must use the
.\"O .Fl i
.\"O option to prevent
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O from backgrounding itself, or init will become confused.
この場合は
.Nm inetd
が自身をバックグラウンドに送るのを防ぐために
.Fl i
オプションを使わなければならない。
さもないと init は混乱してしまう。
.Pp
.\"O When running,
.\"O .Nm inetd listens for connections on certain
.\"O internet sockets.  When a connection is found on one of its sockets, 
.\"O it looks up what service the socket corresponds to, and invokes a 
.\"O program to service the request. 
実行されている間
.Nm inetd 
は定められたインターネットソケットを監視し、接続要求を待つ。
監視しているソケットに対して接続要求が出されると、
そのソケットに対応したサービスを判定し、
サービスを提供するプログラムを起動する。
.\"O After the program is finished, it 
.\"O will continue to listen on the socket, except in some special cases 
.\"O which will be described below.  Essentially,
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O allows running one daemon to invoke several others,
.\"O reducing load on the system.
サービスプログラムが完了すると、
.Nm inetd
は再びソケットの監視を行なう。
後述するような例外もある。
.Nm inetd
を用いれば 1 つのデーモンで
複数のサービスプログラムを起動することができるので、
システムの負荷を軽減することができる。
.\"O .Ss OPTIONS
.Ss オプション
.\"O The options available for
.\"O .Nm inetd:
.Nm inetd
に指定できるオプションを示す:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d
.\"O Turns on several kinds of debugging and make inetd behave if run in a 
.\"O debugger. Also implies
.\"O .Fl i .
いくつかのデバッグを有効にして、
inetd をデバッガから実行されたように動作させる。
暗黙のうちに
.Fl i
も指定される。
.It Fl i
.\"O Do not background; for running from
.\"O .Xr init 8 .
バックグラウンドにしない。
.Xr init 8
から実行するためにある。
.It Fl q Ar queuelength
.\"O Sets the size of the socket listen queue to the specified
.\"O value. Default is 128.
ソケットの監視キューの大きさを指定された値に設定する。
デフォルトは 128。
.El
.\"O .Ss CONFIGURATION
.Ss 設定
.\"O Upon execution,
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O reads its configuration information from a configuration
.\"O file which, by default, is
.\"O .Pa /etc/inetd.conf .
.Nm inetd
は実行時に設定情報を設定ファイルから読み込む。
デフォルトでは設定ファイルは
.Pa /etc/inetd.conf
である。
.\"O There must be an entry for each field of the configuration
.\"O file, with entries for each field separated by a tab or
.\"O a space.  Comments are denoted by a ``#'' at the beginning
.\"O of a line.  There must be an entry for each field.  The
.\"O fields of the configuration file are as follows:
設定ファイルの各フィールドにはエントリが 1 つなければならない。
各フィールドのエントリはタブやスペースで区切る。
コメントは行頭に ``#'' をつける。
設定ファイルのフィールドは次の通り:
.Pp
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.\"O service name[@hostname]
.\"O socket type
.\"O protocol
.\"O wait/nowait[.max]
.\"O user[.group]
.\"O server program
.\"O server program arguments
サービス名[@ホスト名]
ソケットタイプ
プロトコル
wait/nowait[.max]
ユーザー名[.グループ名]
サーバープログラム名
サーバープログラム引き数
.Ed
.Pp
.\"O To specify an 
.\"O .Em Sun-RPC 
.\"O based service, the entry would contain these fields.
.Em Sun-RPC
ベースのサービスを記述する場合には、次のエントリを記述する。
.Pp
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.\"O service name/version[@hostname]
.\"O socket type
.\"O rpc/protocol
.\"O wait/nowait[.max]
.\"O user[.group]
.\"O server program
.\"O server program arguments
サービス名/バージョン[@ホスト名]
ソケットタイプ
RPC/プロトコル
wait/nowait[.max]
ユーザー名[.グループ名]
サーバープログラム名
サーバープログラム引き数
.Ed
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Em service-name
.\"O entry is the name of a valid service in
.\"O the file
.\"O .Pa /etc/services .
.Em サービス名
のエントリには、
.Pa /etc/services
ファイルに記述されているサービス名が記述される。
.\"O For
.\"O .Dq internal
.\"O services (discussed below), the service
.\"O name
.\"O .Em must
.\"O be the official name of the service (that is, the first entry in
.\"O .Pa /etc/services ) . 
.Dq 内部
サービス (後述) については、
名前としてそのサービスの公式名
(すなわち
.Pa /etc/services
内の最初のエントリ) を指定
.Em しなければならない。
.\"O When used to specify a
.\"O .Em Sun-RPC
.\"O based service, this field is a valid RPC service name in
.\"O the file
.\"O .Pa /etc/rpc . 
.Em Sun-RPC
ベースのサービスを指定するためには、このフィールドは
.Pa /etc/rpc
に書かれた有効な RPC サービス名でなければならない。
.\"O The part on the right of the 
.\"O .Dq /
.\"O is the RPC version number. This
.\"O can simply be a single numeric argument or a range of versions.
.\"O A range is bounded by the low version to the high version - 
.\"O .Dq rusers/1-3 .
.Dq /
の右の部分が RPC のバージョン番号である。
バージョン番号は、数字もしくは、バージョンの範囲 (レンジ) で指定する。
範囲を指定する場合は低い番号から高い番号を指定する。
たとえば
.Dq rusers/1-3
のように記述する。
.Pp
.\"O If a string of the form
.\"O .Em @hostname 
.\"O is appended to the service, it causes inetd to bind to the port for
.\"O the service on only the specific IP address associated with
.\"O .Em hostname ,
.\"O instead of listening on all available addresses. 
サービス名に
.Em @hostname
という形式の文字列が追加された場合、
inetd は
.Em hostname
に対応する特定の IP アドレスからの接続についてのみ、
サービスポートをバインドさせる (全てのアドレスからの接続は listen しない)。
.\"O This can be done as
.\"O many times as desired for different addresses, which permits setting
.\"O up ``virtually hosted'' services. 
異なるアドレスに対して使用したいだけ指定できるので、
``仮想ホスト''サービスを設定できる。
.\"O Note, however, that while you can
.\"O listen to as many specific addresses as you want, kernel restrictions
.\"O prevent 
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O from listening to the same port on a specific address and the general
.\"O address at once.
望むだけの数の特定のアドレスを監視できるが、
カーネルによる制限によって、
.Nm inetd
がそのポートを特定のアドレスに対して (あるいは同時に一般のアドレスに対して)
監視するのが禁止されることもある。
.\"O .Em hostname
.\"O should be a resolvable hostname or an IP address associated with one
.\"O of the interfaces of the local system.
.Em hostname
はローカルシステムのインターフェースに関連づけられた、
解決可能なホスト名または IP アドレスにすべきである。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Em socket-type
.\"O should be one of
.\"O .Dq stream ,
.\"O .Dq dgram ,
.\"O .Dq raw ,
.\"O .Dq rdm ,
.\"O or
.\"O .Dq seqpacket ,
.\"O depending on whether the socket is a stream, datagram, raw,
.\"O reliably delivered message, or sequenced packet socket.
.Em ソケットタイプ
のエントリは、
.Dq stream ,
.Dq dgram ,
.Dq raw ,
.Dq rdm ,
.Dq seqpacket
のいずれかで、それぞれソケットが
stream, datagram, raw, reliably delivered message, sequenced packet socket
である場合に対応している。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Em protocol
.\"O must be a valid protocol as given in
.\"O .Pa /etc/protocols .
.Em プロトコル
のエントリには、
.Pa /etc/protocols
に記述されている有効なプロトコル名が記述される。
.\"O Examples might be
.\"O .Dq tcp
.\"O or
.\"O .Dq udp .
例えば
.Dq tcp
や
.Dq udp
などである。
.\"O Rpc based services are specified with the 
.\"O .Dq rpc/tcp
.\"O or 
.\"O .Dq rpc/udp 
.\"O service type.
RPC ベースのサービスの場合、
.Dq rpc/tcp
や
.Dq rpc/udp 
のような指定になる。
.\"O 
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Em wait/nowait
.\"O entry is applicable to datagram sockets only (other sockets should
.\"O have a
.\"O .Dq nowait
.\"O entry in this space).  If a datagram server connects
.\"O to its peer, freeing the socket so
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O can received further messages on the socket, it is said to be
.\"O a
.\"O .Dq multi-threaded
.\"O server, and should use the
.\"O .Dq nowait
.\"O entry.  
.Em wait/nowait
エントリは、datagram ソケットにのみ適用できる
(その他のソケットでは、この場所は
.Dq nowait
でなければならない)。
もし datagram サーバーが相手に接続したときにソケットを解放するなら、
.Nm inetd
はソケットに対するメッセージをさらに受けることができる。
このようなサーバーは
.Dq マルチスレッド
サーバーと呼ばれ、
.Dq nowait
エントリを指定しなければならない。
.\"O For datagram servers which process all incoming datagrams
.\"O on a socket and eventually time out, the server is said to be
.\"O .Dq single-threaded
.\"O and should use a
.\"O .Dq wait
.\"O entry.
入って来る全ての datagram を処理し、
時間切れまで動作する datagram サーバーは、
.Dq シングルスレッド
サーバーと呼ばれ、
.Dq wait
エントリを指定しなければならない。
.\"O .Xr Comsat 8
.\"O .Pq Xr biff 1
.\"O and
.\"O .Xr talkd 8
.\"O are both examples of the latter type of
.\"O datagram server.
.Xr comsat 8 ,
.Pq Xr biff 1 ,
.Xr talkd 8
は後者のタイプの datagram サーバーの例である。
.\"O .Xr Tftpd 8
.\"O is an exception; it is a datagram server that establishes pseudo-connections.
.\"O It must be listed as
.\"O .Dq wait
.\"O in order to avoid a race;
.\"O the server reads the first packet, creates a new socket,
.\"O and then forks and exits to allow
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O to check for new service requests to spawn new servers.
.Xr tftpd 8
は例外である; これは疑似接続を確立する datagram サーバーである。
競合を避けるために
.Dq wait
が指定されなければならない;
サーバーは最初のパケットを読み込み、新たなソケットを作成し、
.Nm inetd
が新たなサーバーを起動するような接続要求をチェックできるように、
fork して終了する。
.\"O The optional
.\"O .Dq max
.\"O suffix (separated from
.\"O .Dq wait
.\"O or
.\"O .Dq nowait
.\"O by a dot) specifies the maximum number of server instances that may be
.\"O spawned from
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O within an interval of 60 seconds. When omitted,
.\"O .Dq max
.\"O defaults to 40.
オプションのサフィックス (接尾辞) 
.Dq max
.Ns ( Dq wait
または
.Dq nowait
からドット``.''で分けられる) は、60 秒の間に最大いくつのサーバーが
.Nm inetd
から起動できるかを指定する。
省略された場合の、
.Dq max
のデフォルトは 40 である。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Em user
.\"O entry should contain the user name of the user as whom the server
.\"O should run.  This allows for servers to be given less permission
.\"O than root. 
.Em user
エントリには、サーバーを実行するユーザー名を書く。
これによりサーバーを root よりも低い権限で実行できる。
.\"O An optional group name can be specified by appending a dot to
.\"O the user name followed by the group name. This allows for servers to run with
.\"O a different (primary) group id than specified in the password file. If a group
.\"O is specified and user is not root, the supplementary groups associated with
.\"O that user will still be set.
ユーザー名に続いてドット``.'' を付加して、
その後ろにグループ名を指定することができる。
これによりサーバーを password ファイルで指定される
(プライマリの) グループ ID とは違うグループ ID で実行できる。
グループ名が指定され、ユーザーが root 以外だった場合は、
そのユーザの補助グループも (グループアクセスリストに) 設定されることになる。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Em server-program
.\"O entry should contain the pathname of the program which is to be
.\"O executed by
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O when a request is found on its socket.  If
.\"O .Nm inetd
.\"O provides this service internally, this entry should
.\"O be
.\"O .Dq internal .
.Em サーバープログラム名
のエントリには、ソケットに要求があったとき
.Nm inetd
が起動し、当該エントリのサービスを提供する
サーバープログラムのパス名を指定する。
.Nm inetd
内にすでに実装されているサービスを提供する場合には、サーバープログラムとして
.Dq internal
を指定する。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Em server program arguments
.\"O should be just as arguments
.\"O normally are, starting with argv[0], which is the name of
.\"O the program.  If the service is provided internally, the
.\"O word
.\"O .Dq internal
.\"O should take the place of this entry.
.Em サーバープログラム引数
のエントリには、サーバーを起動する際の引数を、
サーバープログラムの起動文字列である argv[0] を含めて記述する。
.Nm inetd
内に実装されているサービスを提供する場合には、サーバープログラム引数として
.Dq internal
を指定する。
.\"O .Ss BUILTINS
.Ss 組み込み関数
.\"O .Nm Inetd
.\"O provides several
.\"O .Dq trivial
.\"O services internally by use of
.\"O routines within itself.  These services are
.\"O .Dq echo ,
.\"O .Dq discard ,
.\"O .Dq chargen
.\"O (character generator),
.\"O .Dq daytime
.\"O (human readable time), and
.\"O .Dq time
.\"O (machine readable time,
.\"O in the form of the number of seconds since midnight, January
.\"O 1, 1900).  All of these services are tcp based.  For
.\"O details of these services, consult the appropriate
.\"O .Tn RFC
.\"O from the Network Information Center.
.Nm inetd
は、内蔵ルーチンを用いて簡単なサービスを自身で提供する。
これらのサービスとは
.Dq echo ,
.Dq discard ,
.Dq chargen
(文字生成),
.Dq daytime
(人間が読む形式で時間を出力),
.Dq time
(機械可読形式の時間。1900 年 1 月 1 日 0 時からの経過秒数を出力)
である。
これらのサービスは TCP ベースである。
これらのサービスの詳細については適切な
.Tn RFC
ドキュメントを参照のこと。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Inetd
.\"O rereads its configuration file when it receives a hangup signal,
.\"O .Dv SIGHUP .
.\"O Services may be added, deleted or modified when the configuration file
.\"O is reread.
.Dv SIGHUP
を受けとると、
.Nm inetd
は、設定ファイルを再度読み込む。
設定ファイルを再読み込みするときに、サービスを追加・削除・変更できる。
.\"O .Nm Inetd
.\"O creates a file
.\"O .Em /var/run/inetd.pid
.\"O that contains its process identifier.
.Nm inetd
はファイル
.Pa /var/run/inetd.pid
を作成し、そこにプロセス ID を記録する。
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr comsat 8 ,
.Xr fingerd 8 ,
.Xr ftpd 8 ,
.Xr rexecd 8 ,
.Xr rlogind 8 ,
.Xr rshd 8 ,
.Xr telnetd 8 ,
.Xr tftpd 8
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.3 .
.\"O Support for
.\"O .Em Sun-RPC 
.\"O based services is modelled after that
.\"O provided by
.\"O .Em SunOS 4.1 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.3
から登場した。
.Em Sun-RPC
ベースのサービスのサポートは、
.Em SunOS 4.1
で提供されたものにならって作られた。
