.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)rexecd.8	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	$Id: rexecd.8,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 14 20:53:52 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	facility	機能
.\"
.Dd March 16, 1991
.Dt REXECD 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm rexecd
.\"O .Nd remote execution server
.Nd リモート実行サーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm rexecd
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Rexecd
.\"O is the server for the 
.\"O .Xr rexec 3
.\"O routine.  The server provides remote execution facilities
.\"O with authentication based on user names and
.\"O passwords.
.Nm rexecd
は
.Xr rexec 3
ルーチンのためのサーバである。
このサーバは、ユーザー名とパスワードによる認証に基づいた、
リモート実行機能を提供する。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Rexecd
.\"O listens for service requests at the port indicated in
.\"O the ``exec'' service specification; see
.\"O .Xr services 5 .
.\"O When a service request is received the following protocol
.\"O is initiated:
.Nm rexecd
は ``exec'' サービスの仕様で指示されたポートへのサービス要求を監視する。
.Xr services 5
を参照すること。
サービス要求を受信すると、以下のプロトコルが開始される。
.Bl -enum
.It
.\"O The server reads characters from the socket up
.\"O to a NUL
.\"O .Pq Ql \e0
.\"O byte.  The resultant string is
.\"O interpreted as an
.\"O .Tn ASCII
.\"O number, base 10.
サーバはソケットから
NUL 文字のバイト
.Pq Ql \e0
を受信するまで文字を読み取る。
受信した文字は
.Tn ASCII
文字からなる 10 進数の数字として解釈される。
.It 
.\"O If the number received in step 1 is non-zero,
.\"O it is interpreted as the port number of a secondary
.\"O stream to be used for the 
.\"O .Em stderr .
.\"O A second connection is then created to the specified
.\"O port on the client's machine.
ステップ 1 で受信された番号が 0 でない場合、
その番号は
.Em stderr
のために使われる 2 次ストリームのポート番号であると解釈される。
その後、第 2 の接続がクライアントマシン上の
指定されたポートとの間に生成される。
.It
.\"O A NUL terminated user name of at most 16 characters
.\"O is retrieved on the initial socket.
NUL 文字で終端された最大 16 文字のユーザー名が、
最初のソケットから取得される。
.It
.\"O A NUL terminated, unencrypted password of at most
.\"O 16 characters is retrieved on the initial socket.  
NUL 文字で終端され、暗号化されていない最大 16 文字のパスワードが、
最初のソケットから取得される。
.It
.\"O A NUL terminated command to be passed to a
.\"O shell is retrieved on the initial socket.  The length of
.\"O the command is limited by the upper bound on the size of
.\"O the system's argument list.  
NUL 文字で終端されたシェルに渡されるコマンドが、
最初のソケットから取得される。
コマンドの長さは、システムの引き数リストの上限を越えない長さに制限される。
.It
.\"O .Nm Rexecd
.\"O then validates the user as is done at login time
.\"O and, if the authentication was successful, changes
.\"O to the user's home directory, and establishes the user
.\"O and group protections of the user.
.\"O If any of these steps fail the connection is
.\"O aborted with a diagnostic message returned.
その後、
.Nm rexecd
はログイン時と同様のユーザー認証を行う。
認証が成功した場合、ユーザーのホームディレクトリに移動し、
そのユーザーに対してユーザーとグループの保護を行う。
これらのステップのどれかで失敗した場合、
接続を切断し、診断メッセージを返す。
.It
.\"O A NUL byte is returned on the initial socket
.\"O and the command line is passed to the normal login
.\"O shell of the user.  The
.\"O shell inherits the network connections established
.\"O by
.\"O .Nm rexecd .
NUL 文字のバイトが最初のソケットに返され、
コマンドラインがユーザーの通常のログインシェルに渡される。
シェルは
.Nm rexecd
によって確立されたネットワーク接続を継承する。
.El
.\"O .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Sh 返り値
.\"O Except for the last one listed below,
.\"O all diagnostic messages are returned on the initial socket,
.\"O after which any network connections are closed.
.\"O An error is indicated by a leading byte with a value of
.\"O 1 (0 is returned in step 7 above upon successful completion
.\"O of all the steps prior to the command execution).
以下のリストの一番最後のものを除き、全ての診断メッセージは、
他のネットワーク接続が閉じられた後に、
最初のソケットを経由して返される。
エラーは最初のバイトの値が 1 であることで示される
(コマンド実行に先立つ全てのステップが正常に終了した場合、
上記のステップ 7 で値 0 が返される)。
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy username too long
.\"O The name is
.\"O longer than 16 characters.
ユーザー名が 16 文字を越えている。
.It Sy password too long
.\"O The password is longer than 16 characters.
パスワードが 16 文字を越えている。
.It Sy command too long
.\"O The command line passed exceeds the size of the argument
.\"O list (as configured into the system).
渡されたコマンドラインが
(システムで設定されている) 引き数リストのサイズを越えている。
.It Sy Login incorrect.
.\"O No password file entry for the user name existed or the wrong password
.\"O was supplied.
パスワードファイルにそのユーザー名のエントリが存在しない。
あるいは、間違ったパスワードが送られた。
.It Sy \&No remote directory.
.\"O The 
.\"O .Xr chdir
.\"O command to the home directory failed.
ホームディレクトリへの
.Xr chdir
コマンドが失敗した。
.It Sy Try again.
.\"O A
.\"O .Xr fork
.\"O by the server failed.
サーバーによる
.Xr fork
が失敗した。
.It Sy <shellname>: ...
.\"O The user's login shell could not be started.
.\"O This message is returned
.\"O on the connection associated with the
.\"O .Em stderr ,
.\"O and is not preceded by a flag byte.
ユーザーのログインシェルを起動することができない。
このメッセージは
.Em stderr
に関係づけられた接続を用いて返される。
このメッセージの先頭には、フラグになるバイトが付かない。
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr rexec 3
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O A facility to allow all data and password exchanges to be encrypted should be
.\"O present.
通信される全てのデータとパスワードについて、
暗号化を可能にする機能が用意されるべきである。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
