.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1989, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)rlogind.8	6.12 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	$Id: rlogind.8,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 14 20:56:39 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	pseudo terminal		疑似端末
.\"
.Dd March 16, 1991
.Dt RLOGIND 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm rlogind
.\"O .Nd remote login server
.Nd リモートログインサーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm rlogind
.Op Fl ahlLn
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Rlogind
.\"O is the server for the 
.\"O .Xr rlogin 1
.\"O program.  The server provides a remote login facility
.\"O with authentication based on privileged port numbers from trusted hosts.
.Nm rlogind
は
.Xr rlogin 1
プログラムのためのサーバである。
このサーバは、信頼できるホストからの特権ポート番号に基づいた認証を用いて、
リモートログイン機能を提供する。
.Pp
.\"O Options supported by
.\"O .Nm rlogind :
.Nm rlogind
がサポートするオプションは、以下の通りである:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a
.\"O Ask hostname for verification.
検証のために、ホスト名を問い合わせる。
.It Fl h
.\"O Permit use of superuser 
.\"O .Dq Pa .rhosts
.\"O files.
スーパーユーザーの
.Dq Pa .rhosts
ファイルの使用を許可する。
.It Fl l
.\"O Prevent any authentication based on the user's
.\"O .Dq Pa .rhosts
.\"O file. If the user is logging in as the superuser and the \-h
.\"O option is used,
.\"O .Dq Pa .rhosts
.\"O processing is still enabled.
ユーザーの
.Dq Pa .rhosts
ファイルによる認証を行わせない。
ユーザーがスーパーユーザーとしてログインしている場合に、
\-h オプションが使われると、
.Dq Pa .rhosts
による認証処理が行われる。
.It Fl L
.\"O Prevent any authentication based on 
.\"O .Dq Pa .rhosts
.\"O or
.\"O .Dq Pa hosts.equiv
.\"O information.
.Dq Pa .rhosts
や
.Dq Pa hosts.equiv
の情報に基づく認証を行わせない。
.It Fl n
.\"O Disable keep-alive messages.
キープアライブメッセージを使わせない。
.El
.Pp
.\"O The \-h, \-l, and \-L flags are not used if PAM (Pluggable
.\"O Authentication Module) support is in use. In this case the same
.\"O effects can be achieved by editing
.\"O .Pa /etc/pam.conf .
PAM (Pluggable Authentication Module) サポートが使用中である場合、
\-h, \-l, \-L フラグは使われない。
この場合
.Pa /etc/pam.conf
を編集することで、同様の効果を得ることができる。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl h
.\"O and
.\"O .Fl l
.\"O options should also not be trusted without verifying that they work as
.\"O expected with the particular version of libc installed on your system
.\"O (and should be tested again after any libc update) because some
.\"O versions of libc may not honor the internal flags used by
.\"O .Nm rlogind .
.\"O As the
.\"O .Fl L
.\"O option bypasses the libc functions entirely, it is not subject to this
.\"O problem.
.Fl h
と
.Fl l
オプションを、システムにインストールされている
特定のバージョンの libc とともに使う場合は、
期待通りに動作するかを検証せずに信頼すべきではない
(また、libc を更新した後にはテストすべきである)。
なぜなら、libc のいくつかのバージョンでは
.Nm rlogind
で使われる内部フラグの通りには動作しない。
.Fl L
オプションは libc の関数を完全にバイパスするので、
この問題には影響を受けない。
.Pp
.\"O Also note that the design of the
.\"O .Pa .rhosts
.\"O system is COMPLETELY INSECURE except on a carefully firewalled private
.\"O network. Always use the 
.\"O .Fl L
.\"O option under all other circumstances. Also, since
.\"O .Nm rlogind
.\"O does not encrypt communications, it should not, in general, be used at
.\"O all. Consider
.\"O .Xr ssh 8 .
.Pa .rhosts
システムの設計は、
ファイアーウォールで慎重に保護されたプライベートネットワーク以外では、
「全く安全性がない」ことにも注意すること。
それ以外の環境下では、常に
.Fl L
オプションを使うこと。
更に、
.Nm rlogind
は通信を暗号化しないので、一般的に言うと、本当に使うべきではない。
.Xr ssh 8
の使用を考慮に入れること。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Rlogind
.\"O listens for service requests at the port indicated in
.\"O the ``login'' service specification; see
.\"O .Xr services 5 .
.\"O When a service request is received the following protocol
.\"O is initiated:
.Nm rlogind
は、``login'' サービスの仕様に基づくポート番号で、
サービス要求を受け付ける。
.Xr services 5
を参照すること。
サービスの要求を受け取ると、以下のプロトコルを開始する:
.Bl -enum
.It
.\"O The server checks the client's source port.
.\"O If the port is not in the range 512-1023, the server
.\"O aborts the connection.
サーバはクライアントの要求元ポート番号を調べる。
このポート番号が 512 〜 1023 の範囲でない場合、
サーバは接続を中止する。
.It
.\"O The server checks the client's source address
.\"O and requests the corresponding host name (see
.\"O .Xr gethostbyaddr 3 ,
.\"O .Xr hosts 5
.\"O and
.\"O .Xr named 8 ) .
.\"O If the hostname cannot be determined,
.\"O the dot-notation representation of the host address is used.
サーバはクライアントの要求元 IP アドレスを調べ、
それに対応するホスト名を求める
.Ns ( Xr gethostbyaddr 3 ,
.Xr hosts 5,
.Xr named 8
を参照すること)。
ホスト名が決定できない場合、
ドット表記法によるホストアドレスが使われる。
.\"O If the hostname is in the same domain as the server (according to
.\"O the last two components of the domain name),
.\"O or if the
.\"O .Fl a
.\"O option is given,
.\"O the addresses for the hostname are requested,
.\"O verifying that the name and address correspond.
.\"O Normal authentication is bypassed if the address verification fails.
(ドメイン名の後ろから 2 つを使って判断した)
ホスト名がサーバと同じドメインの場合、
または
.Fl a
オプションが指定されている場合、
ホスト名に対するアドレスが求められ、
ホスト名とアドレスが一致しているかを検証する。
アドレスの検証に失敗した場合、通常の認証作業を行わない。
.El
.Pp
.\"O Once the source port and address have been checked, 
.\"O .Nm rlogind
.\"O proceeds with the authentication process described in
.\"O .Xr rshd 8 .
要求元のポート番号とアドレスが検証されると、
.Nm rlogind
は
.Xr rshd 8
で説明されている認証プロセスを開始する。
.\"O It then allocates a pseudo terminal (see 
.\"O .Xr pty 4 ) ,
.\"O and manipulates file descriptors so that the slave
.\"O half of the pseudo terminal becomes the 
.\"O .Em stdin ,
.\"O .Em stdout ,
.\"O and
.\"O .Em stderr
.\"O for a login process.
そして、疑似端末
.Ns ( Xr pty 4
を参照) を割り当てるとともに、ファイルディスクリプタを操作する。
これにより、疑似端末のスレーブ側がログインプロセスの
.Em stdin ,
.Em stdout ,
.Em stderr
になる。
.\"O The login process is an instance of the
.\"O .Xr login 1
.\"O program, invoked with the
.\"O .Fl f
.\"O option if authentication has succeeded.
.\"O If automatic authentication fails, the user is
.\"O prompted to log in as if on a standard terminal line.
認証が成功した場合、
.Xr login 1
プログラムに
.Fl f
オプションを指定して起動し、
ログインプロセスを生成する。
自動認証が失敗した場合、通常の端末回線からのログインと同様に、
ユーザーにログインのプロンプトが出される。
.Pp
.\"O The parent of the login process manipulates the master side of
.\"O the pseudo terminal, operating as an intermediary
.\"O between the login process and the client instance of the
.\"O .Xr rlogin
.\"O program.  In normal operation, the packet protocol described
.\"O in
.\"O .Xr pty 4
.\"O is invoked to provide
.\"O .Ql ^S/^Q
.\"O type facilities and propagate
.\"O interrupt signals to the remote programs.  The login process
.\"O propagates the client terminal's baud rate and terminal type,
.\"O as found in the environment variable,
.\"O .Ql Ev TERM ;
.\"O see
.\"O .Xr environ 7 .
ログインプロセスの親プロセスは、疑似端末のマスタ側を操作する。
これは、ログインプロセスと
.Xr rlogin
プログラムを実体化したものとの間を仲介する役割をする。
通常の操作では、
.Ql ^S/^Q
のような機能を提供したり、
割り込み信号をリモートプログラムに伝えるために、
.Xr pty 4
で説明されているパケットプロトコルを起動する。
ログインプロセスは、
クライアント端末の通信速度や環境変数
.Ql Ev TERM
で指定されている端末タイプを伝える。
.Xr environ 7
を参照すること。
.\"O The screen or window size of the terminal is requested from the client,
.\"O and window size changes from the client are propagated to the pseudo terminal.
端末のスクリーンサイズやウインドウサイズがクライアント側から要求される。
そして、クライアントから変更されたウインドウサイズは、
疑似端末へと伝えられる。
.Pp
.\"O Transport-level keepalive messages are enabled unless the
.\"O .Fl n
.\"O option is present.
.\"O The use of keepalive messages allows sessions to be timed out
.\"O if the client crashes or becomes unreachable.
トランスポートレベルのキープアライブメッセージは、
.Fl n
オプションが指定されていない限り出力される。
キープアライブメッセージを使うと、
クライアントがクラッシュしたり、通信不能になった場合に、
セッションをタイムアウトで終了することが可能になる。
.\"O .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Sh 返り値
.\"O All initial diagnostic messages are indicated
.\"O by a leading byte with a value of 1,
.\"O after which any network connections are closed.
.\"O If there are no errors before
.\"O .Xr login
.\"O is invoked, a null byte is returned as in indication of success.
ネットワーク接続が切断された後、
全ての初期診断メッセージは、先頭に値 1 のバイトを付けて通知される。
.Xr login
が起動される前にエラーが発生していない場合、
成功したことを通知するために、ヌル文字のバイトが返される。
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy Try again.
.\"O A
.\"O .Xr fork
.\"O by the server failed.
サーバが
.Xr fork
に失敗した。
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr login 1 ,
.Xr ruserok 3 ,
.Xr rshd 8
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O The authentication procedure used here assumes the integrity
.\"O of each client machine and the connecting medium.  This is
.\"O insecure, but is useful in an ``open'' environment.
ここで使われる認証手続きは、それぞれのクライアントマシンと
接続媒体が完全であることを仮定している。
これは安全ではないが、「オープンな」環境では便利である。
.Pp
.\"O A facility to allow all data exchanges to be encrypted should be
.\"O present.
通信する全てのデータを暗号化する機能が提供されるべきである。
.Pp
.\"O A more extensible protocol should be used.
もっと発展性のあるプロトコルが用いられるべきである。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
