.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     From: @(#)routed.8	6.6 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	From: @(#)routed.8	8.2 (Berkeley) 12/11/93
.\"	From: NetBSD: routed.8,v 1.6 1995/03/18 15:00:38 cgd Exp
.\"	$Id: routed.8,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 14 21:05:08 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	destination	到達先
.\"
.Dd December 11, 1993
.Dt ROUTED 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm routed
.\"O .Nd network routing daemon
.Nd ネットワークルーティングデーモン
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm routed
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl g
.Op Fl q
.Op Fl s
.Op Fl t
.Op Ar logfile
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Routed
.\"O is invoked at boot time to manage the network routing tables.
.\"O The routing daemon uses a variant of the Xerox NS Routing
.\"O Information Protocol in maintaining up to date kernel routing
.\"O table entries.
.Nm routed
は、ネットワークのルーティングテーブルを管理するために、ブート時に起動される。
ルーティングデーモンは、
Xerox NS ルーティング情報プロトコル
(Routing Information Protocol) を変更したものを使う。
これにより、カーネルのルーティングテーブルのエントリを最新に保つ。
.\"O It used a generalized protocol capable of use with multiple
.\"O address types, but is currently used only for Internet routing
.\"O within a cluster of networks.
このサーバは、複数のアドレスタイプを使用できる一般化したプロトコルを使う。
しかし、現在のところは、ネットワーククラスタ内で
インターネットのルーティングをするためだけに使われている。
.Pp
.\"O In normal operation
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O listens on the
.\"O .Xr udp 4
.\"O socket for the
.\"O .Xr route 8
.\"O service (see
.\"O .Xr services 5 )
.\"O for routing information packets.  If the host is an
.\"O internetwork router, it periodically supplies copies
.\"O of its routing tables to any directly connected hosts
.\"O and networks.
通常の運用において
.Nm routed
は、
ルーティング情報パケットを待つために、
.Xr route 8
サービス
.Ns ( Xr services 5
を参照)
用の
.Xr udp 4
ソケットの接続を待つ。
ホストがネットワーク間のルータである場合、
.Nm routed
は、直接接続されている全てのホストとネットワークに、
ルーティングテーブルの複製を定期的に提供する。
.Pp
.\"O When
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O is started, it uses the
.\"O .Dv SIOCGIFCONF
.\"O .Xr ioctl 2
.\"O to find those
.\"O directly connected interfaces configured into the
.\"O system and marked ``up'' (the software loopback interface
.\"O is ignored).  If multiple interfaces
.\"O are present, it is assumed that the host will forward packets
.\"O between networks.
.Nm routed
が動作し始めると、
システムで設定されており、
かつ ``up'' とマークされている
直接接続されたインターフェースを探すために、
.Dv SIOCGIFCONF
.Xr ioctl 2
が使われる (ソフトウェアループバックインターフェースは無視される)。
複数のインターフェースが存在する場合、
ホストはネットワーク間でパケットを転送するものと仮定される。
.\"O .Nm Routed
.\"O then transmits a 
.\"O .Em request
.\"O packet on each interface (using a broadcast packet if
.\"O the interface supports it) and enters a loop, listening
.\"O for
.\"O .Em request
.\"O and
.\"O .Em response
.\"O packets from other hosts.
それから
.Nm routed
は、
.Em リクエスト
パケットを各インターフェースから送信する
(インターフェースがサポートしている場合は、ブロードキャストパケットを使う)。
そして、
.Nm routed
は、他のホストからの
.Em リクエスト
パケットと
.Em レスポンス
パケットの接続を待つループに入る。
.Pp
.\"O When a
.\"O .Em request
.\"O packet is received, 
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O formulates a reply based on the information maintained in its
.\"O internal tables.  The
.\"O .Em response
.\"O packet generated contains a list of known routes, each marked
.\"O with a ``hop count'' metric (a count of 16, or greater, is
.\"O considered ``infinite'').  The metric associated with each
.\"O route returned provides a metric
.\"O .Em relative to the sender .
.Em リクエスト
パケットを受信すると、
.Nm routed
は内部テーブルで管理している情報に基づいてリプライを作成する。
作成された
.Em レスポンス
パケットには既知のルートのリストが含まれ、
各ルートには「ホップカウント」メトリックが付く
(16 以上のホップカウントは「無限大」とみなされる)。
ここで返された各ルートのメトリックは、
.Em 送信者からの相対的な
メトリックである。
.Pp
.\"O .Em Response
.\"O packets received by
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O are used to update the routing tables if one of the following
.\"O conditions is satisfied:
以下の条件を満たす場合、
.Nm routed
が受信した
.Em レスポンス
パケットは、
ルーティングテーブルを更新するために使われる:
.Bl -enum
.It
.\"O No routing table entry exists for the destination network
.\"O or host, and the metric indicates the destination is ``reachable''
.\"O (i.e. the hop count is not infinite).
到達先ネットワークまたは到達先ホストについての
ルーティングテーブルのエントリが存在せず、
かつ到達先を示すメトリックが「到達可能」である場合
(すなわち、ホップカウントが無限大でない場合)。
.It
.\"O The source host of the packet is the same as the router in the
.\"O existing routing table entry.  That is, updated information is
.\"O being received from the very internetwork router through which
.\"O packets for the destination are being routed.
パケットの送信元ホストが、
既存のルーティングテーブルのエントリにあるネットワーク間ルータと同じ場合。
つまり、到達先へのパケットをルーティングする
ルータそのものから、更新された情報を受け取る場合。
.It
.\"O The existing entry in the routing table has not been updated for
.\"O some time (defined to be 90 seconds) and the route is at least
.\"O as cost effective as the current route.
ルーティングテーブルの既存のエントリが
一定期間 (90 秒と定義されている) 更新されておらず、
このルートが少なくとも現在のルートと同じくらい有効な価値がある場合。
.It
.\"O The new route describes a shorter route to the destination than
.\"O the one currently stored in the routing tables; the metric of
.\"O the new route is compared against the one stored in the table
.\"O to decide this.
新しいルートが、現在ルーティングテーブルに格納されているルートと比べて、
到達先へのより短いルートを表している場合。
これを決定するために、新しいルートのメトリックを
テーブルに格納されているルートのメトリックと比較する。
.El
.Pp
.\"O When an update is applied,
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O records the change in its internal tables and updates the kernel
.\"O routing table.
.\"O The change is reflected in the next
.\"O .Em response
.\"O packet sent.
更新が行われた場合、
.Nm routed
は内部テーブルの変更を記録し、カーネルのルーティングテーブルを更新する。
この変更は次に
.Em レスポンス
パケットを送信する際に反映される。
.Pp
.\"O In addition to processing incoming packets,
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O also periodically checks the routing table entries.
.\"O If an entry has not been updated for 3 minutes, the entry's metric
.\"O is set to infinity and marked for deletion.  Deletions are delayed
.\"O an additional 60 seconds to insure the invalidation is propagated
.\"O throughout the local internet.
.Nm routed
は外部からのパケットを処理するのに加え、
定期的にルーティングテーブルのエントリをチェックする。
エントリが 3 分間以上更新されていない場合、
そのエントリのメトリックは無限大に設定され、
削除のためのマークが付けられる。
そのエントリの失効が
ローカルのインターネット上で通知されるのを保証するために、
削除は更に 60 秒後になる。
.Pp
.\"O Hosts acting as internetwork routers gratuitously supply their
.\"O routing tables every 30 seconds to all directly connected hosts
.\"O and networks.
ネットワーク間ルータとして動作しているホストは、
直接接続された全てのホストやネットワークに対して、
30 秒毎に無条件でルーティングテーブルを提供する。
.\"O The response is sent to the broadcast address on nets capable of that function,
.\"O to the destination address on point-to-point links, and to the router's
.\"O own address on other networks.
.\"O The normal routing tables are bypassed when sending gratuitous responses.
レスポンスは、
ブロードキャスト機能を持つネットワークのブロードキャストアドレス・
point-to-point リンクの到達先アドレス・
ルータ自身の他のネットワークでのアドレス
に対して送信される。
無条件にレスポンスを送信する場合、
通常のルーティングテーブルは無視される。
.\"O The reception of responses on each network is used to determine that the
.\"O network and interface are functioning correctly.
.\"O If no response is received on an interface, another route may be chosen
.\"O to route around the interface, or the route may be dropped if no alternative
.\"O is available.
ネットワークとインターフェースが正しく機能しているかを、
各ネットワークがレスポンスを受信できるか否かを使って決定する。
あるインターフェースでレスポンスが受信できない場合、
そのインターフェースに対してルーティングするために別のルートを選択する。
また、他のルートもない場合、そのルートはルーティングテーブルから削除される。
.Pp
.\"O Options supported by
.\"O .Nm routed :
.Nm routed
がサポートするオプションを示す:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d
.\"O Enable additional debugging information to be logged,
.\"O such as bad packets received.
不正なパケットを受信したというような、
付加的なデバッグ情報をログに記録するようにする。
.It Fl g
.\"O This flag is used on internetwork routers to offer a route
.\"O to the ``default'' destination.
.\"O This is typically used on a gateway to the Internet,
.\"O or on a gateway that uses another routing protocol whose routes
.\"O are not reported to other local routers.
このフラグは、ネットワーク間ルータにおいて 
``default'' の到達先へのルートを設けるために使われる。
このフラグは、インターネットのゲートウェイや、
他のローカルルータにルートを報告しない
別のルーティングプロトコルを利用するゲートウェイで、
典型的に使われる。
.It Fl s
.\"O Supplying this
.\"O option forces 
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O to supply routing information whether it is acting as an internetwork
.\"O router or not.
.\"O This is the default if multiple network interfaces are present,
.\"O or if a point-to-point link is in use.
このオプションを指定すると、
ネットワーク間ルータとして動作しているか否かに関係なく、
.Nm routed
に強制的にルーティング情報を提供させる。
複数のネットワークインターフェースがある場合や、
point-to-point リンクを使用中である場合は、これがデフォルトである。
.It Fl q
.\"O This
.\"O is the opposite of the
.\"O .Fl s
.\"O option.
このオプションは、
.Fl s
オプションの反対である。
.It Fl t
.\"O If the
.\"O .Fl t
.\"O option is specified, all packets sent or received are
.\"O printed on the standard output.  In addition,
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O will not divorce itself from the controlling terminal
.\"O so that interrupts from the keyboard will kill the process.
.Fl t
オプションが指定すると、
送受信した全てのパケットが標準出力に表示される。
更に、
.Nm routed
は自分自身を制御端末から切り離さないため、
キーボードからインタラプトを入力すればプロセスが kill される。
.El
.Pp
.\"O Any other argument supplied is interpreted as the name
.\"O of file in which 
.\"O .Nm routed Ns \'s
.\"O actions should be logged.  This log contains information
.\"O about any changes to the routing tables and, if not tracing all packets,
.\"O a history of recent messages sent and received which are related to
.\"O the changed route.
この他に指定された引き数は、
.Nm routed
の動作を記録するファイルの名前として解釈される。
このログにはルーティングテーブルの変更が記録される。
また、全てのパケットを追跡しない場合は、
変更されたルートに関連して送受信された最新のメッセージの履歴も記録される。
.Pp
.\"O In addition to the facilities described above, 
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O supports the notion of ``distant''
.\"O .Em passive
.\"O and 
.\"O .Em active
.\"O gateways.  When 
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O is started up, it reads the file
.\"O .Pa /etc/gateways
.\"O to find gateways which may not be located using
.\"O only information from the
.\"O .Dv SIOGIFCONF
.\"O .Xr ioctl 2 .
上記の機能に加えて、
.Nm routed
は「遠隔にある」
.Em passive
もしくは
.Em active
なゲートウェイという概念をサポートする。
.Nm routed
が起動すると、
.Dv SIOGIFCONF
.Xr ioctl 2
からの情報のみでは突き止められない可能性のあるゲートウェイを見付けるために、
.Pa /etc/gateways
ファイルが読み込まれる。
.\"O Gateways specified in this manner should be marked passive
.\"O if they are not expected to exchange routing information,
.\"O while gateways marked active
.\"O should be willing to exchange routing information (i.e.
.\"O they should have a
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O process running on the machine).
このようにして指定したゲートウェイには、
ルーティング情報を交換するつもりがない場合には、
passive というマークを付ける必要がある。
また、ルーティング情報を交換する場合には、
active というマークを付ける必要がある
(すなわち、この場合には
.Nm routed
がマシン上で稼働している必要がある)。
.\"O Routes through passive gateways are installed in the
.\"O kernel's routing tables once upon startup.
.\"O Such routes are not included in
.\"O any routing information transmitted.
passive ゲートウェイを通るルートは、
起動時に一度だけカーネルのルーティングテーブルに設定される。
このようなルートは、送信されるルーティング情報には含まれない。
.\"O Active gateways are treated equally to network
.\"O interfaces.  Routing information is distributed
.\"O to the gateway and if no routing information is
.\"O received for a period of time, the associated
.\"O route is deleted.
active ゲートウェイは、ネットワークインターフェースと同様に扱われる。
ルーティング情報はゲートウェイに配布される。
また、一定時間ルーティング情報が受信されない場合、
それに関連したルートは削除される。
.\"O Gateways marked
.\"O .Em external
.\"O are also passive, but are not placed in the kernel
.\"O routing table nor are they included in routing updates.
.Em external
とマークされたゲートウェイも passive であるが、
カーネルのルーティングテーブルに載ることもなく、
ルーティングの更新時にもその情報が含められることはない。
.\"O The function of external entries is to inform
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O that another routing process
.\"O will install such a route, and that alternate routes to that destination
.\"O should not be installed.
external エントリの機能は、
.Nm routed
に対して、
「別のルーティングプロセスがそのようなルートを追加する可能性があり、
その到達先に対して他のルートを設定すべきでない」
と知らせることである。
.\"O Such entries are only required when both routers may learn of routes
.\"O to the same destination.
external エントリは、
2 つのルータが同じ到達先へのルートを覚えてもよい場合にのみ、必要である。
.Pp
.\"O The 
.\"O .Pa /etc/gateways
.\"O is comprised of a series of lines, each in
.\"O the following format:
.Pa /etc/gateways
は、以下のフォーマットの行で構成される:
.Bd -ragged
.Pf < Cm net No \&|
.Cm host Ns >
.Ar name1
.Cm gateway
.Ar name2
.Cm metric
.Ar value
.Pf < Cm passive No \&|
.Cm active No \&|
.Cm external Ns >
.Ed
.Pp
.\"O The 
.\"O .Cm net
.\"O or
.\"O .Cm host
.\"O keyword indicates if the route is to a network or specific host.
キーワード
.Cm net
と
.Cm host
はそれぞれ、ルートがネットワークに付いてのルートなのか、
特定のホストについてのルートなのかを示す。
.Pp
.\"O .Ar Name1
.\"O is the name of the destination network or host.  This may be a
.\"O symbolic name located in
.\"O .Pa /etc/networks
.\"O or
.\"O .Pa /etc/hosts
.\"O (or, if started after
.\"O .Xr named 8 ,
.\"O known to the name server), 
.\"O or an Internet address specified in ``dot'' notation; see
.\"O .Xr inet 3 .
.Ar name1
は、到達先ネットワークまたはホストの名前である。
この名前は、
.Pa /etc/networks
または
.Pa /etc/hosts
にあるシンボル名でもよい
(また、
.Nm routed
が
.Xr named 8
の後に起動される場合は、
ネームサーバがこの名前を知っていなければならない)。
また、
「ドット」表記で指定したインターネットアドレスでもよい。
.Xr inet 3
を参照すること。
.Pp
.\"O .Ar Name2
.\"O is the name or address of the gateway to which messages should
.\"O be forwarded.
.Ar name2
は、メッセージがフォワードされるべきゲートウェイの名前またはアドレスである。
.Pp
.\"O .Ar Value
.\"O is a metric indicating the hop count to the destination host
.\"O or network.
.Ar value
は、到達先ホストまたはネットワークへのホップカウントを表すメトリックである。
.Pp
.\"O One of the keywords
.\"O .Cm passive ,
.\"O .Cm active
.\"O or
.\"O .Cm external
.\"O indicates if the gateway should be treated as 
.\"O .Em passive
.\"O or
.\"O .Em active
.\"O (as described above),
.\"O or whether the gateway is
.\"O .Em external
.\"O to the scope of the
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O protocol.
キーワード
.Cm passive ,
.Cm active ,
.Cm external
の 1 つを使って、
ゲートウェイが
.Em passive
または
.Em active
として (上記のように) 扱われる必要があるか、
あるいはゲートウェイが
.Nm routed
プロトコルのスコープで
.Em external
であるのかを示す。
.Pp
.\"O Internetwork routers that are directly attached to the Arpanet or Milnet
.\"O should use the Exterior Gateway Protocol
.\"O .Pq Tn EGP
.\"O to gather routing information
.\"O rather then using a static routing table of passive gateways.
.\"O .Tn EGP
.\"O is required in order to provide routes for local networks to the rest
.\"O of the Internet system.
Arpanet や Milnet に直接接続されたネットワーク間ルータは、
ルーティング情報を集めるために
.Pq Tn EGP
を使うべきである。
さもなければ、passive ゲートウェイの静的ルーティングテーブルを使うことになる。
.Tn EGP
は、ローカルネットワークに対して
他のインターネットシステムへのルートを提供するために必要である。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /etc/gateways -compact
.It Pa /etc/gateways
.\"O for distant gateways
遠隔ゲートウェイについての情報を記述するファイル
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr udp 7 ,
.Xr icmp 7 
.Rs
.%T Internet Transport Protocols
.%R XSIS 028112
.%Q Xerox System Integration Standard
.Re
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O is of dubious value. Consider using 
.\"O .Xr gated 8
.\"O or
.\"O .Xr zebra 8 .
.Nm routed
は (動作などが) 疑わしい。
.Xr gated 8
または
.Xr zebra 8
の使用を考慮に入れること。
.Pp
.\"O The kernel's routing tables may not correspond to those of
.\"O .Nm routed
.\"O when redirects change or add routes.
.\"O .Nm Routed
.\"O should note any redirects received by reading
.\"O the
.\"O .Tn ICMP
.\"O packets received via a raw socket.
リダイレクトによりルートが変更または追加された場合、
カーネルのルーティングテーブルと
.Nm routed
のルーティングテーブルが対応しない可能性がある。
.Nm routed
は、
raw ソケット経由で受信した
.Tn ICMP
パケットを読み込むことにより、
受信したリダイレクトを注目すべきである。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Routed
.\"O should incorporate other routing protocols.
.\"O Using separate processes for each requires configuration options
.\"O to avoid redundant or competing routes.
.Nm routed
は他のルーティングプロトコルも組み込むべきである。
各プロトコルに対して別々のプロセスを使うには、
余計なルートや競合するルートを排除するために、設定オプションが必要である。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Routed
.\"O should listen to intelligent interfaces, such as an
.\"O .Tn IMP ,
.\"O to gather more information.
.\"O It does not always detect unidirectional failures in network interfaces
.\"O (e.g., when the output side fails).
.Nm routed
は、より多くの情報を集めるために、
.Tn IMP
のようなインテリジェントなインタフェースで接続を待つべきである。
.Nm routed
は、(例えば、出力側の失敗といった)
ネットワークインターフェースの
一方向の失敗を、常に検出できるとは限らない。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
