.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$Id: rpc.rusersd.8,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 14 21:16:31 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd June 7, 1993
.Dt RPC.RUSERSD 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm rpc.rusersd 
.\"O .Nd logged in users server
.Nd ログインしているユーザーに関する情報のサーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm /usr/sbin/rpc.rusersd
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm rpc.rusersd
.\"O is a server which returns information about users
.\"O currently logged in to the system.
.Nm rpc.rusersd
は、システムに現在ログインしているユーザーに関する情報を返すサーバである。
.Pp
.\"O The currently logged in users are queried using the
.\"O .Xr rusers 1
.\"O command.
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm rpc.rusersd
.\"O daemon is normally invoked by
.\"O .Xr inetd 8 .
現在ログインしているユーザーを、
.Xr rusers 1
コマンドを使って問い合わせることができる。
.Nm rpc.rusersd
デーモンは、通常
.Xr inetd 8
から起動される。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm rpc.rusersd
.\"O uses an RPC protocol defined in 
.\"O .Pa /usr/include/rpcsvc/rusers.x .
.Nm rpc.rusersd
は、
.Pa /usr/include/rpcsvc/rusers.x
に定義された RPC プロトコルを使う。
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr rusers 1 ,
.Xr who 1 ,
.Xr w 1 ,
.Xr inetd 8
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
