.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)rwhod.8	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	$Id: rwhod.8,v 1.16 2000/07/30 23:57:06 dholland Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	load average	平均負荷
.\"WORD:	byte order	バイトオーダー
.\"
.Dd May 13, 1997
.Dt RWHOD 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm rwhod
.\"O .Nd system status server
.Nd システムステータスサーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm rwhod
.Op Fl bpa
.Op Fl u Ar user
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Rwhod
.\"O is the server which maintains the database used by the
.\"O .Xr rwho 1
.\"O and
.\"O .Xr ruptime 1
.\"O programs.  Its operation is predicated on the ability to
.\"O .Em broadcast
.\"O messages on a network.
.Nm rwhod
は、
.Xr rwho 1
と
.Xr ruptime 1
プログラムで使用されるデータベースを管理するサーバである。
このサーバの運用は、ネットワーク上で
.Em ブロードキャスト
メッセージが使用できることを前提としている。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Rwhod
.\"O operates as both a producer and consumer of status information.
.\"O As a producer of information it periodically
.\"O queries the state of the system and constructs
.\"O status messages which are broadcast on a network.
.\"O As a consumer of information, it listens for other
.\"O .Nm rwhod
.\"O servers' status messages, validating them, then recording
.\"O them in a collection of files located in the directory
.\"O .Pa /var/spool/rwho .
.Nm rwhod
は、ステータス情報の作成側としても、利用側としても動作する。
情報の作成側としては、システム状態を定期的に問い合わせ、
ネットワークにブロードキャストされるステータスメッセージを作成する。
情報の利用側としては、他の
.Nm rwhod
サーバのステータスメッセージを受け取り、確認した後、
.Pa /var/spool/rwho
ディレクトリに作られたファイルに記録する。
.Pp
.\"O The server transmits and receives messages at the port indicated
.\"O in the ``rwho'' service specification; see 
.\"O .Xr services 5 . 
サーバは、``rwho'' サービスの指定で指示されているポートを使って
メッセージの送受信を行う。
.Xr services 5
を参照すること。
.Pp
.\"O If the
.\"O .Fl b
.\"O flag is supplied, only broadcast interfaces, such as ethernets, will
.\"O be used.  
.\"O If the
.\"O .Fl p
.\"O flag is supplied, only point-to-point interfaces will be used. If the
.\"O .Fl a
.\"O flag is supplied, or no flags are supplied, all interfaces will be
.\"O used.
.Fl b
フラグが指定された場合、
イーサネットのようなブロードキャストインターフェースのみが使われる。
.Fl p
フラグが指定された場合、
point-to-point のインターフェースのみが使われる。
.Fl a
フラグが指定された場合、またはフラグが何も指定されない場合、
全てのインターフェースが使われる。
.Pp
.\"O If the
.\"O .Fl u
.\"O flag is supplied, rwhod will run as the specified user instead of as
.\"O root.
.Fl u
フラグが指定された場合、
rwhod は root ではなく指定されたユーザーとして実行される。
.Pp
.\"O The messages sent and received, are of the form:
送受信されるメッセージは以下の形式である。
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.\"O struct	outmp {
.\"O 	char	out_line[8];		/* tty name */
.\"O 	char	out_name[8];		/* user id */
.\"O 	long	out_time;		/* time on */
.\"O };
struct	outmp {
	char	out_line[8];		/* tty の名前 */
	char	out_name[8];		/* ユーザー ID */
	long	out_time;		/* 時間 */
};

struct	whod {
	char	wd_vers;
	char	wd_type;
	char	wd_fill[2];
	int	wd_sendtime;
	int	wd_recvtime;
	char	wd_hostname[32];
	int	wd_loadav[3];
	int	wd_boottime;
	struct	whoent {
		struct	outmp we_utmp;
		int	we_idle;
	} wd_we[1024 / sizeof (struct whoent)];
};
.Ed
.Pp
.\"O All fields are converted to network byte order prior to
.\"O transmission.  The load averages are as calculated by the
.\"O .Xr w 1
.\"O program, and represent load averages over the 5, 10, and 15 minute 
.\"O intervals prior to a server's transmission; they are multiplied by 100
.\"O for representation in an integer.  The host name
.\"O included is that returned by the
.\"O .Xr gethostname 2
.\"O system call, with any trailing domain name omitted.
.\"O The array at the end of the message contains information about
.\"O the users logged in to the sending machine.  This information 
.\"O includes the contents of the 
.\"O .Xr utmp 5
.\"O entry for each non-idle terminal line and a value indicating the
.\"O time in seconds since a character was last received on the terminal line.
全てのフィールドは、送信の前にネットワークバイトオーダーに変換される。
平均負荷は
.Xr w 1
プログラムによって計算され、
サーバが送信する前の 5, 10, 15 分間隔の平均負荷を表す。
平均負荷は 100 を掛けて整数で表される。
使用されるホスト名は、
.Xr gethostname 2
システムコールによって返されたもので、ドメイン名は省略される。
メッセージの最後の配列には、メッセージを送信したマシンにログインしている
ユーザーの情報が含まれている。
この情報には、アイドルでない端末ラインの
.Xr utmp 5
エントリと端末ラインから最後に文字が受信されてからの秒数が入っている。
.Pp
.\"O Messages received by the
.\"O .Xr rwho
.\"O server are discarded unless they originated at an
.\"O .Xr rwho
.\"O server's port.  In addition, if the host's name, as specified
.\"O in the message, contains any unprintable
.\"O .Tn ASCII
.\"O characters, the
.\"O message is discarded.  Valid messages received by
.\"O .Nm rwhod
.\"O are placed in files named
.\"O .Pa whod.hostname
.\"O in the directory
.\"O .Pa /var/spool/rwho .
.\"O These files contain only the most recent message, in the
.\"O format described above.
.Xr rwho
サーバに受信されるメッセージは、
.Xr rwho
サーバのポートから送信されたものでなければ、破棄される。
さらに、メッセージ中で指定されたホスト名が表示できない
.Tn ASCII
文字を含んでいる場合も、メッセージは破棄される。
.Nm rwhod
に受信された有効なメッセージは、ディレクトリ
.Pa /var/spool/rwho
にある
.Pa whod.hostname
というファイルに入れられる。
これらのファイルには、
最新のメッセージのみが上で説明したフォーマットで格納されている。
.Pp
.\"O Status messages are generated approximately once every
.\"O 3 minutes.
.\"O .Nm Rwhod
.\"O recomputes the system boot time every 30 minutes because on
.\"O some (non-Linux) systems it is not a totally reliable process.
ステータスメッセージは、約 3 分に 1 回作成される。
.Nm rwhod
はシステムのブート時刻を 30 分毎に再計算する。
なぜなら、(Linux 以外の) システムの中には、
ブート時刻の計算が完全に信用のおけるプロセスではない
システムも存在するためである。
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr rwho 1 ,
.Xr ruptime 1
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O There should be a way to relay status information between networks. 
.\"O People often interpret the server dying
.\"O or network communtication failures
.\"O as a machine going down.
ネットワーク間でステータス情報を中継する方法が必要である。
サーバが死んでいる場合やネットワーク通信が失敗している場合に、
マシンがダウンしていると解釈してしまうことがある。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
