.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)talkd.8	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	$Id: talkd.8,v 1.14 2000/07/30 23:57:02 dholland Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	rendezvous	会合場所
.\"WORD:	invitation	呼出し状
.\"
.Dd March 16, 1991
.Dt TALKD 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm talkd
.\"O .Nd remote user communication server
.Nd リモートユーザーの通信サーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm talkd
.Op Fl dp
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Talkd
.\"O is the server that notifies a user that someone else wants to
.\"O initiate a conversation.
.\"O It acts a repository of invitations, responding to requests
.\"O by clients wishing to rendezvous to hold a conversation.
.Nm talkd
は、ユーザーに他のユーザーが会話を始めようとしていることを
知らせるサーバである。
サーバは、会話をする会合場所が欲しいクライアントの要求に応答し、
呼出し状の置場所として機能する。
.\"O In normal operation, a client, the caller,
.\"O initiates a rendezvous by sending a
.\"O .Tn CTL_MSG
.\"O to the server of
.\"O type
.\"O .\"O .Tn LOOK_UP
.\"O (see
.\"O .Aq Pa protocols/talkd.h ) .
通常の操作では、呼出し元であるクライアントは、メッセージタイプが
.Tn LOOK_UP
である
.Tn CTL_MSG
構造体
.Ns ( Aq Pa protocols/talkd.h
を参照) をサーバに送ることで、会合場所の初期化を行う。
.\"O This causes the server to search its invitation
.\"O tables to check if an invitation currently exists for the caller
.\"O (to speak to the callee specified in the message).
これにより、サーバは呼出し状テーブルに呼出し元からの
(メッセージで指定されている呼出し先と会話をするための)
呼出し状が既にあるかを検索する。
.\"O If the lookup fails,
.\"O the caller then sends an
.\"O .Tn ANNOUNCE
.\"O message causing the server to
.\"O broadcast an announcement on the callee's login ports requesting contact.
検索に失敗すると、呼出し元は
.Tn ANNOUNCE
メッセージを送る。
これにより、サーバは呼出し相手のログインポートに
通信の要求があるという通知をブロードキャストする。
.\"O When the callee responds, the local server uses the
.\"O recorded invitation to respond with the appropriate rendezvous
.\"O address and the caller and callee client programs establish a
.\"O stream connection through which the conversation takes place.
呼出し先が応答すると、ローカルサーバは記録されている
(適切な会合場所アドレスで応答するための) 呼出し状を使用する。
これにより、呼出し元と呼出し先のクライアントプログラムは
会話をするためのストリーム接続を確立する。
.\"O .Sh OPTIONS
.Sh オプション
.Op Fl d
.\"O Debug mode; writes copious logging and debugging information to 
.\"O .Pa /var/log/talkd.log .
デバッグモード。
.Pa /var/log/talkd.log
に多くのログ情報とデバッグ情報を書き込む。
.Pp
.Op Fl p
.\"O Packet logging mode; writes copies of malformed packets to
.\"O .Pa /var/log/talkd.packets .
.\"O This is useful for debugging interoperability problems.
パケット記録モード。
.Pa /var/log/talkd.packets
にそのままの不恰好なパケットを書き込む。
相互運用の問題をデバッグするのに役立つ。
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr talk 1 ,
.Xr write 1
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.3 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.3
で登場した。
