.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)telnetd.8	6.8 (Berkeley) 4/20/91
.\"	$Id: telnetd.8,v 1.18 2000/07/30 23:57:10 dholland Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 14 21:27:21 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	pseudo terminal		疑似端末
.\"WORD:	virtual terminal	仮想端末
.\"
.Dd December 29, 1996
.Dt TELNETD 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm telnetd
.Nd DARPA
.Tn telnet
.\"O protocol server
プロトコルサーバ
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm /usr/sbin/in.telnetd
.Op Fl hns
.Op Fl a Ar authmode
.Op Fl D Ar debugmode
.Op Fl L Ar loginprg
.Op Fl S Ar tos
.Op Fl X Ar authtype
.Op Fl edebug
.Op Fl debug Ar port
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O program is a server which supports the 
.\"O .Tn DARPA
.\"O .Tn telnet
.\"O interactive communication protocol.
.Nm telnetd
プログラムは、
.Tn DARPA
.Tn telnet
対話的通信プロトコルをサポートするサーバである。
.\"O .Nm Telnetd
.\"O is normally invoked by the internet server (see
.\"O .Xr inetd 8 )
.\"O for requests to connect to the
.\"O .Tn telnet
.\"O port as indicated by the
.\"O .Pa /etc/services
.\"O file (see
.\"O .Xr services 5 ) .
.Nm telnetd
は、通常は
.Pa /etc/services
ファイル
.Ns ( Xr services 5
を参照) に記述されている
.Tn telnet
ポートへの接続要求を受けて、
インターネットサーバ
.Ns ( Xr inetd 8
を参照) から起動される。
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl debug
.\"O option may be used to start up 
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O manually, instead of through
.\"O .Xr inetd 8 .
.Fl debug
オプションは、
.Nm telnetd
を
.Xr inetd 8
ではなく、手動で起動するために使われる。
.\"O If started up this way, 
.\"O .Ar port
.\"O may be specified to run 
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O on an alternate 
.\"O .Tn TCP 
.\"O port number.
この方法で起動した場合、
別の
.Tn TCP
ポート番号で
.Nm telnetd
を実行するために、
.Ar port
を指定することができる。
.Pp
.\"O The 
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O program accepts the following options:
.Nm telnetd
プログラムは以下のオプションを受け付ける:
.Bl -tag -width "-a authmode"
.It Fl a Ar authmode
.\"O This option may be used for specifying what mode should
.\"O be used for authentication.
.\"O Note that this option is only useful if
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O has been compiled with support for authentication, which is not
.\"O available in the current version.  The following values of
.\"O .Ar authmode 
.\"O are understood:
このオプションは、どのモードが認証に使われるかを指定するために用いられる。
このオプションは、
.Nm telnetd
が認証をサポートする設定でコンパイルされている場合にのみ、
有効である点に注意すること。
これは現在のバージョンでは使用できない。
.Ar authmode
のとしては、以下の値を受け付ける:
.Bl -tag -width debug
.It debug
.\"O Turns on authentication debugging code.
認証のデバッグコードを有効にする。
.It user
.\"O Only allow connections when the remote user can provide valid
.\"O authentication information to identify the remote user, and is allowed
.\"O access to the specified account without providing a password.
リモートユーザは、自分自身であること示すための
有効な認証情報を提供した時にのみ接続が許可される。
この場合、指定されたアカウントに対しては、
パスワードの提供なしに接続が許可される。
.It valid
.\"O Only allow connections when the remote user can provide valid
.\"O authentication information to identify the remote user.  The
.\"O .Xr login 1
.\"O command will provide any additional user verification needed if the
.\"O remote user is not allowed automatic access to the specified account.
リモートユーザは、自分自身であること示すための
有効な認証情報を提供した時にのみ接続が許可される。
リモートユーザに指定されたアカウントに対する
自動的な接続が許可されていなければ、
.Xr login 1
コマンドは、必要となる別のユーザ認証を行う。
.It other
.\"O Only allow connections that supply some authentication information.
.\"O This option is currently not supported by any of the existing
.\"O authentication mechanisms, and is thus the same as specifying
.\"O .Cm valid .
ある種の認証情報を提供した場合のみ接続を許可する。
このオプションは、現在のところ、
既存のいずれの認証方法でもサポートされていないため、
.Cm valid
オプションを指定するのと同じである。
.It none
.\"O This is the default state.  Authentication information is not
.\"O required.  If no or insufficient authentication information is
.\"O provided, then the
.\"O .Xr login 1
.\"O program will provide the necessary user verification.
デフォルトではこの状態である。
認証情報は要求されない。
もし認証情報がなかったり不十分であれば、
.Xr login 1
プログラムによって必要となるユーザ認証を行う。
.It off
.\"O This disables the authentication code.  All user verification will
.\"O happen through the
.\"O .Xr login 1
.\"O program.
認証コードを無効にする。
すべてのユーザ証明が
.Xr login 1
プログラムによって行われる。
.El
.It Fl D Ar debugmode
.\"O This option may be used for debugging purposes.  This allows
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O to print out debugging information to the connection, allowing the
.\"O user to see what
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O is doing.  There are several possible values for
.\"O .Ar debugmode:
このオプションはデバックのために使われる。
これによって
.Nm telnetd
にデバッグ情報を表示させ、
.Nm telnetd
の動作をユーザが見ることができる。
以下に示すような、いくつかの
.Ar debugmode
がある:
.Bl -tag -width exercise
.It Cm options
.\"O Prints information about the negotiation of
.\"O .Tn telnet
.\"O options.
.Tn telnet
オプションのネゴシエーションについての情報が表示される。
.It Cm report
.\"O Prints the 
.\"O .Cm options
.\"O information, plus some additional information about what processing is
.\"O going on.
.Cm options
で表示される情報に加えて、
どのような操作が行われているのかという、
いくつかの付加的な情報が表示される。
.It Cm netdata
.\"O Displays the data stream received by
.\"O .Nm telnetd.
.Nm telnetd
が受け取ったデータストリームを表示する。
.It Cm ptydata
.\"O Displays data written to the pty.
pty に書かれたデータを表示する。
.It Cm exercise
.\"O Has not been implemented yet.
まだ実装されていない。
.El
.It Fl edebug
.\"O If
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O has been compiled with support for encryption, then the
.\"O .Fl edebug
.\"O option may be used to enable encryption debugging code.
このオプションは、
.Nm telnetd
が暗号化をサポートする設定でコンパイルされている場合にのみ、
有効である点に注意すること。
.Fl edebug
オプションは、暗号化デバッグコードを有効にするために使われる。
.It Fl h
.\"O Disables the printing of host-specific information before
.\"O login has been completed.
ログインが完了するまでホストに特有の情報を表示しないようにする。
.It Fl L Ar loginprg
.\"O This option may be used to specify a different login program.
.\"O By default, 
.\"O .Pa /bin/login
.\"O is used.
このオプションは、別の login プログラムを指定するために使われる。
デフォルトでは、
.Pa /bin/login
が使われる。
.It Fl n
.\"O Disable
.\"O .Dv TCP
.\"O keep-alives.  Normally
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O enables the
.\"O .Tn TCP
.\"O keep-alive mechanism to probe connections that
.\"O have been idle for some period of time to determine
.\"O if the client is still there, so that idle connections
.\"O from machines that have crashed or can no longer
.\"O be reached may be cleaned up.
.Dv TCP
keep-alives を無効にする。
通常
.Nm telnetd
は、
クライアントがまだ存在するかを決定するために、
ある一定期間アイドルになっている接続を調べる
.Tn TCP
keep-alive 機構を有効にしている。
これにより、クラッシュしたり、
すでに接続出来ないようなマシンからの
アイドルコネクションを解消できる。
.It Fl s
.\"O This option is only enabled if
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O is compiled with support for
.\"O .Tn SecurID
.\"O cards.
このオプションは、
.Nm telnetd
が
.Tn SecurID
カードをサポートする設定でコンパイルされている場合にのみ、有効である。
.\"O It causes the
.\"O .Fl s
.\"O option to be passed on to
.\"O .Xr login 1 ,
.\"O and thus is only useful if
.\"O .Xr login 1
.\"O supports the
.\"O .Fl s
.\"O flag to indicate that only
.\"O .Tn SecurID
.\"O validated logins are allowed. This is usually useful for controlling
.\"O remote logins from outside of a firewall.
このオプションは、
.Fl s
オプションを
.Xr login 1
にそのまま渡すようにするので、
.Xr login 1
が、
.Tn SecurID
によって認証されたログインのみを許可していることを表す、
.Fl s
フラグをサポートしている場合にのみ役立つ。
これは通常、ファイアウォールの外側からの
リモートログインを制御する場合に役立つ。
.It Fl S Ar tos
.\"O Sets the IP type-of-service (TOS) option for the telnet
.\"O connection to the value
.\"O .Ar tos .
telnet 接続の IP サービスタイプ
(type-of-service, TOS) オプションの値を
.Ar tos
に設定する。
.It Fl X Ar authtype
.\"O This option is only valid if
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O has been built with support for the authentication option.
.\"O It disables the use of
.\"O .Ar authtype
.\"O authentication, and
.\"O can be used to temporarily disable
.\"O a specific authentication type without having to recompile
.\"O .Nm telnetd .
このオプションは、
.Nm telnetd
が認証オプションをサポートする設定でコンパイルされている場合にのみ、
有効である。
このオプションは
.Ar authtype
認証の使用を不可にし、
.Nm telnetd
を再コンパイルすることなく、
特定の認証タイプを一時的に使用不可にすることができる。
.El
.Pp
.\"O If the file
.\"O .Pa /etc/issue.net
.\"O is present,
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O will display its contents before the login prompt of a telnet session (see
.\"O .Xr issue.net 5 ) .
ファイル
.Pa /etc/issue.net
が存在する場合、
.Nm telnetd
は、telnet セッションのログインプロンプトより前に、
そのファイルの内容を表示する
.Ns ( Xr issue.net 5
を参照すること)。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Telnetd
.\"O operates by allocating a pseudo-terminal device (see
.\"O .Xr pty 4 )
.\"O for a client, then creating a login process which has
.\"O the slave side of the pseudo-terminal as 
.\"O .Dv stdin ,
.\"O .Dv stdout ,
.\"O and
.\"O .Dv stderr .
.Nm telnetd
は、疑似端末デバイス
.Ns ( Xr pty 4
を参照) をクライアントに割り当て、login プロセスを生成する。
この login プロセスは、
.Dv stdin ,
.Dv stdout ,
.Dv stderr
として疑似端末のスレーブ側を使用する。
.\"O .Nm Telnetd
.\"O manipulates the master side of the pseudo-terminal,
.\"O implementing the
.\"O .Tn telnet
.\"O protocol and passing characters
.\"O between the remote client and the login process.
.Nm telnetd
は、
.Tn telnet
プロトコルを実装し、
リモートクライアントとログインプロセスの間に文字を受け渡すことにより、
疑似端末のマスター側を操作する。
.Pp
.\"O When a
.\"O .Tn telnet
.\"O session is started up, 
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O sends
.\"O .Tn telnet
.\"O options to the client side indicating
.\"O a willingness to do the
.\"O following
.\"O .Tn telnet
.\"O options, which are described in more detail below:
.Tn telnet
セッションが開始されると、
.Nm telnetd
は、以下の
.Tn telnet
オプションを希望していることを示すために、
クライアント側にこれらの
.Tn telnet
オプションを送信する。
これらのオプションの詳細については、以下で説明されている:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
DO AUTHENTICATION
WILL ENCRYPT
DO TERMINAL TYPE
DO TSPEED
DO XDISPLOC
DO NEW-ENVIRON
DO ENVIRON
WILL SUPPRESS GO AHEAD
DO ECHO
DO LINEMODE
DO NAWS
WILL STATUS
DO LFLOW
DO TIMING-MARK
.Ed
.Pp
.\"O The pseudo-terminal allocated to the client is configured
.\"O to operate in \*(lqcooked\*(rq mode, and with 
.\"O .Dv XTABS
.\"O .Dv CRMOD
.\"O enabled (see
.\"O .Xr tty 4 ) .
クライアントに割り当てられた疑似端末は、
\*(lqcooked\*(rq モードで動作し、
.Dv XTABS
.Dv CRMOD
が有効になるように設定される
.Ns ( Xr tty 4
を参照すること)。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Telnetd
.\"O has support for enabling locally the following
.\"O .Tn telnet
.\"O options:
.Nm telnetd
は、ローカル側で有効な、以下の
.Tn telnet
オプションをサポートしている:
.Bl -tag -width "DO AUTHENTICATION"
.It "WILL ECHO"
.\"O When the
.\"O .Dv LINEMODE
.\"O option is enabled, a
.\"O .Dv WILL ECHO
.\"O or
.\"O .Dv WONT ECHO
.\"O will be sent to the client to indicate the
.\"O current state of terminal echoing.
.Dv LINEMODE
オプションが有効な場合、
端末の現在のエコー状態を示すために、
.Dv WILL ECHO
または
.Dv WONT ECHO
がクライアントに送信される。
.\"O When terminal echo is not desired, a
.\"O .Dv WILL ECHO
.\"O is sent to indicate that
.\"O .Tn telnetd
.\"O will take care of echoing any data that needs to be
.\"O echoed to the terminal, and then nothing is echoed.
端末エコーが必要ない場合、
端末にエコーする必要があるデータを
.Tn telnetd
がエコー処理することを示すために、
.Dv WILL ECHO
が送信され、何もエコーされない。
.\"O When terminal echo is desired, a
.\"O .Dv WONT ECHO
.\"O is sent to indicate that
.\"O .Tn telnetd
.\"O will not be doing any terminal echoing, so the
.\"O client should do any terminal echoing that is needed.
端末エコーが必要な場合、
.Tn telnetd
が端末エコーも行わないことを示すために、
.Dv WONT ECHO
が送信されるので、
端末エコーが必要な場合はクライアントが行わなければならない。
.It "WILL BINARY"
.\"O Indicates that the client is willing to send a
.\"O 8 bits of data, rather than the normal 7 bits
.\"O of the Network Virtual Terminal.
クライアントが、
通常のネットワーク仮想端末が用いる 7 ビットのデータではなく、
8 ビットのデータを送信するように指定する。
.It "WILL SGA"
.\"O Indicates that it will not be sending
.\"O .Dv IAC GA,
.\"O go ahead, commands.
.Dv IAC GA
すなわち go ahead コマンドを送信しないように指定する。
.It "WILL STATUS"
.\"O Indicates a willingness to send the client, upon
.\"O request, of the current status of all
.\"O .Tn TELNET
.\"O options.
クライアントから要求があった場合に、全ての
.Tn TELNET
オプションの現在の状況を送信するように指定する。
.It "WILL TIMING-MARK"
.\"O Whenever a
.\"O .Dv DO TIMING-MARK
.\"O command is received, it is always responded
.\"O to with a
.\"O .Dv WILL TIMING-MARK
.Dv DO TIMING-MARK
コマンドを受信した場合、常にそれに対して
.Dv WILL TIMING-MARK
を返信する。
.It "WILL LOGOUT"
.\"O When a
.\"O .Dv DO LOGOUT
.\"O is received, a
.\"O .Dv WILL LOGOUT
.\"O is sent in response, and the
.\"O .Tn TELNET
.\"O session is shut down.
.Dv DO LOGOUT
を受信した場合、
.Dv WILL LOGOUT
を返信し、
.Tn TELNET
セッションをシャットダウンする。
.It "WILL ENCRYPT"
.\"O Only sent if
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O is compiled with support for data encryption, and
.\"O indicates a willingness to decrypt
.\"O the data stream.
.Nm telnetd
がデータの暗号化をサポートする設定で
コンパイルされている場合にのみ送信され、
データ列を復号化するように指定する。
.El
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Telnetd
.\"O has support for enabling remotely the following
.\"O .Tn TELNET
.\"O options:
.Nm telnetd
は、リモート側で有効な、以下の
.Tn TELNET
オプションをサポートしている:
.Bl -tag -width "DO AUTHENTICATION"
.It "DO BINARY"
.\"O Sent to indicate that
.\"O .Tn telnetd
.\"O is willing to receive an 8 bit data stream.
このオプションは、
.Tn telnetd
が 8 ビットのデータ列を受信するように指定するために送られる。
.It "DO LFLOW"
.\"O Requests that the client handle flow control
.\"O characters remotely.
クライアントがフロー制御文字をリモート側で処理するように指定する。
.It "DO ECHO"
.\"O This is not really supported, but is sent to identify a 4.2BSD
.\"O .Xr telnet 1
.\"O client, which will improperly respond with
.\"O .Dv WILL ECHO.
.\"O If a
.\"O .Dv WILL ECHO
.\"O is received, a
.\"O .Dv DONT ECHO
.\"O will be sent in response.
このオプションは実際にはサポートされていないが、
.Dv WILL ECHO
に対して正しく応答しない、
4.2BSD の
.Xr telnet 1
クライアントを識別するために送られる。
.Dv WILL ECHO
を受信すると、
.Dv DONT ECHO
が返答として送信される。
.It "DO TERMINAL-TYPE"
.\"O Indicates a desire to be able to request the
.\"O name of the type of terminal that is attached
.\"O to the client side of the connection.
接続のクライアント側に割り当てられた端末の
タイプ名を要求できるように指定する。
.It "DO SGA"
.\"O Indicates that it does not need to receive
.\"O .Dv IAC GA,
.\"O the go ahead command.
.Dv IAC GA
すなわち go ahead コマンドを受信する必要がないように指定する。
.It "DO NAWS"
.\"O Requests that the client inform the server when
.\"O the window (display) size changes.
ウィンドウ (ディスプレイ) のサイズが変わった場合に、
クライアントがサーバに知らせることを要求する。
.It "DO TERMINAL-SPEED"
.\"O Indicates a desire to be able to request information
.\"O about the speed of the serial line to which
.\"O the client is attached.
クライアントに割り当てられたシリアルラインの
速度に関する情報を要求できるように指定する。
.It "DO XDISPLOC"
.\"O Indicates a desire to be able to request the name
.\"O of the X windows display that is associated with
.\"O the telnet client.
telnet クライアントが使用している
X ウィンドウのディスプレイの名前を要求できるように指定する。
.It "DO NEW-ENVIRON"
.\"O Indicates a desire to be able to request environment
.\"O variable information, as described in RFC 1572.
RFC 1572 に示されている
環境変数に関する情報を要求できるように指定する。
.It "DO ENVIRON"
.\"O Indicates a desire to be able to request environment
.\"O variable information, as described in RFC 1408.
RFC 1408 に示されている
環境変数に関する情報を要求できるように指定する。
.It "DO LINEMODE"
.\"O Only sent if
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O is compiled with support for linemode, and
.\"O requests that the client do line by line processing.
.Nm telnetd
が linemode をサポートする設定でコンパイルされている場合にのみ送信され、
クライアントに行単位の処理を行うことを要求する。
.It "DO TIMING-MARK"
.\"O Only sent if
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O is compiled with support for both linemode and
.\"O kludge linemode, and the client responded with
.\"O .Dv WONT LINEMODE.
.Nm telnetd
が linemode と kludge linemode の
両方をサポートする設定でコンパイルされ、
クライアントが
.Dv WONT LINEMODE
を返信した場合にのみ、送信される。
.\"O If the client responds with
.\"O .Dv WILL TM,
.\"O the it is assumed that the client supports
.\"O kludge linemode.
クライアントが
.Dv WILL TM
を返信した場合、
クライアントが
kludge linemode
をサポートしていると見なす。
.\"O Note that the
.\"O .Op Fl k
.\"O option can be used to disable this.
.Op Fl k
オプションは、この機能を無効にするために使用される点に注意すること。
.It "DO AUTHENTICATION"
.\"O Only sent if
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O is compiled with support for authentication, and
.\"O indicates a willingness to receive authentication
.\"O information for automatic login.
.Nm telnetd
が認証機能をサポートする設定でコンパイルされている場合にのみ送信され、
自動ログインに使用する認証情報を受信するようにする。
.It "DO ENCRYPT"
.\"O Only sent if
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O is compiled with support for data encryption, and
.\"O indicates a willingness to decrypt
.\"O the data stream.
.\"O .Xr issue.net 5 ) .
.Nm telnetd
がデータの暗号化をサポートする設定で
コンパイルされている場合にのみ送信され、
データ列を復号化するように指定する。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Pa /etc/services ,
.Pa /etc/issue.net
.\"O .Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr telnet 1 ,
.Xr login 1 ,
.\"O .Xr issue.net 5 ,
.Xr issue.net 5
.\"O .Sh STANDARDS
.Sh 準拠
.Bl -tag -compact -width RFC-1572
.It Cm RFC-854
.Tn TELNET
PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION
.It Cm RFC-855
TELNET OPTION SPECIFICATIONS
.It Cm RFC-856
TELNET BINARY TRANSMISSION
.It Cm RFC-857
TELNET ECHO OPTION
.It Cm RFC-858
TELNET SUPPRESS GO AHEAD OPTION
.It Cm RFC-859
TELNET STATUS OPTION
.It Cm RFC-860
TELNET TIMING MARK OPTION
.It Cm RFC-861
TELNET EXTENDED OPTIONS - LIST OPTION
.It Cm RFC-885
TELNET END OF RECORD OPTION
.It Cm RFC-1073
Telnet Window Size Option
.It Cm RFC-1079
Telnet Terminal Speed Option
.It Cm RFC-1091
Telnet Terminal-Type Option
.It Cm RFC-1096
Telnet X Display Location Option
.It Cm RFC-1123
Requirements for Internet Hosts -- Application and Support
.It Cm RFC-1184
Telnet Linemode Option
.It Cm RFC-1372
Telnet Remote Flow Control Option
.It Cm RFC-1416
Telnet Authentication Option
.It Cm RFC-1411
Telnet Authentication: Kerberos Version 4
.It Cm RFC-1412
Telnet Authentication: SPX
.It Cm RFC-1571
Telnet Environment Option Interoperability Issues
.It Cm RFC-1572
Telnet Environment Option
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O Some
.\"O .Tn TELNET
.\"O commands are only partially implemented.
いくつかの
.Tn TELNET
コマンドは、部分的にしか実装されていない。
.Pp
.\"O Because of bugs in the original 4.2 BSD
.\"O .Xr telnet 1 ,
.\"O .Nm telnetd
.\"O performs some dubious protocol exchanges to try to discover if the remote
.\"O client is, in fact, a 4.2 BSD
.\"O .Xr telnet 1 .
オリジナルの 4.2 BSD の
.Xr telnet 1
のバグに対処するため、
.Nm telnetd
は、ある種のうさんくさいプロトコル通信を行うことにより、
リモートクライアントが実際に
4.2 BSD の
.Xr telnet 1
であるかを判断しようとする。
.Pp
.\"O Binary mode
.\"O has no common interpretation except between similar operating systems
.\"O (Unix in this case).
バイナリモードは、よく似たオペレーティングシステム
(この場合 Unix) 間以外では、
一般的な互換性がない。
.Pp
.\"O The terminal type name received from the remote client is converted to
.\"O lower case.
リモートクライアントから受け取った端末タイプ名は、小文字に変換される。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Telnetd
.\"O never sends
.\"O .Tn TELNET
.\"O .Dv IAC GA
.\"O (go ahead) commands.
.Nm telnetd
は、
.Tn TELNET
.Dv IAC GA
(go ahead) コマンドを絶対に送らない。
.Pp
.\"O The source code is not comprehensible.
ソースコードが分かりやすくない。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
