.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)timedc.8	6.7 (Berkeley) 5/11/93
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 14 21:16:31 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd May 11, 1993
.Dt TIMEDC 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.ad
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm timedc
.\"O .Nd timed control program
.Nd timed の制御プログラム
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm timedc
.Oo Ar command\ \&
.Op Ar argument ...
.Oc
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Timedc
.\"O is used to control the operation of the
.\"O .Xr timed 8
.\"O program.
.\"O It may be used to:
.Nm timedc
は、
.Xr timed 8
プログラムの操作を制御するために使われる。
このプログラムは、以下の目的で使われる:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.\"O Measure the differences between machines' clocks,
複数マシン間の時刻差の計測
.It 
.\"O Find the location where the master time server is running,
マスタタイムサーバが実行されているホストの検索
.It
.\"O Enable or disable tracing of messages received by
.\"O .Xr timed ,
.\"O and
.Xr timed
が受信したメッセージのトレースの有効・無効の切り替え
.It
.\"O Perform various debugging actions.
いろいろなデバッグ動作
.El
.Pp
.\"O Without any arguments,
.\"O .Nm timedc
.\"O will prompt for commands from the standard input.
.\"O If arguments are supplied,
.\"O .Nm timedc
.\"O interprets the first argument as a command and the remaining
.\"O arguments as parameters to the command.  The standard input
.\"O may be redirected causing
.\"O .Nm timedc
.\"O to read commands from a file.
.\"O Commands may be abbreviated;
.\"O recognized commands are:
引き数を指定しない場合、
.Nm timedc
は標準入力を読み込むプロンプトを出す。
引き数を指定した場合、
.Nm timedc
は最初の引き数をコマンドとして、
残りの引き数をコマンドのパラメータとして解釈する。
標準入力は、
.Nm timedc
がファイルからコマンドを読むように、リダイレクトしてもよい。
コマンドは短縮可能である。
使用可能なコマンドは以下の通りである:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Ic \&? Op Ar command ...
.Pp
.It Ic help Op Ar command ...
.\"O Print a short description of each command specified in the argument list,
.\"O or, if no arguments are given, a list of the recognized commands.
引き数リストで指定された各コマンドについて、簡単な説明を表示する。
引き数が指定されない場合、使用可能なコマンドの一覧を表示する。
.Pp
.It Ic clockdiff Ar host ...
.\"O Compute the differences between the clock of the host machine
.\"O and the clocks of the machines given as arguments.
ホストマシンの時刻と、引き数で指定したマシンの時刻の差を計算する。
.Pp 
.It Ic msite Op Ar host ...
.\"O Show the master time server for specified host(s).
host で指定したホストのマスタタイムサーバを表示する。
.Pp
.It Xo
.Ic trace
.Li \&{ Ar on Li \&|
.Ar off \&}
.Xc
.\"O Enable or disable the tracing of incoming messages to
.\"O .Xr timed
.\"O in the file
.\"O .Pa /var/log/timed.log.
.Xr timed
へのメッセージを
.Pa /var/log/timed.log
にトレース (記録) するか否かを指定する。
.Pp
.It Ic election Ar host
.\"O Asks the daemon
.\"O on the target host to reset its 
.\"O .Dq election
.\"O timers and to ensure that a time master has been elected.
対象ホスト host のデーモンに対し、
.Dq election
タイマをリセットし、マスタタイムサーバが既に選択されていることを
確実にするように要求する。
.Pp
.It Ic quit
.\"O Exit from timedc.
timedc を終了する。
.El
.Pp
.\"O Other commands may be included for use in testing and debugging
.\"O .Xr timed ;
.\"O the help command and
.\"O the program source may be consulted for details.
上記以外のコマンドも、
.Xr timed
のテストやデバッグのために実装されている。
詳細については、help コマンドやプログラムのソースを当たること。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /var/log/timed.masterlog -compact
.It Pa /var/log/timed.log
.\"O tracing file for timed
timed 用のトレースファイル
.It Pa /var/log/timed.masterlog
.\"O log file for master timed
マスタ timed 用のログファイル
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr date 1 ,
.Xr adjtime 2 ,
.Xr icmp 4 ,
.Xr timed 8
.Rs
.%T "TSP: The Time Synchronization Protocol for UNIX 4.3BSD"
.%A R. Gusella
.%A S. Zatti
.Re
.\"O .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Sh 返り値
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It ?Ambiguous command
.\"O abbreviation matches more than one command
短縮された入力に対して、複数のコマンドがマッチする
.It ?Invalid command
.\"O no match found
該当するコマンドが見つからない
.It ?Privileged command
.\"O command can be executed by root only
このコマンドは、root のみが実行できる
.El
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.3 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.3
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
