.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)timed.8	6.7 (Berkeley) 5/11/93
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 14 21:16:31 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd May 11, 1993
.Dt TIMED 8
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm timed
.\"O .Nd time server daemon
.Nd タイムサーバデーモン
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm timed
.Op Fl M
.Op Fl t
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl i Ar network
.Op Fl n Ar network
.Op Fl F Ar host1 host2 ...
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O This
.\"O is a time server daemon and is normally invoked
.\"O at boot time from the
.\"O .Xr rc 8
.\"O file.  
これはタイムサーバデーモンであり、
通常はブート時に
.Xr rc 8
ファイルから起動される。
.\"O It synchronizes the host's time with the time of other
.\"O machines in a local area network running 
.\"O .Nm timed 8 .
このサーバは、ホストの時刻と、
ローカルエリアネットワーク内で
.Nm timed 8
を実行している他のホストの時刻を同期させる。
.\"O These time servers will slow down the clocks of some machines
.\"O and speed up the clocks of others to bring them to the average network time.
これらのタイムサーバは、マシンの時刻を遅らせたり進ませたりすることで、
マシンの時刻を平均ネットワーク時刻にする。
.\"O The average network time is computed from measurements of clock differences
.\"O using the
.\"O .Tn ICMP
.\"O timestamp request message.
平均ネットワーク時刻は、
.Tn ICMP
タイムスタンプリクエストメッセージを使って、
時刻差を計測することにより計算される。
.Pp
.\"O The service provided by
.\"O .Nm timed
.\"O is based  on a master-slave
.\"O scheme.
.Nm timed
が提供するサービスは、マスタースレーブの考えに基づいている。
.\"O When
.\"O .Nm timed 8
.\"O is started on a machine, it asks the master for the network time
.\"O and sets the host's clock to that time.
.Xr timed 8
がマシンで起動されると、マスターにネットワーク時刻を問い合わせ、
ホストの時刻をその時刻に合わせる。
.\"O After that, it accepts synchronization messages periodically sent by
.\"O the master and calls 
.\"O .Xr adjtime 2
.\"O to perform the needed corrections on the host's clock.
その後、マスターが定期的に送る同期メッセージを受け取り、
ホスト時刻に必要な修正を加えるために
.Xr adjtime 2
を呼び出す。
.Pp
.\"O It also communicates with
.\"O .Xr date 1
.\"O in order to set the date globally,
.\"O and with 
.\"O .Xr timedc 8 ,
.\"O a timed control program.
このサーバは、
日付を大域的に設定するために
.Xr date 1
と通信し、
timed 制御プログラムである
.Xr timedc 8
とも通信する。
.\"O If the machine running the master crashes, then the slaves will elect
.\"O a new master from among slaves running with the 
.\"O .Fl M
.\"O flag.
マスターとして実行されているマシンがクラッシュすると、
スレーブは、
.Fl M
フラグで実行されているスレーブの中から、新しいマスターを選ぶ。
.\"O A
.\"O .Nm timed
.\"O running without the
.\"O .Fl M
.\"O or
.\"O .Fl F
.\"O flags will remain a slave.
.Fl M
や
.Fl F
フラグなしで実行されている
.Nm timed
を実行しているマシンはスレーブのままである。
.\"O The 
.\"O .Fl t
.\"O flag enables
.\"O .Nm timed
.\"O to trace the messages it receives in the
.\"O file
.\"O .Pa /var/log/timed.log .
.\"O Tracing can be turned on or off by the program
.\"O .Xr timedc 8 .
.Fl t
フラグを指定した場合、
.Nm timed
は、受信したメッセージをファイル
.Pa /var/log/timed.log
の中でトレースするようになる。
トレースの有効・無効は、
.Xr timedc 8
プログラムを使って切替えることができる。
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl d
.\"O flag is for debugging the daemon.
.\"O It causes the program to not put itself into the background.
.Fl d
フラグは、このデーモンをデバッグするためのものである。
このフラグを指定した場合、デーモンをバックグラウンドにさせない。
.\"O Normally
.\"O .Nm timed
.\"O checks for a master time server on each network to which
.\"O it is connected, except as modified by the options described below.
.\"O It will request synchronization service from the first master server
.\"O located.
通常
.Nm timed
は、接続されている各ネットワークのマスタータイムサーバをチェックする。
ただし、以下で説明するオプションで変更されている場合は例外である。
.Nm timed
は、見付けた最初のマスターサーバに対して、同期サービスを要求する。
.\"O If permitted by the
.\"O .Fl M
.\"O flag, it will provide synchronization service on any attached networks
.\"O on which no current master server was detected.
.\"O Such a server propagates the time computed by the top-level master.
その時点でマスターサーバが接続されているネットワークで検知できない場合、
.Fl M
フラグを指定すると、
同期サービスをそのネットワークに提供することが許可される。
このようなサーバは、トップレベルマスターが計算した時間を提供する。
.\"O The 
.\"O .Fl n
.\"O flag, followed by the name of a network which the host is connected to
.\"O (see
.\"O .Xr networks 5 ) ,
.\"O overrides the default choice of the
.\"O network addresses made by the program.
.Fl n
フラグは、その後にホストが接続されているネットワーク名
.Ns ( Xr networks 5
を参照) を続けることにより、
プログラムが決定するネットワークアドレスのデフォルトの選択を上書きする。
.\"O Each time the
.\"O .Fl n
.\"O flag appears, that network name is added to a list of valid networks.
.\"O All other networks are ignored.
.Fl n
フラグが表れる度に、そこで指定されているネットワーク名は、
有効なネットワークのリストに追加される。
他のネットワークは無視される。
.\"O The 
.\"O .Fl i
.\"O flag, followed by the name of a network to which the host is connected
.\"O (see
.\"O .Xr networks 5 ) ,
.\"O overrides the default choice of the network addresses made by the program.
.Fl i
フラグは、その後にホストが接続されているネットワーク名
.Ns ( Xr networks 5
を参照) を続けることにより、
プログラムが決定するネットワークアドレスのデフォルトの選択を上書きする。
.\"O Each time the
.\"O .Fl i
.\"O flag appears, that network name is added to a list of networks to ignore.
.\"O All other networks are used by the time daemon.
.Fl i
フラグが表れる度に、そこで指定されているネットワーク名は、
無視するネットワークのリストに追加される。
他のネットワークはタイムデーモンによって使われる。
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl n
.\"O and 
.\"O .Fl i
.\"O flags are meaningless if used together.
.Fl n
と
.Fl i
フラグを同時に使うと、何も意味を持たなくなる。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Timed
.\"O checks for a master time server on each network to which
.\"O it is connected, except as modified by the
.\"O .Fl n
.\"O and
.\"O .Fl i
.\"O options described above.
.Nm timed
は、接続されている各ネットワーク上のマスタータイムサーバをチェックする。
ただし、上で説明した
.Fl n
と
.Fl i
オプションで変更されている場合は例外である。
.\"O If it finds masters on more than one network, it chooses one network
.\"O on which to be a "slave," and then periodically checks the other
.\"O networks to see if the masters there have disappeared.
2 つ以上のネットワークでマスターサーバが見つかった場合、
「スレーブ」となるべきネットワークを選択する。
そして、定期的に各ネットワークでマスターが消えたかどうかをチェックする。
.Pp
.\"O One way to synchronize a group of machines is to use an NTP daemon to 
.\"O synchronize the clock of one machine to a distant standard or a radio
.\"O receiver and 
.\"O .Fl F Ar hostname
.\"O to tell its timed daemon to trust only itself.
マシンの同期をとるための 1 つの方法として、
NTP デーモンを用いてマシンの時刻を
遠距離の標準時刻やラジオ受信機の時刻に同期させ、
かつ、信頼できるマシンが自分自身のみであることを
timed デーモンに
.Fl F Ar hostname
によって通知する、といったものがある。
.Pp
.\"O Messages printed by the kernel on the system console occur with
.\"O interrupts disabled. 
.\"O This means that the clock stops while they are printing.
.\"O A machine with many disk or network hardware problems and consequent
.\"O messages cannot keep good time by itself.  Each message typically causes
.\"O the clock to lose a dozen milliseconds.  A time daemon can
.\"O correct the result.
カーネルによるシステムコンソールへのメッセージ出力は、
割り込みを禁止して行われる。
これは、メッセージが出力されている間は
システムのクロックが停止することを意味する。
ディスクやネットワークハードウェアに多くの問題を抱え、
その結果としてメッセージを出力するマシンは、
正確な時間を保持できない。
それぞれのメッセージは、出力される毎に 10ms 程度の時刻遅延を引き起こす。
タイムデーモンは、この結果を補正する。
.Pp
.\"O Messages in the system log about machines that failed to respond
.\"O usually indicate machines that crashed or were turned off.
.\"O Complaints about machines that failed to respond to initial time
.\"O settings are often associated with 
.\"O .Dq multi-homed
.\"O machines that looked for time masters on more than one network and eventually
.\"O chose to become slaves on other networks.
マシンが応答しないというシステムログメッセージは、
通常、そのクラッシュまたは電源が切れていることを意味する。
マシンが初期時刻設定時に応答に失敗してエラーが出るのは、
大抵の場合、「
.Dq マルチホーム
のマシン (ネットワークインターフェースが複数あるマシン) が
複数のネットワークでタイムマスターを探した後、
別のネットワークでスレーブになることを選択した」ということに関連している。
.\"O .Sh WARNINGS
.Sh 警告
.\"O If two or more time daemons, whether 
.\"O .Nm timed 
.\"O or
.\"O .Xr ntp ,
.\"O try to adjust the same clock, temporal chaos will result.
.Nm timed 
や
.Xr ntp
といった複数のタイムデーモンが同じ時計を調整しようとした場合、
一時的に時刻がおかしくなる可能性がある。
.\"O If both 
.\"O .Nm
.\"O and another time daemon are run on the same machine,
.\"O ensure that the 
.\"O .Fl F
.\"O flag is used, so that 
.\"O .Nm timed
.\"O never attempts to adjust the local clock.
.Nm
と別のタイムデーモンが同じマシンで稼働している場合、
.Fl F
フラグが指定されていることを確認すること。
このようにすれば、
.Nm timed
はローカルマシンの時計を調整しようとしなくなる。
.Pp 
.\"O The protocol is based on UDP/IP broadcasts.  All machines within
.\"O the range of a broadcast that are using the TSP protocol must cooperate.
.\"O There cannot be more than a single administrative domain using the
.\"O .Fl F
.\"O flag among all machines reached by a broadcast packet.
.\"O Failure to follow this rule is usually indicated by complaints concerning
.\"O .Dq untrusted
.\"O machines in the system log.
このプロトコルは、UDP/IP ブロードキャストに基づいたものである。
ブロードキャストの範囲内で TSP プロトコルを用いている
全てのマシンは、協調しあわなければならない。
ブロードキャストパケットが到達するマシンの間では、
.Fl F
フラグを使用する管理ドメインを 2 つ以上持つことはできない。
このルールに従わない場合は、通常、
.Dq 信頼できない
マシンに関連するエラーがシステムログに書き込まれる。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /var/log/timed.masterlog -compact
.It Pa /var/log/timed.log
.\"O tracing file for timed
timed のトレースファイル
.It Pa /var/log/timed.masterlog
.\"O log file for master timed 
マスター timed のログファイル
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr date 1 ,
.Xr adjtime 2 ,
.Xr gettimeofday 2 ,
.Xr icmp 4 ,
.Xr timedc 8
.Rs
.%T "TSP: The Time Synchronization Protocol for UNIX 4.3BSD"
.%A R. Gusella
.%A S. Zatti
.Re
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O daemon appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.3 .
.Nm
デーモンは
.Bx 4.3
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
