.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Jul 23 03:20:31 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 31 20:12:43 JST 2004 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Feb 19 13:46:24 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH FILE 1 "Copyright but distributable"
.\" $Id: file.man,v 1.55 2005/02/09 19:07:30 christos Exp $
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
file
.\"O \- determine file type
\- ファイルタイプを判定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B file
[
.B \-bcikLnNprsvz
]
[
.B \-f
.I namefile
]
[
.B \-F
.I separator
]
[
.B \-m 
.I magicfiles
]
.I file
\&...
.br
.B file
.B -C
[
.B \-m 
magicfile ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This manual page documents version 4.12 of the
.\"O .B file
.\"O command.
この man ページは
.B file
コマンド version 4.12 について記述している。
.PP
.\"O .B File
.\"O tests each argument in an attempt to classify it.
.B file
は各引き数をテストして分類する。
.\"O There are three sets of tests, performed in this order:
.\"O filesystem tests, magic number tests, and language tests.
ファイルシステムテスト、マジックナンバーテスト、言語テストの
順序で 3 つのテストを行う。
.\"O The
.\"O .I first
.\"O test that succeeds causes the file type to be printed.
そのうちの\fI最初に\fR成功したテストで、ファイルタイプを表示する。
.PP
.\"O The type printed will usually contain one of the words
表示されるタイプには通常以下のうち 1 つの単語が含まれる。
.B text
.\"O (the file contains only
.\"O printing characters and a few common control
.\"O characters and is probably safe to read on an
.\"O .SM ASCII
.\"O terminal),
(このファイルには表示可能文字といくつかの一般的な制御文字のみが含まれ、
.SM ASCII
端末で読んでも多分安全である)、
.B executable
.\"O (the file contains the result of compiling a program
.\"O in a form understandable to some \s-1UNIX\s0 kernel or another),
.\"O or
(このファイルにはプログラムをコンパイルした結果が含まれ、
\s-1UNIX\s0 カーネルなどにより実行可能な形式である)、
.B data
.\"O meaning anything else (data is usually `binary' or non-printable).
その他のもの (data は通常「バイナリ」または表示不能なファイルである)。
.\"O Exceptions are well-known file formats (core files, tar archives)
.\"O that are known to contain binary data.
ただしバイナリデータを含んでいる良く知られた形式のフォーマット
(core ファイル、tar アーカイブなど) は例外である。
.\"O When modifying the file
.\"O .I /usr/share/file/magic
.\"O or the program itself, 
.\"O .B "preserve these keywords" .
.I /usr/share/file/magic
ファイルや file プログラム自身を変更する場合も、
\fBこれらのキーワードは変更しないこと\fR。
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: preserve は「残しておく」という意味の保存なのか、
.\"Osato: 「変更しない」という意味の保存なのかが分からない。
.\"Osato: ここでは後者としてみた。
.\"Osato: 
.\"O People depend on knowing that all the readable files in a directory
.\"O have the word ``text'' printed.
人々は、ディレクトリ内の読み取り可能なファイルに対しては、
全て ``text'' が表示されると思っている。
.\"O Don't do as Berkeley did and change ``shell commands text''
.\"O to ``shell script''.
Berkeley がかつてやったように、
``shell commands text'' を ``shell script'' に変更したりしてはいけない。
.\"O Note that the file
.\"O .I /usr/share/file/magic
.\"O is built mechanically from a large number of small files in
.\"O the subdirectory
.\"O .I Magdir
.\"O in the source distribution of this program.
ファイル
.I /usr/share/file/magic
は、このプログラムのソースディストリビューションのサブディレクトリ
.I Magdir
にある数多くの小さなファイルから機械的に作られている点に注意すること。
.\"Osato:
.\"Osato: file-4.02 では magic/Magdir にあるようです。
.\"Osato:
.PP
.\"O The filesystem tests are based on examining the return from a
.\"O .BR stat (2)
.\"O system call.
ファイルシステムのテストは、
.BR stat (2)
システムコールの結果の検討に基づいて行われる。
.\"O The program checks to see if the file is empty,
.\"O or if it's some sort of special file.
このプログラムは、ファイルが空であるかや、
特殊ファイルであるかをチェックする。
.\"O Any known file types appropriate to the system you are running on
.\"O (sockets, symbolic links, or named pipes (FIFOs) on those systems that
.\"O implement them)
.\"O are intuited if they are defined in
.\"O the system header file
.\"O .IR <sys/stat.h>  .
実行中のシステムに特有の既存のファイルタイプ
(ソケット・シンボリックリンク・名前付きパイプ (FIFO)
(ただしシステムで実装されている場合)) は、
システムのヘッダファイル
.I <sys/stat.h>
に定義されていれば、すぐに分かる。
.PP
.\"O The magic number tests are used to check for files with data in
.\"O particular fixed formats.
マジックナンバーテストは、
特定の決まった形式のデータを含むファイルをチェックするのに使われる。
.\"O The canonical example of this is a binary executable (compiled program)
.\"O .I a.out
.\"O file, whose format is defined in 
.\"O .I a.out.h
.\"O and possibly
.\"O .I exec.h
.\"O in the standard include directory.
もっとも簡単な例は、バイナリ実行可能ファイル (コンパイルされたプログラム)
.I a.out
である。
この形式は標準インクルードディレクトリの
.I a.out.h
で定義されている
.RI ( exec.h
の場合もある)。
.\"O These files have a `magic number' stored in a particular place
.\"O near the beginning of the file that tells the \s-1UNIX\s0 operating system
.\"O that the file is a binary executable, and which of several types thereof.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: tells UNIX OS that ... の部分が訳しづらかったので、
.\"Osato: UNIX OS を主語にして訳してみました。
.\"Osato: 
これらのファイルにはファイルの先頭付近の特定位置に
「マジックナンバー」が格納されている。
これにより \s-1UNIX\s0 オペレーティングシステムは、
ファイルがバイナリ実行可能であることが分かり、
そのうちのどのファイルタイプであるかも分かる。
.\"O The concept of `magic number' has been applied by extension to data files.
.\"O Any file with some invariant identifier at a small fixed
.\"O offset into the file can usually be described in this way.
「マジックナンバー」の考え方は、データファイルに対する拡張にも応用されている。
ファイルの先頭から近い場所に一定の識別子を持つファイルは、
通常はこの方法で記述できる。
.\"O The information identifying these files is read from the compiled
.\"O magic file
.\"O .I /usr/share/file/magic.mgc ,
.\"O or 
.\"O .I /usr/share/file/magic
.\"O if the compile file does not exist. In addition
.\"O .B file
.\"O will look in
.\"O .I $HOME/.magic.mgc ,
.\"O or
.\"O .I $HOME/.magic
.\"O for magic entries.
これらのファイルについての情報識別子は、コンパイルされたマジックファイル
.I /usr/share/file/magic.mgc
から読み込まれる。
このコンパイルされたファイルがない場合は、
.I /usr/share/file/magic
から読み込まれる。
更に
.B file
は
.I $HOME/.magic.mgc
または
.I $HOME/.magic
からマジックファイルのエントリを探す。
.PP
.\"O If a file does not match any of the entries in the magic file,
.\"O it is examined to see if it seems to be a text file.
ファイルがマジックファイルのどのエントリともマッチしなかった場合、
テキストファイルであるかを調べる。
.\"O ASCII, ISO-8859-x, non-ISO 8-bit extended-ASCII character sets
.\"O (such as those used on Macintosh and IBM PC systems),
.\"O UTF-8-encoded Unicode, UTF-16-encoded Unicode, and EBCDIC
.\"O character sets can be distinguished by the different
.\"O ranges and sequences of bytes that constitute printable text
.\"O in each set.
文字集合内の表示可能なテキストを構成する
バイト列の範囲の違いを調べることにより、
ASCII, ISO-8859-x, (Macintosh や IBM PC システムで使用されている)
ISO に準拠しない 8 ビット拡張 ASCII 文字集合、
UTF-8 エンコードされたユニコード、UTF-16 エンコードされたユニコード、
EBCDIC 文字集合を識別する。
.\"O If a file passes any of these tests, its character set is reported.
ファイルがこれらのテストをパスすると、文字集合名が表示される。
.\"O ASCII, ISO-8859-x, UTF-8, and extended-ASCII files are identified
.\"O as ``text'' because they will be mostly readable on nearly any terminal;
ASCII, ISO-8859-x, UTF-8, 拡張 ASCII のファイルは、
これはほぼ全ての端末で読むことができるので、
``text'' として識別される。
.\"O UTF-16 and EBCDIC are only ``character data'' because, while
.\"O they contain text, it is text that will require translation
.\"O before it can be read.
UTF-16 と EBCDIC のファイルは、
たとえテキストを含んでいたとしても読む前に変換が必要なので、
単なる ``character data'' とされる。
.\"O In addition,
.\"O .B file
.\"O will attempt to determine other characteristics of text-type files.
さらに
.B file
はテキスト型ファイルの他の特徴も決定しようとする。
.\"O If the lines of a file are terminated by CR, CRLF, or NEL, instead
.\"O of the Unix-standard LF, this will be reported.
ファイルの行が Unix で標準的な LF ではなく、
CR, CRLF, NEL で終了している場合は、その旨を表示する。
.\"O Files that contain embedded escape sequences or overstriking
.\"O will also be identified.
ファイルに組み込み (embedded) エスケープシーケンスや
重ね打ち (overstriking) が含まれている場合も、その旨を表示する。
.PP
.\"O Once
.\"O .B file
.\"O has determined the character set used in a text-type file,
.\"O it will
.\"O attempt to determine in what language the file is written.
.B file
はテキスト型ファイルで使われている文字集合を決定した後は、
ファイルが書かれている言語を決定しようとする。
.\"O The language tests look for particular strings (cf
.\"O .IR names.h )
.\"O that can appear anywhere in the first few blocks of a file.
言語テストではファイルの最初の数ブロックのどこかに現れる特定の文字列
.RI ( names.h
を参照) を探す。
.\"O For example, the keyword
.\"O .B .br
.\"O indicates that the file is most likely a
.\"O .BR troff (1)
.\"O input file, just as the keyword 
.\"O .B struct
.\"O indicates a C program.
例えばキーワード
.B .br
があれば、そのファイルは多くの場合
.BR troff (1)
の入力ファイルであることを示しており、
キーワード
.B struct
は C 言語プログラムであることを示している。
.\"O These tests are less reliable than the previous
.\"O two groups, so they are performed last.
これらのテストは前のテストに比べると信頼性が低いので、
最後に実行される。
.\"O The language test routines also test for some miscellany
.\"O (such as 
.\"O .BR tar (1)
.\"O archives).
言語テストのルーチンは他のファイルタイプ (例えば
.BR tar (1)
アーカイブ) に関するテストも行う。
.PP
.\"O Any file that cannot be identified as having been written
.\"O in any of the character sets listed above is simply said to be ``data''.
上に挙げた文字集合のどれにも当てはまらないファイルは、
単に ``data'' と表示される。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP 8
.B "\-b, \-\-brief"
.\"O Do not prepend filenames to output lines (brief mode).
出力行の最初にファイル名を表示しない (簡易モード)。
.TP 8
.B "\-c, \-\-checking\-printout"
.\"O Cause a checking printout of the parsed form of the magic file.
マジックファイルの解析形式を表示してチェックする。
.\"O This is usually used in conjunction with 
.\"O .B \-m
.\"O to debug a new magic file before installing it.
通常は
.B \-m
オプションと一緒に用いて、
新しいマジックファイルをインストールする前のデバッグに使う。
.TP 8
.B "\-C, \-\-compile"
.\"O Write a magic.mgc output file that contains a pre-parsed version of
.\"O file.
マジックファイルを事前に解析した内容を含む出力ファイル
magic.mgc を書き出す。
.TP 8
.BI "\-f, \-\-files\-from" " namefile"
.\"O Read the names of the files to be examined from 
.\"O .I namefile
.\"O (one per line) 
.\"O before the argument list.
他の引き数リストより先に、検査するファイルの名前を
.I namefile
ファイルから読み込む
(1 行に 1 つのファイル名)。 
.\"O Either 
.\"O .I namefile
.\"O or at least one filename argument must be present;
.I namefile
または少なくとも 1 つのファイル名引き数がなければいけない。
.\"O to test the standard input, use ``\-'' as a filename argument.
標準入力をテストする場合は、ファイル名引き数として ``\-'' を使うこと。
.TP 8
.BI "\-F, \-\-separator" " separator"
.\"O Use the specified string as the separator between the filename and the
.\"O file result returned. Defaults to ``:''.
指定した文字列をファイル名とファイルをテストした結果の区切り文字とする。
デフォルトは ``:'' である。
.TP 8
.B "\-i, \-\-mime"
.\"O Causes the file command to output mime type strings rather than the more
.\"O traditional human readable ones. Thus it may say
.\"O ``text/plain; charset=us-ascii''
.\"O rather
.\"O than ``ASCII text''.
file コマンドの出力を人間が読みやすい昔ながらのものではなく、
mime タイプ文字列にする。
したがって ``ASCII text'' ではなく、
``text/plain; charset=us-ascii'' のように出力される。
.\"O In order for this option to work, file changes the way
.\"O it handles files recognised by the command itself (such as many of the
.\"O text file types, directories etc), and makes use of an alternative
.\"O ``magic'' file.
このオプションを動作させるため、
file コマンドが認識するファイルの取り扱い方法
(多くのテキストファイルタイプやディレクトリ) を変更し、
別の ``magic'' ファイルを使うようにした。
.\"O (See ``FILES'' section, below).
(下記の「ファイル」のセクションを参照)。
.TP 8
.B "\-k, \-\-keep\-going"
.\"O Don't stop at the first match, keep going.
最初にマッチしたもので停止せず、次のマッチングに進む。
.TP 8
.B "\-L, \-\-dereference"
.\"O option causes symlinks to be followed, as the like-named option in
.\"O .BR ls (1).
.\"O (on systems that support symbolic links).
(システムがシンボリックリンクをサポートしている場合は)
.BR ls (1)
の同じ名前のオプションと同様に、シンボリックリンクを辿るようにさせる。
.TP 8
.BI "\-m, \-\-magic\-file" " list"
.\"O Specify an alternate list of files containing magic numbers.
マジックナンバーが書かれた別のファイルのリストを指定する。
.\"O This can be a single file, or a colon-separated list of files.
1 つのファイルでも、コンマで区切られたファイルのリストでもよい。
.\"O If a compiled magic file is found alongside, it will be used instead.
コンパイル済みのマジックファイルが一緒に指定された場合は、
代りにそれを使う。
.TP 8
.B "\-n, \-\-no\-buffer"
.\"O Force stdout to be flushed after checking each file.
1 つのファイルをチェックする毎に、標準出力をフラッシュする。
.\"O This is only useful if checking a list of files.
これは複数のファイルをチェックするときにのみ役立つ。
.\"O It is intended to be used by programs that want filetype output from a pipe.
このオプションは、ファイルタイプをパイプから出力する
プログラムで使われることを意図している。
.\"O With the \-i or \-\-mime option, the program adds ".mime" to each file name.
\-i または \-\-mime オプションと一緒に指定すると、
このプログラムは各ファイル名の後に ".mime" を追加する。
.TP 8
.B "\-N, \-\-no\-pad"
.\"O Don't pad filenames so that they align in the output.
出力を整列するためのファイル名への空白の追加を行わない。
.TP 8
.B "\-p, \-\-preserve\-date"
.\"O On systems that support
.\"O .BR utime (2)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR utimes(2),
.\"O attempt to preserve the access time of files analyzed, to pretend that
.\"O .BR file (2)
.\"O never read them.
.BR utime (2)
または
.BR utimes(2)
をサポートするシステムでは、
.BR file (1)
が解析したファイルを読み込まれなかったかのようにするため、
アクセス時刻を保存しようとする。
.TP 8
.B "\-r, \-\-raw"
.\"O Don't translate unprintable characters to \eooo.
印字不能文字を \eooo に変換しない。
.\"O Normally
.\"O .B file
.\"O translates unprintable characters to their octal representation.
通常、
.B file
は印字不能文字を 8 進数表現に変換する。
.TP 8
.B "\-s, \-\-special\-files"
.\"O Normally,
.\"O .B file
.\"O only attempts to read and determine the type of argument files which
.\"O .BR stat (2)
.\"O reports are ordinary files.
通常
.B file
は、引き数で指定されたファイルのうち
.BR stat (2)
で通常のファイル (ordinary file) とされたファイルのみを読み込んで、
タイプの決定を行う。
.\"O This prevents problems, because reading special files may have peculiar
.\"O consequences.
特殊ファイルを読み込むと異常な結果を引き起こすかも知れないため、
この動作により問題を防止している。
.\"O Specifying the
.\"O .BR \-s
.\"O option causes
.\"O .B file
.\"O to also read argument files which are block or character special files.
.BR \-s
オプションを指定すると、
.B file
は引き数で指定されたブロックスペシャルファイルや
キャラクタスペシャルファイルも読み込む。
.\"O This is useful for determining the filesystem types of the data in raw
.\"O disk partitions, which are block special files.
ブロックスペシャルファイルである
raw ディスクパーティションのデータの
ファイルシステムタイプを決定するのに役立つ。
.\"O This option also causes
.\"O .B file
.\"O to disregard the file size as reported by
.\"O .BR stat (2)
.\"O since on some systems it reports a zero size for raw disk partitions.
このオプションを指定すると
.B file
は
.BR stat (2)
が返すファイルサイズを無視する。
これは raw ディスクパーティションのサイズを
0 として返すシステムも存在するためである。
.TP 8
.B "\-v, \-\-version"
.\"O Print the version of the program and exit.
プログラムのバージョンを表示して終了する。
.TP 8
.B "\-z, \-\-uncompress"
.\"O Try to look inside compressed files.
圧縮ファイルの中も検査する。
.TP 8
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Print a help message and exit.
ヘルプメッセージを表示して終了する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.I /usr/share/file/magic.mgc
.\"O Default compiled list of magic numbers
デフォルトのコンパイル済みのマジックナンバーのリスト。
.TP
.I /usr/share/file/magic
.\"O Default list of magic numbers
デフォルトのマジックナンバーのリスト。
.TP
.I /usr/share/file/magic.mime.mgc
.\"O Default compiled list of magic numbers, used to output mime types when
.\"O the -i option is specified.
デフォルトのコンパイル済みのマジックナンバーのリスト。
\-i オプションが指定された場合に、mime タイプを出力するのに使用される。
.TP
.I /usr/share/file/magic.mime
.\"O Default list of magic numbers, used to output mime types when the -i option
.\"O is specified.
デフォルトのマジックナンバーのリスト。
\-i オプションが指定された場合に、mime タイプを出力するのに使用される。
.TP
.I /etc/magic
.\"O Local additions to magic wisdom.
マジックナンバーについてのローカルな追加情報。

.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O The environment variable
.\"O .B MAGIC
.\"O can be used to set the default magic number file name.
環境変数
.B MAGIC
はデフォルトのマジックナンバーファイルの名前を設定する。
.\"O .B file
.\"O adds ".mime" and/or ".mgc" to the value of this variable as appropriate.
.B file
はこの変数の値に ".mime" と ".mgc" を適宜追加する
(どちらか一方の場合もある)。
.\"O If that variable is set, then
.\"O .B file
.\"O will not attempt to open
.\"O .B $HOME/.magic .
この変数が設定されると、
.B file
は
.B $HOME/.magic
をオープンしない。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR magic (4)
.\"O \- description of magic file format.
\- マジックファイルのフォーマットについての記述。
.br
.\"O .BR strings (1), " od" (1), " hexdump(1)"
.BR strings (1), " od" (1), " hexdump" (1)
.\"O \- tools for examining non-textfiles.
\- 非テキストファイルを検査するためのツール。
.\"O .SH STANDARDS CONFORMANCE
.SH 標準への準拠
.\"O This program is believed to exceed the System V Interface Definition
.\"O of FILE(CMD), as near as one can determine from the vague language
.\"O contained therein. 
このプログラムは System V Interface Definition の
FILE(CMD) より優れていると考えている。
ファイルに含まれている曖昧な言語から決定するという点では似ている。
.\"O Its behaviour is mostly compatible with the System V program of the same name.
動作は同じ名前の System V のプログラムとほぼ互換性がある。
.\"O This version knows more magic, however, so it will produce
.\"O different (albeit more accurate) output in many cases. 
このバージョンはより多くのマジックナンバーを認識する。
しかし多くの場合、System V のものとは異なった
(ただしもっと正確な) 出力を行う。
.PP
.\"O The one significant difference 
.\"O between this version and System V
.\"O is that this version treats any white space
.\"O as a delimiter, so that spaces in pattern strings must be escaped.
System V バージョンとの重要な違いは、
このバージョンでは空白を区切り文字として扱うために、
パターン文字列における空白文字をしなければならないという点にある。
.\"O For example,
例えば、
.br
>10	string	language impress\ 	(imPRESS data)
.br
.\"O in an existing magic file would have to be changed to
という既存のマジックファイルは、
.br
>10	string	language\e impress	(imPRESS data)
.br
のように変更しなければならない。
.\"O In addition, in this version, if a pattern string contains a backslash,
.\"O it must be escaped.
更にこのバージョンでは、バックスラッシュを含むパターン文字列は
エスケープしなければならない。
.\"O For example
例えば、
.br
0	string		\ebegindata	Andrew Toolkit document
.br
.\"O in an existing magic file would have to be changed to
という既存のマジックファイルは、
.br
0	string		\e\ebegindata	Andrew Toolkit document
.br
のように変更しなければならない。
.PP
.\"O SunOS releases 3.2 and later from Sun Microsystems include a
.\"O .BR file (1)
.\"O command derived from the System V one, but with some extensions.
Sun Microsystems の SunOS releases 3.2 以降には、
System V のものから派生した
.BR file (1)
コマンドが含まれているが、いくつか拡張されている。
.\"O My version differs from Sun's only in minor ways.
私の作ったバージョンは、Sun のものと些細な違いしかない。
.\"O It includes the extension of the `&' operator, used as,
.\"O for example,
Sun のバージョンは `&' オペレータの拡張が含まれ、
例えば以下のように使われる。
.br
>16	long&0x7fffffff	>0		not stripped
.\"O .SH MAGIC DIRECTORY
.SH マジックディレクトリ
.\"O The magic file entries have been collected from various sources,
.\"O mainly USENET, and contributed by various authors.
マジックファイルのエントリは、
いろいろな情報源、主に USENET から集められ、
多くの著者から寄贈してもらった。
.\"O Christos Zoulas (address below) will collect additional
.\"O or corrected magic file entries.
Christos Zoulas (アドレスは以下) はマジックファイルエントリを
集めたり修正したりしてくれた。
.\"O A consolidation of magic file entries 
.\"O will be distributed periodically.
マジックファイルのエントリを整理統合したものは、
定期的に配布される予定である。
.PP
.\"O The order of entries in the magic file is significant.
マジックファイルのエントリは順番が重要である。
.\"O Depending on what system you are using, the order that
.\"O they are put together may be incorrect.
使用しているシステムによっては、順番の組みが不正であるかもしれない。
.\"O If your old
.\"O .B file
.\"O command uses a magic file,
.\"O keep the old magic file around for comparison purposes
.\"O (rename it to 
.\"O .IR /usr/share/file/magic.orig ).
古い
.B file
コマンドがマジックファイルを使っている場合、
比較のために古いマジックファイルを残しておくこと
.RI ( /usr/share/file/magic.orig
に名前を変更しておく)。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.nf
$ file file.c file /dev/{wd0a,hda}
file.c:   C program text
file:     ELF 32-bit LSB executable, Intel 80386, version 1 (SYSV),
          dynamically linked (uses shared libs), stripped
/dev/wd0a: block special (0/0)
/dev/hda: block special (3/0)

$ file -s /dev/wd0{b,d}
/dev/wd0b: data
/dev/wd0d: x86 boot sector

$ file -s /dev/hda{,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10}
/dev/hda:   x86 boot sector
/dev/hda1:  Linux/i386 ext2 filesystem
/dev/hda2:  x86 boot sector
/dev/hda3:  x86 boot sector, extended partition table
/dev/hda4:  Linux/i386 ext2 filesystem
/dev/hda5:  Linux/i386 swap file
/dev/hda6:  Linux/i386 swap file
/dev/hda7:  Linux/i386 swap file
/dev/hda8:  Linux/i386 swap file
/dev/hda9:  empty
/dev/hda10: empty

$ file -i file.c file /dev/{wd0a,hda}
file.c:      text/x-c
file:        application/x-executable, dynamically linked (uses shared libs),
not stripped
/dev/hda:    application/x-not-regular-file
/dev/wd0a:   application/x-not-regular-file

.fi
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O There has been a 
.\"O .B file
.\"O command in every \s-1UNIX\s0 since at least Research Version 4
.\"O (man page dated November, 1973).
少なくとも Research Version 4 以降の全ての \s-1UNIX\s0 に、
.B file
コマンドは含まれている
(man ページの日付は 1973 年 11 月である)。
.\"O The System V version introduced one significant major change:
.\"O the external list of magic number types.
System V バージョンでは重大な変更が行われ、
マジックナンバータイプのリストを外部に保持するようになった。
.\"O This slowed the program down slightly but made it a lot more flexible.
この変更はプログラムを幾らかは遅くしたが、とても柔軟にした。
.PP
.\"O This program, based on the System V version,
.\"O was written by Ian Darwin <ian@darwinsys.com>
.\"O without looking at anybody else's source code.
System V バージョンをベースにしたこのプログラムは、
誰のソースコードも見ずに
Ian Darwin <ian@darwinsys.com> によって書かれた。
.PP
.\"O John Gilmore revised the code extensively, making it better than
.\"O the first version.
John Gilmore はコードを広範囲にわたって改訂し、
最初のバージョンより改良した。
.\"O Geoff Collyer found several inadequacies
.\"O and provided some magic file entries.
Geoff Collyer はいくつかの欠点を見つけ、
マジックファイルエントリを提供した。
.\"O Contributions by the `&' operator by Rob McMahon, cudcv@warwick.ac.uk, 1989.
`&' オペレータについては 1989 年に
Rob McMahon, cudcv@warwick.ac.uk が貢献した。
.PP
.\"O Guy Harris, guy@netapp.com, made many changes from 1993 to the present.
Guy Harris, guy@netapp.com は 1993 年から現在に至るまで
多くの変更を行っている。
.PP
.\"O Primary development and maintenance from 1990 to the present by
.\"O Christos Zoulas (christos@astron.com).
Christos Zoulas (christos@astron.com) は 1990 年に最初の開発を行い、
現在までメンテナンスを行っている。
.PP
.\"O Altered by Chris Lowth, chris@lowth.com, 2000:
.\"O Handle the ``-i'' option to output mime type strings and using an alternative
.\"O magic file and internal logic.
2000 年の Chris Lowth, chris@lowth.com による変更:
別のマジックファイルと内部ロジックを使い、
``-i'' で mime タイプ文字列を出力するようにした。
.PP
.\"O Altered by Eric Fischer (enf@pobox.com), July, 2000,
.\"O to identify character codes and attempt to identify the languages
.\"O of non-ASCII files.
2000 年 7 月の Eric Fischer (enf@pobox.com) による変更:
文字コードを識別し、非 ASCII ファイルの言語を識別するようにした。
.PP
.\"O The list of contributors to the "Magdir" directory (source for the
.\"O /etc/magic
.\"O file) is too long to include here.
.\"O You know who you are; thank you.
"Magdir" ディレクトリ (/etc/magic ファイルのソース) の貢献者のリストは、
長すぎるのでここには含められない。
貢献してくれた人は自分が貢献したことを知っているでしょう。
感謝します。
.\"O .SH LEGAL NOTICE
.SH 法的な注意
Copyright (c) Ian F. Darwin, Toronto, Canada, 1986-1999.
.\"O Covered by the standard Berkeley Software Distribution copyright; see the file
.\"O LEGAL.NOTICE in the source distribution.
このソフトウェアは standard Berkeley Software Distribution copyright により
保護されている。
ソース配布にある LEGAL.NOTICE ファイルを参照すること。
.PP
.\"O The files
.\"O .I tar.h
.\"O and
.\"O .I is_tar.c
.\"O were written by John Gilmore from his public-domain
.\"O .B tar
.\"O program, and are not covered by the above license.
ファイル
.I tar.h
と
.I is_tar.c
は John Gilmore によって書かれたもので、
彼のパブリックドメイン
.B tar
プログラムに由来する。
この 2 つのファイルには上記のライセンスが適用されない。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O There must be a better way to automate the construction of the Magic
.\"O file from all the glop in magdir.
magdir にある全てのファイルから Magic ファイルを自動的に構築する
もっと良い方法があるべきだ。
.\"O What is it?
それはどんなものだろうか ?
.\"O Better yet, the magic file should be compiled into binary (say,
.\"O .BR ndbm (3)
.\"O or, better yet, fixed-length
.\"O .SM ASCII
.\"O strings for use in heterogenous network environments) for faster startup.
起動を速くするためには、
マジックファイルをバイナリにコンパイルしておくべきだろう
(つまり
.BR ndbm (3)
や、異なる OS によるネットワーク環境で使うために固定長の
.SM ASCII
文字列にするのも良いだろう)。
.\"O Then the program would run as fast as the Version 7 program of the same name,
.\"O with the flexibility of the System V version.
これにより、System V バージョンの柔軟性を備えたまま、
同じ名前の Version 7 のプログラムより速くなるだろう。
.PP
.\"O .B File
.\"O uses several algorithms that favor speed over accuracy,
.\"O thus it can be misled about the contents of
.\"O text
.\"O files.
.B file
には正確さよりも速度を重視したアルゴリズムが使われているため、
テキストファイルの内容を読み誤ることがある。
.PP
.\"O The support for
.\"O text
.\"O files (primarily for programming languages)
.\"O is simplistic, inefficient and requires recompilation to update.
(主にプログラミング言語を対象とした) テキストファイルのサポートは、
単純化されていて不十分であり、更新するには再コンパイルが必要である。
.PP
.\"O There should be an ``else'' clause to follow a series of continuation lines.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: ここは良く分かりません。
.\"Osato: 
後続の行を追っていくためには、``else'' 節を付けておくべきである。
.PP
.\"O The magic file and keywords should have regular expression support.
マジックファイルとキーワードで正規表現をサポートすべきである。
.\"O Their use of
.\"O .SM "ASCII TAB"
.\"O as a field delimiter is ugly and makes
.\"O it hard to edit the files, but is entrenched.
.SM "ASCII TAB"
をフィールドの区切り文字として使用するのは、
見苦しく編集しづらいが、定着している。
.\"O It might be advisable to allow upper-case letters in keywords
.\"O for e.g.,
.\"O .BR troff (1)
.\"O commands vs man page macros.
例えば
.BR troff (1)
コマンドに対する man ページのマクロのように、
キーワードで大文字を許可するようにするのが望ましいだろう。
.\"O Regular expression support would make this easy.
正規表現がサポートされれば、これが簡単にできるだろう。
.PP
.\"O The program doesn't grok \s-2FORTRAN\s0.
このプログラムは \s-2FORTRAN\s0 を判別できない。
.\"O It should be able to figure \s-2FORTRAN\s0 by seeing some keywords which 
.\"O appear indented at the start of line.
開始行でインデントされているキーワードを見て、
\s-2FORTRAN\s0 であると判断すべきである。
.\"O Regular expression support would make this easy.
正規表現がサポートされれば、これが簡単にできるだろう。
.PP
.\"O The list of keywords in 
.\"O .I ascmagic
.\"O probably belongs in the Magic file.
.I ascmagic
にあるキーワードは、多分 Magic ファイルに入れるべきだろう。
.\"O This could be done by using some keyword like `*' for the offset value.
これはオフセット値に `*' のようなキーワードを使うことで可能だろう。
.PP
.\"O Another optimisation would be to sort
.\"O the magic file so that we can just run down all the
.\"O tests for the first byte, first word, first long, etc, once we
.\"O have fetched it.
その他の最適化としてはマジックファイルのソートがある。
これにより一度読み込んでしまえば、
最初のバイト・最初のワード・最初の long 型、... というように
全てのテストで突き止めていくことができる。
.\"O Complain about conflicts in the magic file entries.
マジックファイルエントリの衝突について苦情を言ってください。
.\"O Make a rule that the magic entries sort based on file offset rather
.\"O than position within the magic file?
マジックファイルのエントリのソートは、
マジックファイルにおける位置ではなくファイルオフセットで行う、
というルールにするべきだろうか ?
.PP
.\"O The program should provide a way to give an estimate 
.\"O of ``how good'' a guess is.
推定した結果が「どのくらい良いか」を評価する手段を、
プログラムが提供すべきである。
.\"O We end up removing guesses (e.g. ``From '' as first 5 chars of file) because
.\"O they are not as good as other guesses (e.g. ``Newsgroups:'' versus
.\"O ``Return-Path:'').
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: versus の意味が良く分からないし、訳しづらい。
.\"Osato: 
最終的には (例えば ``Newsgroups:'' に対する ``Return-Path:'' のように) 
他の推定結果より良くない推定結果
(例えば、ファイルの最初の 5 文字が ``From '' など) は削除する。
.\"O Still, if the others don't pan out, it should be possible to use the
.\"O first guess.  
しかし他の推定結果が出なければ、
最初の推定結果を使えるようにしておくべきである。
.PP
.\"O This program is slower than some vendors' file commands.
このプログラムは、いくつかのベンダの file コマンドより遅い。
.\"O The new support for multiple character codes makes it even slower.
複数文字コードを新しくサポートしたことで、いっそう遅くなってしまった。
.PP
.\"O This manual page, and particularly this section, is too long.
この man ページ、特にこのセクションが長すぎる。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手方法
.\"O You can obtain the original author's latest version by anonymous FTP
.\"O on
.\"O .B ftp.astron.com
.\"O in the directory
.\"O .I /pub/file/file-X.YZ.tar.gz
オリジナルの作者の最新バージョンは、anonymous FTP で
.B ftp.astron.com
のディレクトリ
.I /pub/file/file-X.YZ.tar.gz
から入手できる。
