.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Sep 29 01:13:26 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	
.\"
.\" $Id: adsl-connect.8,v 1.4 2002/04/09 17:28:38 dfs Exp $
.\" LIC: GPL
.TH ADSL-CONNECT 8 "21 February 2000"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O adsl-connect \- Shell script to manage a PPPoE link
adsl-connect \- PPPoE 接続を管理するシェルスクリプト

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B adsl-connect \fR[\fIconfig_file\fR]
.P
.B adsl-connect \fR\fIinterface user\fR [\fIconfig_file\fR]


.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBadsl-connect\fR is a shell script which manages an ADSL connection
.\"O using the Roaring Penguin user-space PPPoE client.  If you omit
.\"O \fIconfig_file\fR, the default file \fB/etc/ppp/pppoe.conf\fR is used.
.\"O If you supply \fIinterface\fR and \fIuser\fR, then they override the
.\"O Ethernet interface and user-name settings in the configuration file.
\fBadsl-connect\fR は、
Roaring Penguin ユーザー空間 PPPoE クライアントを使って
ADSL 接続を管理するシェルスクリプトである。
\fIconfig_file\fR を省略した場合、
デフォルトの設定ファイル \fB/etc/ppp/pppoe.conf\fR が使われる。
\fIinterface\fR と \fIuser\fR を指定した場合、
設定ファイルにあるイーサーネットインターフェースと
ユーザー名の設定を上書きする。
.P
.\"O Note that normally, you should \fInot\fR invoke \fBadsl-connect\fR
.\"O directly.  Instead, use \fBadsl-start\fR to bring up the ADSL connection.
通常は直接 \fBadsl-connect\fR を起動すべきでは\fIなく\fR、
ADSL 接続を開始するには \fBadsl-start\fR を用いるべきである。
.P
.\"O \fBadsl-connect\fR first reads a configuration file.  It then brings
.\"O up a PPPoE connection.  If the connection ever drops, a message is logged
.\"O to syslog, and \fBadsl-connect\fR re-establishes the connection.  In addition,
.\"O each time the connection is dropped or cannot be established,
.\"O \fBadsl-connect\fR executes the script \fB/etc/ppp/adsl-lost\fR if it
.\"O exists and is executable.
\fBadsl-connect\fR は最初に設定ファイルを読み、それから PPPoE 接続を開く。
接続が切れた場合、syslog にメッセージが記録され、
\fBadsl-connect\fR が再接続を行う。
そして、接続が切れた場合や接続が確立できない場合、
スクリプト \fB/etc/ppp/adsl-lost\fR が存在して実行可能であれば、
\fBadsl-connect\fR はこれを実行する。

.P
.\"O The shell script \fBadsl-stop\fR causes \fBadsl-connect\fR to break out
.\"O of its loop, bring the connection down, and exit.
シェルスクリプト \fBadsl-stop\fR を呼ぶと、
\fBadsl-connect\fR はループを抜けさせ、接続を閉じて終了する。

.\"O .SH TECHNICAL DETAILS
.SH 技術的な詳細
.\"O \fBadsl-connect\fR uses the following shell variables from the
.\"O configuration file:
\fBadsl-connect\fR は設定ファイルにある以下のシェル変数を使う。

.TP
.B ETH
.\"O The Ethernet interface connected to the ADSL modem (for example, eth0).
ADSL モデムに接続されるイーサーネットインターフェース (例えば eth0)。

.TP
.B USER
.\"O The ADSL user-id (for example, b1xxnxnx@sympatico.ca).
ADSL ユーザー ID (例えば b1xxnxnx@sympatico.ca)。

.TP
.B PIDFILE
.\"O A file in which to write the process-ID of the adsl-connect process
.\"O (for example, \fB/var/run/pppoe.pid\fR).  Two additional files
.\"O ($PIDFILE.pppd and $PIDFILE.pppoe) hold the process-ID's of the
.\"O \fBpppd\fR and \fBpppoe\fR processes, respectively.
adsl-connect のプロセス ID が書かれるファイル
(例えば \fB/var/run/pppoe.pid\fR)。
さらに 2 つのファイル ($PIDFILE.pppd と $PIDFILE.pppoe) には、
それぞれ \fBpppd\fR と \fBpppoe\fR のプロセス ID が入る。

.P
.\"O By using different configuration files with different PIDFILE
.\"O settings, you can manage multiple PPPoE connections.  Just specify the
.\"O configuration file as an argument to \fBadsl-start\fR and
.\"O \fBadsl-stop\fR.
別々の PIDFILE を設定してそれぞれの設定ファイルを使えば、
複数の PPPoE 接続を管理できる。
\fBadsl-start\fR と \fBadsl-stop\fR の引き数として、
その設定ファイルを指定するだけでよい。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O \fBadsl-connect\fR was written by David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com>.
\fBadsl-connect\fR は David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com> によって
作成された。

.\"O The \fBpppoe\fR home page is \fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR.
\fBpppoe\fR のホームページは
\fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR である。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
pppoe(8), adsl-start(8), adsl-stop(8), pppd(8), pppoe.conf(5), adsl-setup(8), adsl-status(8), pppoe-sniff(8), pppoe-server(8), pppoe-relay(8)
