.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Sun Oct 14 03:57:39 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu May  9 22:00:04 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\" 
.\" $Id: pppoe-server.8,v 1.8 2002/04/09 17:28:38 dfs Exp $ 
.\" LIC: GPL
.TH PPPOE-SERVER 8 "3 July 2000"
.\""
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pppoe-server \- user-space PPPoE server
pppoe-server \- ユーザー空間 PPPoE サーバー
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pppoe-server \fR[\fIoptions\fR]

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBpppoe-server\fR is a user-space server for PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol
.\"O over Ethernet) for Linux and other UNIX systems.  \fBpppoe-server\fR works in
.\"O concert with the \fBpppoe\fR client to respond to PPPoE discovery packets
.\"O and set up PPPoE sessions.
\fBpppoe-server\fR は PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet) の
ユーザー空間サーバーであり、Linux やその他の UNIX 系システムで利用できる。
\fBpppoe-server\fR は \fBpppoe\fR クライアントと関連して動作し、
PPPoE discovery パケットに応答して、PPPoE セッションを設定する。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-F
.\"O The \fB\-F\fR option causes \fBpppoe-server\fR not to fork and become a
.\"O daemon.  The default is to fork and become a daemon.
\fB\-F\fR オプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe-server\fR は fork されずデーモンにならない。
デフォルトでは fork されてデーモンになる。

.TP
.B \-I \fIinterface\fR
.\"O The \fB\-I\fR option specifies the Ethernet interface to use.  Under Linux,
.\"O it is typically \fIeth0\fR or \fIeth1\fR.  The interface should be "up"
.\"O before you start \fBpppoe-server\fR, but should \fInot\fR be configured to have
.\"O an IP address.  You can supply multiple \fB\-I\fR options if you want the
.\"O server to respond on more than one interface.
\fB\-I\fR オプションは、使用するイーサーネットインターフェースを指定する。
Linux 上では、\fIeth0\fR や \fIeth1\fR が一般的である。
インターフェースは \fBpppoe-server\fR を開始する前に
「アップ (起動)」しておかなければならないが、
IP アドレスを設定しては\fIならない\fR。
2 つ以上のインターフェースで応答するサーバーを設定するには、
複数の \fB\-I\fR オプションを指定すればよい。

.TP
.B \-T \fItimeout\fR
.\"O This option is passed directly to \fBpppoe\fR; see \fBpppoe\fR(8) for
.\"O details.
このオプションは \fBpppoe\fR に直接渡される。
詳細は \fBpppoe\fR(8) を参照すること。

.TP
.B \-C \fIac_name\fR
.\"O Specifies which name to report as the access concentrator name.  If not
.\"O supplied, the host name is used.
アクセス集信装置の名前として使用したい名前を指定する。
指定しない場合は、ホスト名が使われる。

.TP
.B \-S \fIname\fR
.\"O Offer a service named \fIname\fR.  Multiple \fB\-S\fR options may
.\"O be specified; each one causes the named service to be advertised
.\"O in a Service-Name tag in the PADO frame.  The first \fB\-S\fR option
.\"O specifies the default service, and is used if the PPPoE client
.\"O requests a Service-Name of length zero.
\fIname\fR という名前のサービスを提供する。
\fB\-S\fR オプションは複数個指定できる。
各 \fB\-S\fR オプションごとに、指定した名前のサービスを
PADO フレームの Service-Name タグで広告できる。
最初の \fB\-S\fR オプションはデフォルトのサービスを指定し、
PPPoE クライアントが長さ 0 の Service-Name をリクエストした場合は、
このサービスが使われる。

.TP
.B \-m \fIMSS\fR
.\"O This option is passed directly to \fBpppoe\fR; see \fBpppoe\fR(8) for
.\"O details.
このオプションは \fBpppoe\fR に直接渡される。
詳細は \fBpppoe\fR(8) を参照すること。

.TP
.B \-s
.\"O This option is passed directly to \fBpppoe\fR; see \fBpppoe\fR(8) for
.\"O details.  In addition, it causes \fBpppd\fR to be invoked with the
.\"O \fIsync\fR option.
このオプションは \fBpppoe\fR に直接渡される。
詳細は \fBpppoe\fR(8) を参照すること。
このオプションを指定すると、
\fIsync\fR オプションを付けて \fBpppd\fR が起動される。

.TP
.B \-L \fIip\fR
.\"O Sets the local IP address.  This is passed to spawned \fBpppd\fR processes.
.\"O If not specified, the default is 10.0.0.1.
IP アドレスを設定する。
このアドレスは生成される \fBpppd\fR プロセスに渡される。
指定しない場合のデフォルトは 10.0.0.1 である。

.TP
.B \-R \fIip\fR
.\"O Sets the starting remote IP address.  As sessions are established,
.\"O IP addresses are assigned starting from \fIip\fR.   \fBpppoe-server\fR
.\"O automatically keeps track of the pool of addresses and passes a
.\"O valid remote IP address to \fBpppd\fR.  If not specified, a starting address
.\"O of 10.67.15.1 is used.
リモート側の IP アドレスの開始点を指定する。
セッションを確立すると、\fIip\fR から順に IP アドレスが割り当てられる。
\fBpppoe-server\fR はアドレスのプールを自動的に監視し、
有効な IP アドレスを \fBpppd\fR に渡す。
指定しない場合は、開始アドレスとして 10.67.15.1 が使われる。

.TP
.B \-N \fInum\fR
.\"O Allows at most \fInum\fR concurrent PPPoE sessions.  If not specified,
.\"O the default is 64.
最大 \fInum\fR 個の PPPoE セッションを許可する。
指定しない場合のデフォルトは 64 である。

.TP
.B \-p \fIfname\fR
.\"O Reads the specified file \fIfname\fR which is a text file consisting of
.\"O one IP address per line.  These IP addresses will be assigned to clients.
.\"O The number of sessions allowed will equal the number of addresses found
.\"O in the file.  The \fB\-p\fR option overrides both \fB\-R\fR and \fB\-N\fR.
1 行に 1 つの IP アドレスが書かれたテキストファイル \fIfname\fR を読み込む。
ここに書かれた IP アドレスがクライアントに割り当てられる。
許可されるセッション数は、このファイルにある IP アドレスの数に等しい。
\fB\-p\fR オプションは、\fB\-R\fR と \fB\-N\fR の両方を上書きする。

.\"O In addition to containing IP addresses, the pool file can contain lines
.\"O of the form:
このプールファイルには IP アドレスだけでなく、
以下の形式の行があってもよい。

.nf
	a.b.c.d-e
.fi

.\"O which includes all IP addresses from a.b.c.d to a.b.c.e.  For example,
.\"O the line:
これには a.b.c.d 〜 a.b.c.e の IP アドレスが含まれる。
例えば、

.nf
	1.2.3.4-7
.fi

.\"O is equivalent to:
という行は

.nf
	1.2.3.4
	1.2.3.5
	1.2.3.6
	1.2.3.7
.fi

と同じである。

.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Tells the PPPoE server to randomly permute session numbers.  Instead of
.\"O handing out sessions in order, the session numbers are assigned in an
.\"O unpredictable order.
PPPoE サーバーにセッション番号をランダムに割り当てさせる。
セッションは順番に操作されるのではなく、
予想できない順番で割り当てられる。

.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Tells the server to invoke \fBpppd\fR with the \fIunit\fR option.  Note
.\"O that this option only works for \fBpppd\fR version 2.4.0 or newer.
サーバーに対して、\fBpppd\fR に \fIunit\fR オプションをつけて起動させる。
このオプションはバージョン 2.4.0 以降の \fBpppd\fR でしか
動作しない点に注意すること。

.TP
.B \-o \fIoffset\fR
.\"O Instead of numbering PPPoE sessions starting at 1, they will be numbered
.\"O starting at \fIoffset\fR+1.  This allows you to run multiple servers on
.\"O a given machine; just make sure that their session numbers do not
.\"O overlap.
PPPoE セッションの開始番号を、1 ではなく、\fIoffset\fR+1 にする。
これを使うと、与えられたマシン上で複数のサーバーを稼働することができる。
ただし、セッション番号が重複しないように注意すること。

.TP
.B \-f disc:sess
.\"O The \fB\-f\fR option sets the Ethernet frame types for PPPoE discovery
.\"O and session frames.  The types are specified as hexadecimal numbers
.\"O separated by a colon.  Standard PPPoE uses frame types 8863:8864.
.\"O \fIYou should not use this option\fR unless you are absolutely sure
.\"O the peer you are dealing with uses non-standard frame types.
\fB\-f\fR オプションは、
PPPoE の discovery フレームと session フレームで使う
イーサーネットフレームタイプを設定する。
タイプはコロンで区切られた 16 進数で指定する。
標準的な PPPoE では、フレームタイプ 8863:8864 を使う。
接続先が標準的でないフレームタイプを使っていることが
はっきり解っている場合以外は、
\fIこのオプションを使うべきではない\fR。 

.TP
.B \-k
.\"O The \fB\-k\fR option tells the server to use kernel-mode PPPoE on Linux.
.\"O This option is available only on Linux kernels 2.4.0 and later, and
.\"O only if the server was built with kernel-mode support.
Linux で \fB\-k\fR オプションを指定すると、
サーバーはカーネルモード PPPoE を使う。 
このオプションは、Linux カーネル 2.4.0 以降で、
かつ PPPoE サーバーがカーネルモードをサポートするように
構築されている場合にのみ使用可能である。

.TP
.B \-h
.\"O The \fB\-h\fR option prints a brief usage message and exits.
\fB\-h\fR オプションを指定すると、
使用法についての簡単なメッセージを表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH OPERATION
.SH 動作

.\"O \fBpppoe-server\fR listens for incoming PPPoE discovery packets.  When
.\"O a session is established, it spawns a \fBpppd\fR process.  The following
.\"O options are passed to \fBpppd\fR:
\fBpppoe-server\fR は入ってくる PPPoE discovery パケットを待ち受ける。
セッションが確立されると、サーバーは \fBpppd\fR プロセスを生成する。
以下のオプションが \fBpppd\fR に渡される:

.nf
nodetach noaccomp nobsdcom nodeflate nopcomp novj novjccomp
default-asyncmap
.fi

.\"O In addition, the local and remote IP address are set based on the
.\"O \fB\-L\fR and \fB\-R\fR options.  The \fBpty\fR option is supplied along
.\"O with a \fBpppoe\fR command to initiate the PPPoE session.  Finally,
.\"O additional \fBpppd\fR options can be placed in the file
.\"O \fB/etc/ppp/pppoe-server-options\fR (which must exist, even if it is just
.\"O empty!)
さらに、\fB\-L\fR と \fB\-R\fR オプションに基づいて
ローカルとリモートの IP アドレスが設定される。
PPPoE セッションを初期化するために、
\fBpppoe\fR コマンドに \fBpty\fR オプションが指定される。
また、その他の \fBpppd\fR オプションは
ファイル \fB/etc/ppp/pppoe-server-options\fR に書いておくことができる
(このファイルは何も書いていなくてもよいが、存在しなければならない)。

.\"O Note that \fBpppoe-server\fR is meant mainly for testing PPPoE clients.
.\"O It is \fInot\fR a high-performance server meant for production use.
\fBpppoe-server\fR は主に PPPoE クライアントの
テスト用のものである点に注意すること。
製品としての使用を意図した高性能のサーバー\fIではない\fR。

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O \fBpppoe-server\fR was written by David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com>.
\fBpppoe-server\fR は
David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com> によって作成された。

.\"O The \fBpppoe\fR home page is \fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR.
\fBpppoe\fR のホームページは
\fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR である。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
adsl-start(8), adsl-stop(8), adsl-connect(8), pppd(8), pppoe.conf(5),
pppoe(8), adsl-setup(8), adsl-status(8), pppoe-sniff(8), pppoe-relay(8)
