.\" $Id: pppoe-relay.8,v 1.6 2002/04/09 17:28:38 dfs Exp $ 
.\" LIC: GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Oct 14 01:12:31 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:
.\"
.TH PPPOE-RELAY 8 "26 January 2001"
.\""
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pppoe-relay \- user-space PPPoE relay agent.
pppoe-relay \- ユーザー空間 PPPoE リレーエージェント
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pppoe-relay \fR[\fIoptions\fR]

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBpppoe-relay\fR is a user-space relay agent for PPPoE
.\"O (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet) for Linux.  \fBpppoe-relay\fR
.\"O works in concert with the \fBpppoe\fR client and \fBpppoe-server\fR
.\"O server.  See the OPERATION section later in this manual for
.\"O details on how \fBpppoe-relay\fR works.
\fBpppoe-relay\fR は Linux で使われる
PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet) の
ユーザー空間リレーエージェントである。
\fBpppoe-relay\fR はクライアント \fBpppoe\fR と
サーバー \fBpppoe-server\fR と連携して動作する。
\fBpppoe-relay\fR の動作についての詳細は、
このマニュアルで後にでてくる「動作」のセクションを参照すること。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-S \fIinterface\fR
.\"O Adds the Ethernet interface \fIinterface\fR to the list of interfaces
.\"O managed by \fBpppoe-relay\fR.  Only PPPoE servers may be connected to
.\"O this interface.
イーサーネットインターフェース \fIinterface\fR を
\fBpppoe-relay\fR が管理するインターフェースのリストに追加する。
PPPoE サーバーだけが、このインターフェースに接続できる。

.TP
.B \-C \fIinterface\fR
.\"O Adds the Ethernet interface \fIinterface\fR to the list of interfaces
.\"O managed by \fBpppoe-relay\fR.  Only PPPoE clients may be connected to
.\"O this interface.
イーサーネットインターフェース \fIinterface\fR を
\fBpppoe-relay\fR が管理するインターフェースのリストに追加する。
PPPoE クライアントだけが、このインターフェースに接続できる。

.TP
.B \-B \fIinterface\fR
.\"O Adds the Ethernet interface \fIinterface\fR to the list of interfaces
.\"O managed by \fBpppoe-relay\fR.  Both PPPoE clients and servers may be
.\"O connected to this interface.
イーサーネットインターフェース \fIinterface\fR を
\fBpppoe-relay\fR が管理するインターフェースのリストに追加する。
PPPoE クライアントとサーバーの両方が、このインターフェースに接続できる。

.TP
.B \-n \fInum\fR
.\"O Allows at most \fInum\fR concurrent PPPoE sessions.  If not specified,
.\"O the default is 5000.  \fInum\fR can range from 1 to 65534.
最大 \fInum\fR 個の PPPoE セッションを許可する。
指定されない場合のデフォルトは 5000 である。
\fInum\fR は 1 〜 65534 の範囲である。

.TP
.B \-i \fItimeout\fR
.\"O Specifies the session idle timeout.  If both peers in a session are idle
.\"O for more than \fItimeout\fR seconds, the session is terminated.
.\"O If \fItimeout\fR is specified as zero, sessions will never be terminated
.\"O because of idleness.
セッションのアイドルタイムアウトを指定する。
セッションの接続先と接続元の両方が \fItimeout\fR 秒以上
アイドルになっていた場合、そのセッションを終了する。
\fItimeout\fR を 0 に指定すると、
アイドルによりセッションが終了されることはない。

.\"O Note that the idle-session expiry routine is never run more frequently than
.\"O every 30 seconds, so the timeout is approximate.  The default value for
.\"O \fItimeout\fR is 600 seconds (10 minutes.)
アイドルセッションの満了をチェックするルーチンは、
最も頻繁に実行されたとしても 30 秒に 1 回であるので、
最も短いタイムアウトの値もこれに近い。
\fItimeout\fR のデフォルトの値は 600 秒 (10 分) である。

.TP
.B \-F
.\"O The \fB\-F\fR option causes \fBpppoe-relay\fR \fInot\fR to fork into the
.\"O background; instead, it remains in the foreground.
\fB\-F\fR オプションを指定すると、\fBpppoe-relay\fR は
バックグラウンドに fork \fIされず\fR、
フォアグラウンドに残ったままになる。

.TP
.B \-h
.\"O The \fB\-h\fR option prints a brief usage message and exits.
\fB\-h\fR オプションを指定すると、
使用法についての簡単なメッセージを表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH OPERATION
.SH 動作

.\"O \fBpppoe-relay\fR listens for incoming PPPoE PADI frames on all interfaces
.\"O specified with \fB-B\fR or \fB-C\fR options.  When a PADI frame appears,
.\"O \fBpppoe-relay\fR adds a Relay-Session-ID tag and broadcasts the PADI
.\"O on all interfaces specified with \fB-B\fR or \fB-S\fR options (except the
.\"O interface on which the frame arrived.)
\fBpppoe-relay\fR は、\fB-B\fR または \fB-C\fR オプションで指定された
全てのインターフェースに入ってくる PPPoE PADI フレームを待ち受ける。
PADI フレームが入ってくると、
\fBpppoe-relay\fR は Relay-Session-ID タグを追加し、
\fB-B\fR または \fB-S\fR オプションで指定された
全てのインターフェースに PADI をブロードキャストする。
(ただし PADI フレームが入ってきたインターフェースは除く)。

.\"O Any PADO frames received are relayed back to the client which sent the
.\"O PADI (assuming they contain valid Relay-Session-ID tags.)  Likewise,
.\"O PADR frames from clients are relayed back to the matching access
.\"O concentrator.
受信した全ての PADO フレームは、
(送られてきた PADI フレームに有効な Relay-Session-ID タグがあると仮定して)
PADI を送ってきたクライアントにリレーして戻される。
同様に、クライアントからの PADR フレームは、
マッチしたアクセス集信装置にリレーして戻される。

.\"O When a PADS frame is received, \fBpppoe-relay\fR enters the two peers'
.\"O MAC addresses and session-ID's into a hash table.  (The session-ID seen
.\"O by the access concentrator may be different from that seen by the client;
PADS フレームを受信すると、\fBpppoe-relay\fR は
接続元と接続先の MAC アドレスとセッション ID を
ハッシュテーブルに入れる。
アクセス集信装置が監視するセッション ID は、
クライアントが監視するセッション ID と異なるかもしれない。
.\"O \fBpppoe-relay\fR must renumber sessions to avoid the possibility of duplicate
.\"O session-ID's.)  Whenever either peer sends a session frame, \fBpppoe-relay\fR
.\"O looks up the session entry in the hash table and relays the frame to
.\"O the correct peer.
\fBpppoe-relay\fR はセッション ID が重複しないように
セッションの番号をふり直さなければならない。
接続元または接続先がセッションフレームを送信すると、
\fBpppoe-relay\fR はハッシュテーブルにあるセッションエントリを参照し、
適切な接続相手にフレームを受け渡す。

.\"O When a PADT frame is received, \fBpppoe-relay\fR relays it to the peer
.\"O and deletes the session entry from its hash table.
PADT フレームを受信すると、\fBpppoe-relay\fR は
接続相手に PADT フレームを受け渡し、
ハッシュテーブルからセッションエントリを削除する。

.\"O If a client and server crash (or frames are lost), PADT frames may never
.\"O be sent, and \fBpppoe-relay\fR's hash table can fill up with stale sessions.
.\"O Therefore, a session-cleaning routine runs periodically, and removes old
.\"O sessions from the hash table.  A session is considered "old" if no traffic
.\"O has been seen within \fItimeout\fR seconds.  When a session is deleted because
.\"O of a timeout, a PADT frame is sent to each peer to make certain that they
.\"O are aware the session has been killed.
クライアントやサーバーがクラッシュした場合 (またはフレームが失われた場合)、
PADT フレームは送信されず、\fBpppoe-relay\fR のハッシュテーブルは
失効したセッションで一杯になってしまう。
そのため、セッションを掃除するルーチンが定期的に実行され、
ハッシュテーブルから古くなったセッションを削除する。
\fItimeout\fR 秒間データが流れていない場合、
そのセッションは「古くなった」とされる。
タイムアウトによりセッションが削除される場合、
セッションが kill されたことを知らせるために、
接続元と接続先に PADT フレームが送られる。

.\"O .SH EXAMPLE INVOCATIONS
.SH 起動方法の例

.nf
pppoe-relay -C eth0 -S eth1
.fi

.\"O The example above relays frames between PPPoE clients on the eth0 network
.\"O and PPPoE servers on the eth1 network.
上記の例では、eth0 ネットワーク上の PPPoE クライアントと
eth1 ネットワーク上の PPPoE サーバーの間でフレームが受け渡される。

.nf
pppoe-relay -B eth0 -B eth1
.fi

.\"O This example is a transparent relay -- frames are relayed between any mix
.\"O of clients and servers on the eth0 and eth1 networks.
これは透過的なリレーの例である -- 
eth0, eth1 ネットワークとクライアント・サーバーの
どの組み合わせでもフレームが受け渡される。

.nf
pppoe-relay -S eth0 -C eth1 -C eth2 -C eth3
.fi

.\"O This example relays frames between servers on the eth0 network and
.\"O clients on the eth1, eth2 and eth3 networks.
この例では、eth0 ネットワーク上のサーバーと
eth1, eth2, eth3 ネットワーク上のクライアントの間で
フレームが受け渡される。

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O \fBpppoe-relay\fR was written by David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com>.
\fBpppoe-relay\fR は David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com> によって
作成された。

.\"O The \fBpppoe\fR home page is \fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR.
\fBpppoe\fR のホームページは
\fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR である。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
adsl-start(8), adsl-stop(8), adsl-connect(8), pppd(8), pppoe.conf(5),
pppoe(8), adsl-setup(8), adsl-status(8), pppoe-sniff(8), pppoe-server(8)
