.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Sun Oct 14 06:25:22 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" 
.\"WORD:	promiscuous	無差別
.\" 
.\" $Id: pppoe-sniff.8,v 1.3 2002/04/09 17:28:38 dfs Exp $ 
.\" LIC: GPL
.TH PPPOE-SNIFF 8 "3 July 2000"
.\""
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pppoe-sniff \- examine network for non-standard PPPoE frames
pppoe-sniff \- ネットワーク上を流れる標準的でない PPPoE フレームを調査する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pppoe-sniff \fR[\fIoptions\fR]

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBpppoe-sniff\fR listens for likely-looking PPPoE PADR and session frames
.\"O and deduces extra options required for \fBpppoe(8)\fR to work.
\fBpppoe-sniff\fR は PPPoE PADR や session フレームと思われるものを待ち受け、
\fBpppoe(8)\fR を動作させるのに必要なその他のオプションを推定する。

.\"O Some DSL providers seem to use non-standard frame types for PPPoE frames,
.\"O and/or require a certain value in the Service-Name field.  It is often
.\"O easier to sniff those values from a machine which can successfully connect
.\"O rather than try to pry them out of the DSL provider.
DSL サービス提供業者の中には
標準的でない PPPoE フレームタイプを使っていると思われるものがあり、
Service-Name フィールドに適切な値を設定する必要がある。
多くの場合、DSL 提供業者からそれらの値を詮索するよりは、
接続の成功しているマシンから嗅ぎ出す方が簡単である。

.\"O To use \fBpppoe-sniff\fR, you need two computers, a DSL modem and
.\"O an Ethernet hub (\fInot\fR an Ethernet switch.)
\fBpppoe-sniff\fR を使うには、2 台のコンピュータ、DSL モデム、
(イーサーネットスイッチ\fIではない\fR) イーサーネットハブが必要である。

.\"O If the DSL modem normally connects directly to your computer's
.\"O Ethernet card, connect it to the "uplink" port on the Ethernet hub.
.\"O Plug two computers into normal ports on the hub.  On one computer, run
.\"O whatever software the DSL provider gave you on whatever operating
.\"O system the DSL provider supports.  On the other computer, run Linux and
.\"O log in as root.
通常のように DSL モデムがコンピュータの
イーサーネットカードに直接接続されている場合、
まず (イーサーネットカードに繋がっていた側を)
イーサーネットハブの "uplink" ポートに接続する。
次に 2 台のコンピュータを通常のポートに接続する。
一方のコンピュータは、DSL サービス提供業者がサポートする OS 上で
DSL サービス提供業者から提供されたソフトウェアを実行する。
もう一方のコンピュータは、Linux にして root でログインする。

.\"O On the Linux machine, put the Ethernet interface into promiscuous mode
.\"O and start \fBpppoe-sniff\fR.  If the ethernet interface is \fIeth0\fR,
.\"O for example, type these commands:
Linux マシンは、イーサーネットインターフェースを
無差別 (promiscuous) モードにして、\fBpppoe-sniff\fR を実行する。
例えば、イーサーネットインターフェースが \fIeth0\fR の場合は、
以下のコマンドを実行する:

.nf
	ifconfig eth0 promisc
	pppoe-sniff -I eth0
.fi

.\"O On the other machine, start your DSL connection as usual.  After a short
.\"O time, \fBpppoe-sniff\fR should print recommendations for the value
.\"O of \fBPPPOE_EXTRA\fR.  Set this value in \fB/etc/ppp/pppoe.conf\fR.
もう一方のマシンは、通常通り DSL 接続を開始する。
少し時間が経過すると、 推奨される \fBPPPOE_EXTRA\fR の値を
\fBpppoe-sniff\fR が表示する筈である。
この値を \fB/etc/ppp/pppoe.conf\fR に設定すること。
.\"O If \fBpppoe-sniff\fR indicates that something special is required in
.\"O \fBPPPOE_EXTRA\fR, please e-mail this to \fBpppoe@roaringpenguin.com\fR
.\"O along with the name of your ISP and the manufacturer and model number of
.\"O your DSL modem.  This information will be collated and provided on the
.\"O PPPoE web page for users who do not have two computers.
\fBPPPOE_EXTRA\fR に必要な特別な値を \fBpppoe-sniff\fR が表示した場合、
この値に ISP 名、DSL モデムの製造業者とモデル番号を添えて
E メールで \fBpppoe@roaringpenguin.com\fR に送って下さい。
2 台のコンピュータを持たないユーザーのために、
この情報を集めて PPPoE のウェブページで提供する予定である。

.\"O After \fBpppoe-sniff\fR finishes (or you stop it if it seems hung),
.\"O remember to turn off promiscuous mode:
\fBpppoe-sniff\fR が終了した場合
(または、ハングしたように思われて停止させた場合)、
以下のようにして無差別モードを解除するのを忘れないこと:

.nf
	ifconfig eth0 -promisc
.fi

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-I \fIinterface\fR
.\"O The \fB\-I\fR option specifies the Ethernet interface to use.  Under Linux,
.\"O it is typically \fIeth0\fR or \fIeth1\fR.  The interface should be "up"
.\"O and in promiscuous mode before you start \fBpppoe-sniff\fR.
\fB\-I\fR オプションは、使用するイーサーネットインターフェースを指定する。
Linux 上では、\fIeth0\fR や \fIeth1\fR が一般的である。
インターフェースは、\fBpppoe-sniff\fR を開始する前に
「アップ (起動)」して、無差別モードにしておかなければならない。

.TP
.B \-V
.\"O The \fB\-V\fR option causes \fBpppoe-sniff\fR to print its version number and
.\"O exit.
\fB\-V\fR オプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe-sniff\fR はバージョン番号を表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O \fBpppoe-sniff\fR only works on Linux.
\fBpppoe-sniff\fR は Linux 上でしか動作しない。

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O \fBpppoe-sniff\fR was written by David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com>.
\fBpppoe-sniff\fR は
David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com> によって作成された。

.\"O The \fBpppoe\fR home page is \fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR.
\fBpppoe\fR のホームページは
\fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR である。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
adsl-start(8), adsl-stop(8), adsl-connect(8), pppd(8), pppoe.conf(5),
pppoe(8), adsl-setup(8), adsl-status(8), pppoe-server(8), pppoe-relay(8)
