.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Oct 14 01:10:05 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: access concentrators	アクセス集信装置
.\"WORD: peer	接続先
.\" 
.\" $Id: pppoe.8,v 1.4 2002/04/09 17:28:38 dfs Exp $ 
.\" LIC: GPL
.TH PPPOE 8 "3 July 2000"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pppoe \- user-space PPPoE client.
pppoe \- ユーザー空間 PPPoE クライアント
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pppd pty 'pppoe \fR[\fIpppoe_options\fR]\fB' \fR[\fIpppd_options\fR]
.P
.B pppoe -A \fR[\fIpppoe_options\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBpppoe\fR is a user-space client for PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol
.\"O over Ethernet) for Linux and other UNIX systems.  \fBpppoe\fR works in
.\"O concert with the \fBpppd\fR PPP daemon to provide a PPP connection
.\"O over Ethernet, as is used by many ADSL service providers.
\fBpppoe\fR は、PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet) の
ユーザー空間クライアントであり、
Linux やその他の UNIX 系システムで利用できる。
\fBpppoe\fR は、イーサーネット上で PPP 接続を提供する
PPP デーモン \fBpppd\fR と関連して動作する。
このような \fBpppd\fR は多くの ADSL サービス提供業者で使われている。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-I \fIinterface\fR
.\"O The \fB\-I\fR option specifies the Ethernet interface to use.  Under Linux,
.\"O it is typically \fIeth0\fR or \fIeth1\fR.  The interface should be "up"
.\"O before you start \fBpppoe\fR, but should \fInot\fR be configured to have
.\"O an IP address.
\fB\-I\fR オプションは、使用するイーサーネットインターフェースを指定する。
Linux 上では、\fIeth0\fR や \fIeth1\fR が一般的である。
インターフェースは \fBpppoe\fR を開始する前に
「アップ (起動)」しておかなければならないが、
IP アドレスを設定しては\fIならない\fR。

.TP
.B \-T \fItimeout\fR
.\"O The \fB\-T\fR option causes \fBpppoe\fR to exit if no session traffic
.\"O is detected for \fItimeout\fR seconds.  I recommend that you use this
.\"O option as an extra safety measure, but if you do, you should make sure
.\"O that PPP generates enough traffic so the timeout will normally not be
.\"O triggered.  The best way to do this is to use the
.\"O \fIlcp-echo-interval\fR option to \fBpppd\fR.  You should set the
.\"O PPPoE timeout to be about four times the LCP echo interval.
\fB\-T\fR オプションを用いると、
セッション中に \fItimeout\fR 秒間データのやりとりがない場合に
\fBpppoe\fR を終了する。
このオプションはおまけの安全装置として用いることを薦める。
ただし利用する場合は、PPP がたくさんのトラフィックを通していて、
通常はタイムアウトが起こらないであろう事を確認しておくように。
一番良い方法は \fIlcp-echo-interval\fR オプションをつけて
\fBpppd\fR を実行することである。
PPPoE タイムアウトは LCP echo interval の 4 倍程度に設定するのが良い。

.TP
.B \-D \fIfile_name\fR
.\"O The \fB\-D\fR option causes every packet to be dumped to the specified
.\"O \fIfile_name\fR.  This is intended for debugging only; it produces huge
.\"O amounts of output and greatly reduces performance.
\fB\-D\fR オプションを用いると、
全てのパケットが指定したファイル \fIfile_name\fR に書き出される。
このオプションはデバッグ専用のものである。
このオプションを用いると、大量の出力が行われて、非常に性能が下がる。

.TP
.B \-V
.\"O The \fB\-V\fR option causes \fBpppoe\fR to print its version number and
.\"O exit.
\fB\-V\fR オプションを用いると、
\fBpppoe\fR はバージョン番号を表示して終了する。

.TP
.B \-A
.\"O The \fB\-A\fR option causes \fBpppoe\fR to send a PADI packet and then print
.\"O the names of access concentrators in each PADO packet it receives.  Do not
.\"O use this option in conjunction with \fBpppd\fR; the \fB\-A\fR option is
.\"O meant to be used interactively to give interesting information about the
.\"O access concentrator.
\fB\-A\fR オプションを用いると、
\fBpppoe\fR は PADI パケットを送信して、
(返信されてきた) 受信 PADO パケットにあった
アクセス集信装置の名前を表示する。
このオプションを \fBpppd\fR と組み合わせて使ってはならない。
\fB\-A\fR オプションは、アクセス集信装置についての重要な情報を
対話的に取得することを目的としている。

.TP
.B \-S \fIservice_name\fR
.\"O Specifies the desired service name.  \fBpppoe\fR will only initiate sessions
.\"O with access concentrators which can provide the specified service.  In
.\"O most cases, you should \fInot\fR specify this option.  Use it only if you
.\"O know that there are multiple access concentrators or know that you need a
.\"O specific service name.
使いたいサービスの名前を指定する。
\fBpppoe\fR は、指定したサービスを提供する
アクセス集信装置とのセッションを初期化するだけである。
多くの場合、このオプションを指定するべき\fIではない\fR。 
複数のアクセス集信装置があることが解っている場合や、
特別なサービス名が必要であることが解っている場合にのみ、
このオプションを使うべきである。

.TP
.B \-C \fIac_name\fR
.\"O Specifies the desired access concentrator name.  \fBpppoe\fR will only
.\"O initiate sessions with the specified access concentrator.  In
.\"O most cases, you should \fInot\fR specify this option.  Use it only if you
.\"O know that there are multiple access concentrators.  If both the
.\"O \fB\-S\fR and \fB\-C\fR options are specified, they must \fIboth\fR match
.\"O for \fBpppoe\fR to initiate a session.
使いたいアクセス集信装置の名前を指定する。
\fBpppoe\fR は、アクセス集信装置とのセッションを初期化するだけである。
多くの場合、このオプションを指定するべき\fIではない\fR。 
複数のアクセス集信装置があることが解っている場合にのみ、
このオプションを使うべきである。
\fB\-S\fR オプションと \fB\-C\fR オプションを両方指定した場合、
\fBpppoe\fR が接続を初期化するためには、
\fI両方に\fRマッチする必要がある。

.TP
.B \-U
.\"O Causes \fBpppoe\fR to use the Host-Uniq tag in its discovery packets.  This
.\"O lets you run multiple \fBpppoe\fR daemons without having their discovery
.\"O packets interfere with one another.  You must supply this option to
.\"O \fIall\fR \fBpppoe\fR daemons if you intend to run multiple daemons
.\"O simultaneously.
このオプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe\fR は discovery パケット中の Host-Uniq タグを使う。
これを用いると複数の \fBpppoe\fR デーモンを起動し、
それぞれの discovery パケットが混信しないようにできる。
複数の \fBpppoe\fR デーモンを同時に実行しようとする場合には、
\fI全ての\fR \fBpppoe\fR デーモンにこのオプションを付けなければならない。

.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Causes \fBpppoe\fR to use \fIsynchronous\fR PPP encapsulation.  If you
.\"O use this option, then you \fImust\fR use the \fBsync\fR option with
.\"O \fBpppd\fR.  You are encouraged to use this option if it works, because
.\"O it greatly reduces the CPU overhead of \fBpppoe\fR.  However, it
.\"O MAY be unreliable on slow machines -- there is a race condition between
.\"O pppd writing data and pppoe reading it.  For this reason, the default
.\"O setting is asynchronous.  If you encounter bugs or crashes with Synchronous
.\"O PPP, turn it off -- don't e-mail me for support!
このオプションを指定すると、\fBpppoe\fR は \fI同期\fR PPP カプセル化を使う。
このオプションを使う場合、
\fBpppd\fR に \fBsync\fR オプションをつけなければ\fIならない\fR。 
もし動作するならば、
\fBpppoe\fR の CPU オーバーヘッドを減らすことができるので、
このオプションを用いることを推奨する。
しかし、遅いマシンでは信頼性がない\fBかもしれない\fR --
pppd によるデータの書き込みと pppoe によるデータの読み込みに、
競合状態が起こるかもしれない。
のこのような理由により、デフォルトの設定は非同期である。
同期 PPP でバグがあったりクラッシュしたりしたら、同期をオフにすること --
同期のサポートについて私に E メールを送らないこと !

.TP
.B \-m \fIMSS\fR
.\"O Causes \fBpppoe\fR to \fIclamp\fR the TCP maximum segment size at the specified
.\"O value.  Because of PPPoE overhead, the maximum segment size for PPPoE is
.\"O smaller than for normal Ethernet encapsulation.  This could cause problems
.\"O for machines on a LAN behind a gateway using PPPoE.  If you have a LAN
.\"O behind a gateway, and the gateway connects to the Internet using PPPoE,
.\"O you are strongly recommended to use a \fB\-m 1412\fR option.  This avoids
.\"O having to set the MTU on all the hosts on the LAN.
このオプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe\fR は TCP maximum segment size (最大セグメントサイズ) を
指定した値に\fI固定 (clamp)\fR する。
PPPoE のオーバーヘッドにより、PPPoE の最大セグメントサイズは
通常のイーサーネットカプセル化のものより小さい。
このため、PPPoE を使ったゲートウェイの後にある LAN 上のマシンで問題が発生する。
ゲートウェイの後ろに LAN があり、
ゲートウェイが PPPoE を使ってインターネットに接続されている場合、
\fB\-m 1412\fR オプションを使うことを強く推奨する。
これにより、LAN 上の全てのホストが MTU を設定するのを避けられる。

.TP
.B \-p \fIfile\fR
.\"O Causes \fBpppoe\fR to write its process-ID to the specified file.  This
.\"O can be used to locate and kill \fBpppoe\fR processes.
このオプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe\fR はプロセス ID を指定したファイルに書き出す。
\fBpppoe\fR のプロセス ID を取得したり kill したりするのに使うことができる。

.TP
.B \-e \fIsess:mac\fR
.\"O Causes \fBpppoe\fR to skip the discovery phase and move directly to the
.\"O session phase.  The session is given by \fIsess\fR and the MAC address of
.\"O the peer by \fImac\fR.  This mode is \fInot\fR meant for normal use; it
.\"O is designed only for \fBpppoe-server\fR(8).
このオプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe\fR は発見 (discovery) の段階を省略して、セッションの段階に移る。
セッションは \fIsess\fR で指定され、
接続先の MAC アドレスは \fImac\fR で指定される。
このモードは通常の使用を意図したもの\fIではない\fR。
これは \fBpppoe-server\fR(8) のために設計されている。

.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Causes \fBpppoe\fR not to open a discovery socket.  This mode is
.\"O \fInot\fR meant for normal use; it is designed only for
.\"O \fBpppoe-server\fR(8).
このオプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe\fR は discovery ソケットをオープンしない。
このモードは通常の使用を意図したもの\fIではない\fR。
これは \fBpppoe-server\fR(8) のために設計されている。

.TP
.B \-k
.\"O Causes \fBpppoe\fR to terminate an existing session by sending a PADT frame,
.\"O and then exit.  You must use the \fB\-e\fR option in conjunction with this
.\"O option to specify the session to kill.  This may be useful for killing
.\"O sessions when a buggy peer does not realize the session has ended.
このオプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe\fR はセッションを終了して自らも終了するために、
PADT フレームを送って終了する。
このオプションは、kill するセッションを指定するために
\fB\-e\fR オプションと組み合わせて使わなければならない。
このオプションは、バグのある接続先が
セッションを終了できない場合に役立つ。

.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Causes \fBpppoe\fR to perform discovery and then exit, after printing
.\"O session information to standard output.  The session information is printed
.\"O in exactly the format expected by the \fB\-e\fR option.  This option lets
.\"O you initiate a PPPoE discovery, perform some other work, and then start
.\"O the actual PPP session.  \fIBe careful\fR; if you use this option in a loop,
.\"O you can create many sessions, which may annoy your peer.
このオプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe\fR はセッション情報を標準出力に書き出した後に、
発見を行って終了する。
表示されるセッション情報は、
\fB\-e\fR オプションで用いられる形式と全く同じである。
このオプションは PPPoE の発見を初期化して、
その他の処理を行った後で、実際の PPP セッションを開始する。
\fI注意して使うこと\fR。 
このオプションをループ中で使うと、
接続先を悩ませるような多くのセッションを作ってしまう。

.TP
.B \-f disc:sess
.\"O The \fB\-f\fR option sets the Ethernet frame types for PPPoE discovery
.\"O and session frames.  The types are specified as hexadecimal numbers
.\"O separated by a colon.  Standard PPPoE uses frame types 8863:8864.
.\"O \fIYou should not use this option\fR unless you are absolutely sure
.\"O the peer you are dealing with uses non-standard frame types.  If your
.\"O ISP uses non-standard frame types, complain!
\fB\-f\fR オプションは、PPPoE の discovery フレームと session フレームで使う
イーサーネットフレームタイプを設定する。
タイプはコロンで区切られた 16 進数で指定する。
標準的な PPPoE では、フレームタイプ 8863:8864 を使う。
接続先が標準的でないフレームタイプを使っていることが
はっきり解っている場合以外は、
\fIこのオプションを使うべきではない\fR。 
使用している ISP (インターネットサービス提供業者) が
標準的でないフレームタイプを使っている場合は、苦情を言った方がよい !

.TP
.B \-h
.\"O The \fB\-h\fR option causes \fBpppoe\fR to print usage information and
.\"O exit.
\fB\-h\fR オプションを指定すると、
\fBpppoe\fR は使用法を表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH PPPOE BACKGROUND
.SH PPPOE の背景

.\"O PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet) is described in RFC 2516
.\"O and is a protocol which allows the session abstraction to be maintained
.\"O over bridged Ethernet networks.
PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet) は RFC 2516 に記述されている。
このプロトコルは、ブリッジしたイーサーネットワーク上で
セッションを抽象化して維持できる。

.\"O PPPoE works by encapsulating PPP frames in Ethernet frames.  The protocol
.\"O has two distinct stages:  The \fIdiscovery\fR and the \fIsession\fR stage.
PPPoE は PPP フレームをイーサーネットフレームで
カプセル化することにより動作する。
このプロトコルには、\fI発見\fRと\fIセッション\fRという
2 つの異なるステージがある。

.\"O In the discovery stage, the host broadcasts a special PADI (PPPoE
.\"O Active Discovery Initiation) frame to discover any \fIaccess
.\"O concentrators\fR.  The access concentrators (typically, only one
.\"O access concentrator) reply with PADO (PPPoE Active Discovery Offer)
.\"O packets, announcing their presence and the services they offer.  
発見ステージでは、ホストは\fIアクセス集信装置\fRを発見するために
特別な PADI (PPPoE Active Discovery Initiation) フレームを
ブロードキャストする。
(一般的には、ただ 1 つの) アクセス集信装置が
PADO (PPPoE Active Discovery Offer) パケットを返し、
集信装置が存在することとサービスを提供することを知らせる。
.\"O The
.\"O host picks one of the access concentrators and transmits a PADR (PPPoE
.\"O Active Discovery Request) packet, asking for a session.  The access
.\"O concentrator replies with a PADS (PPPoE Active Discovery
.\"O Session-Confirmation) packet.  The protocol then moves to the session stage.
ホストはアクセス集信装置を 1 つ選び、セッションを開いてもらうために
PADR (PPPoE Active Discovery Request) パケットを送る。
アクセス集信装置は PADS (PPPoE Active Discovery Session-Confirmation)
パケットで応答する。
この後、プロトコルはセッションステージに移行する。

.\"O In the session stage, the host and access concentrator exchange PPP frames
.\"O embedded in Ethernet frames.  The normal Ethernet MTU is 1500 bytes, but
.\"O the PPPoE overhead plus two bytes of overhead for the encapsulated PPP
.\"O frame mean that the MTU of the PPP interface is at most 1492 bytes.
セッションステージでは、ホストとアクセス集信装置の間で
イーサーネットフレームに埋め込まれた PPP フレームがやりとりされる。
通常のイーサーネット MTU は 1500 バイトであるが、
PPPoE のオーバーヘッドに加え、
カプセル化された PPP フレームによる 2 バイトのオーバーヘッドがあるので、
PPP インターフェースの MTU は最大 1492 バイトになる。
.\"O This causes \fIall kinds of problems\fR if you are using a Linux machine
.\"O as a firewall and interfaces behind the firewall have an MTU greater than
.\"O 1492.  In fact, to be safe, I recommend setting the MTU of machines
.\"O behind the firewall to 1412, to allow for worst-case TCP and IP options
.\"O in their respective headers.
Linux マシンをファイアーウォールとして使用しており、
ファイアーウォールの背後にあるインターフェースの MTU が
1492 より大きいと、\fIあらゆる問題\fRが発生しうる。
実際、安全のためにファイアーウォールの後ろのマシンの MTU を
1412 に指定しておくことを推奨する。
これにより、ヘッダに TCP オプションと IP オプションが入るという
最悪の場合も許容できる。

.\"O Normally, PPP uses the Link Control Protocol (LCP) to shut down a PPP
.\"O link.  However, the PPPoE specification allows the link to be shut down
.\"O with a special PADT (PPPoE Active Discovery Terminate) packet.  This client
.\"O recognizes this packet and will correctly terminate if a terminate request
.\"O is received for the PPP session.
通常 PPP は接続をシャットダウンするために Link Control Protocol (LCP) を使う。
しかし PPPoE の仕様では、接続をシャットダウンするために
特別な PADT (PPPoE Active Discovery Terminate) パケットを
使うことも許されている。
このクライアントは、PPP セッションに対する終了要求を受け取ると、
PADT パケットを認識して正しくセッションを終了する。

.\"O .SH DESIGN GOALS
.SH 設計の目標

.\"O My design goals for this PPPoE client were as follows, in descending order
.\"O of importance:
この PPPoE クライアントの設計目標は以下の通りである。
重要なものから順に並べてある:

.TP
.B o
.\"O It must work.
動作すること。

.TP
.B o
.\"O It must be a user-space program and not a kernel patch.
ユーザー空間のプログラムであり、カーネルへのパッチにはしない。

.TP
.B o
.\"O The code must be easy to read and maintain.
コードを読みやすくメンテナンスしやすくする。

.TP
.B o
.\"O It must be fully compliant with RFC 2516, the proposed PPPoE standard.
提案されている PPPoE 規格、RFC 2516 に完全に準拠する。

.TP
.B o
.\"O It must never hang up forever -- if the connection is broken, it must
.\"O detect this and exit, allowing a wrapper script to restart the connection.
絶対にハングアップしない -- 接続が切れた場合でも、検知して終了する。
接続を再開するラッパースクリプトを使えるようにする。

.TP
.B o
.\"O It must be fairly efficient.
能率を高くする。

.P
.\"O I believe I have achieved all of these goals, but (of course) am open
.\"O to suggestions, patches and ideas.  See my home page,
.\"O http://www.roaringpenguin.com, for contact information.
これらの目標をすべて達成していると考えているが、
指摘・パッチ・アイディアなどがあれば (もちろん) 受け入れる。
連絡を取るための情報については、私のホームページ
http://www.roaringpenguin.com を参照すること。

.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意

.\"O For best results, you must give \fBpppd\fR an mtu option of
.\"O 1492.  I have observed problems with excessively-large frames
.\"O unless I set this option.  Also, if \fBpppoe\fR is running on a firewall
.\"O machine, all machines behind the firewall should have MTU's of 1412.
最良の結果を得るためには、\fBpppd\fR の mtu オプションを
1492 にしなければならない。
このオプションを設定しなかった場合、
非常に大きなフレームを受け取るといった問題があった。
さらに、\fBpppoe\fR がファイアーウォール上で動作している場合、
ファイアウォールの背後のマシンは MTU を 1412 にしておくべきである。

.\"O If you have problems, check your system logs.  \fBpppoe\fR logs interesting
.\"O things to syslog.  You may have to turn on logging of \fIdebug\fR-level
.\"O messages for complete diagnosis.
問題がある場合は、システムログをチェックすること。
\fBpppoe\fR は重要なことを syslog に記録している。
診断を完全にするためには、\fIdebug\fR レベルのメッセージを
記録できるようにしておいた方がよい。

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O \fBpppoe\fR was written by David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com>,
.\"O with much inspiration from an earlier version by Luke Stras.
\fBpppoe\fR は、Luke Stras による初期のバージョンに示唆を受けて、
David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com> によって作成された。

.\"O The \fBpppoe\fR home page is \fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR.
\fBpppoe\fR のホームページは
\fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR である。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
adsl-start(8), adsl-stop(8), adsl-connect(8), pppd(8), pppoe.conf(5), adsl-setup(8), adsl-status(8), pppoe-sniff(8), pppoe-server(8), pppoe-relay(8)
