.\" /***********************************************************
.\" 	Copyright 1989 by Carnegie Mellon University
.\" 
.\"                       All Rights Reserved
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its 
.\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, 
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
.\" both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in 
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of CMU not be
.\" used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.  
.\" 
.\" CMU DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" CMU BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR
.\" ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION,
.\" ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" ******************************************************************/
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 16 20:15:39 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH SNMPTRAPD 8 "07 Aug 2001"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O snmptrapd - Receive and log snmp trap messages.
snmptrapd - snmp trap メッセージを受信してログに記録する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
snmptrapd [common options] [-P] [-o file] [-s] [-f] [-p port] [-e] [-l [d0-7]] [-a] [-C] [-c confFile] [-F FORMAT]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Snmptrapd
.\"O is an SNMP application that receives and logs snmp trap messages
.\"O sent to the SNMP-TRAP port (162) on the local machine.
.I snmptrapd
はローカルマシンの SNMP-TRAP ポート (162) に送られてきた
snmp trap メッセージを受信してログに記録する SNMP アプリケーションである。
.PP
.\"O The log messages are of the form:
ログメッセージは以下のような形式である:
.br
.I Sep 17 22:39:52 suffern snmptrapd: 128.2.13.41:
.I Cold Start Trap (0) Uptime:
.I 8 days, 0:35:46
.PP
.\"O .I Snmptrapd
.\"O must be run as root so that UDP port 162 can be opened.
.I snmptrapd
は UDP ポート 162 をオープンするので、
root で実行しなければならない。
.\"O .SH COMMAND LINE ARGUMENTS
.SH コマンドライン引き数
.\"O In addition to the command arguments described under
.\"O .IR snmpcmd (1)
.\"O the following arguments are understood:
.IR snmpcmd (1)
で説明されているコマンドライン引き数に加え、以下の引き数が使用できる。
.IP "-P"
.\"O Print the logged messages to stderr.
ログメッセージを標準エラーに表示する。
.IP "-o file"
.\"O Logs messages to a given file.
指定したファイルにメッセージを記録する。
.IP "-p port"
.\"O Specifies the port to run on, if the default 162 is not desired.
デフォルトの 162 番ポートで実行したくない場合に、
実行させるポートを指定する。
.IP "-s"
.\"O Log the messages to syslog(8).  These syslog messages are sent with
.\"O the level of LOG_WARNING, and to the LOG_LOCAL0 facility (by
.\"O default).  The demon will also fork away from its caller when
.\"O the syslog facilities are used.
.\"O This is the default unless the '-P' flag or '-o' flag is used.
メッセージを syslog(8) に記録する。
syslog メッセージは、(デフォルトでは) level を LOG_WARNING、
facility を LOG_LOCAL0 として送られる。
syslog 機能を使うと、デーモンは fork されて
呼び出し元から切り離される。
これは '-P' フラグまたは  '-o' フラグを使わない場合のデフォルトである。 
.IP "-n"
.\"O Don't do reverse translation from IP address to host name.
IP アドレスからホスト名への逆変換を行わない。
.IP "-l [d0-7]"
.\"O Specifies the syslog facility to use, demon or local[0-7].
使用する syslog facility を指定する。demon または local[0-7]。
.IP "-a"
.\"O makes
.\"O .I snmptrapd
.\"O ignore AuthenticationFailure traps
.I snmptrapd
に AuthenticationFailure trap を無視させる。
.IP "-d"
.\"O Causes the application to dump input and output packets.
アプリケーションに入出力パケットをダンプさせる。
.IP "-D" 
.\"O Turn debugging output on.
デバッグ出力を有効にする。
.IP "-f"
.\"O Don't fork away from the caller when using syslog().
syslog() を使用する場合に、
fork による呼び出し元から切り離しを行わない。
.IP "-C"
.\"O Don't read the default set of configuration files.
デフォルトの設定ファイルのセットを読み込ませない。
.IP "-c confFile"
.\"O Force the reading of confFile as a configuration file.
confFile を設定ファイルとして読み込ませる。
.IP "-F FORMAT"
.\"O When logging to standard output, use the format in the string FORMAT.
標準出力にログを記録するときに、フォーマットとして文字列 FORMAT を使う。
.PP
.\"O FORMAT is a printf-like string. 
.\"O .I Snmptrapd 
.\"O interprets the following formatting sequences:
FORMAT は printf で使われる文字列に似ている。
.I snmptrapd 
は以下のフォーマット文字列を解釈する:
.TP
%%
.\"O a literal %
% という文字
.TP
%t
.\"O decimal number of seconds since the operating system's epoch
OS の紀元 (epoch) からの 10 進数での秒数
.TP
%y
.\"O current year
現在の年
.TP
%m
.\"O current (numeric) month
現在の月 (数値)
.TP
%l
.\"O current day of month
現在の月内日
.TP
%h
.\"O current hour
現在の時
.TP
%j
.\"O current minute
現在の分
.TP
%k
.\"O current second
現在の秒
.TP
%T
.\"O up-time in seconds (in decimal)
稼働時間 (up-time) (10 進数での秒数)
.TP
%Y
.\"O the year field from the up-time
稼働時間の「年」のフィールド。
.TP
%M
.\"O the numeric month field from the up-time
稼働時間の「月 (数値)」のフィールド。
.TP
%L
.\"O the day of month field from the up-time
稼働時間の「月内日」のフィールド。
.TP
%H
.\"O the hour field from the up-time
稼働時間の「時」のフィールド。
.TP
%J
.\"O the minute field from the up-time
稼働時間の「分」のフィールド。
.TP
%K
.\"O the seconds field from the up-time
稼働時間の「秒」のフィールド。
.TP
%A
.\"O agent's hostname if available, otherwise IP address
取得可能な場合はエージェントのホスト名。
取得不可能な場合はエージェントの IP アドレス。
.TP
%a
.\"O agent's IP address
エージェントの IP アドレス。
.TP
%B
.\"O PDU's hostname if available, otherwise IP address
取得可能な場合は PDU のホスト名。
取得不可能な場合は PDU の IP アドレス。
.TP
%b
.\"O PDU's IP address
PDU の IP アドレス。
.TP
%N
.\"O Enterprise string
enterprise 文字列。
.TP
%w
.\"O Trap type (numeric, in decimal)
trap タイプ (10 進数)
.TP
%W
.\"O Trap description
trap の説明
.TP
%q
.\"O Trap sub-type (numeric, in decimal)
trap サブタイプ (10 進数)
.TP
%P
.\"O Security information from the PDU (community name for v1/v2c,
.\"O user and context for v3)
PDU のセキュリティ情報
(v1/v2c におけるコミュニティ名、v3 におけるユーザーとコンテキスト)
.TP
%v
.\"O list of trap's variables
trap 変数のリスト
.PP
.\"O In addition to these values, you may also specify an optional field
.\"O width and precision, just as in printf, and a flag value. The
.\"O following flags are legal:
これらの値に加え、フィールドの幅と精度 (printf と同じ) および
フラグ値などをオプションとして指定することもできる。
以下のフラグを指定することができる:
.TP
-
.\"O left justify
左寄せ
.TP
0
.\"O use leading zeros
先頭を 0 で埋める
.TP
#
.\"O use alternate form
別形式を使用する
.PP
.\"O The "use alternate form" flag changes the behavior of some format
.\"O flags. Normally, the fields that display time information base it
.\"O on the local time, but this flag tells them to use GMT instead.
「別形式を使用する」ためのフラグを指定すると、
いくつかのフォーマットフラグは動作が変更される。
通常、時間情報のフィールドはローカル時刻に基づいて表示されるが、
このフラグを使うと GMT を使うようになる。
.\"O Also, the variable list is normally a tab-separated list, but this
.\"O flag changes it to a comma-separated one. The alternate form for the
.\"O uptime is similar to "3 days, 0:14:34.65"
また通常、変数リストはタブで区切られるが、
このフラグを使うとコンマ区切りのリストになる。
稼働時間の別形式は、元と同じで "3 days, 0:14:34.65" のような形式である。
.PP
.\"O Examples:
例:
.PP
.\"O To get a message like "14:03 TRAP3.1 from humpty.ucd.edu" you 
.\"O could use something like this:
"14:03 TRAP3.1 from humpty.ucd.edu" のような形式のメッセージにするためには、
以下のようにすればよい:
.PP
.RS
.NF
snmptrapd -P -F "%02.2h:%02.2j TRAP%w.%q from %A\en"
.FI
.RE
.PP
.\"O If you want the same thing but in GMT rather than local time, use
上と同じであるが、ローカル時刻ではなく GMT を使いたい場合は、
以下のようにすればよい:
.PP
.RS
.NF
snmptrapd -P -F "%#02.2h:%#02.2j TRAP%w.%q from %A\en"
.FI
.RE
.PP
.\"O .SH EXTENSIBILITY AND CONFIGURATION
.SH 拡張性と設定
.\"O See the snmptrapd.conf(5) manual page.
snmptrapd.conf(5) の man ページを参照すること。
.PP
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
snmpcmd(1), syslog(8), variables(5)
