.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999,2000 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"     $Id: ftpcount.1,v 1.2 2001/03/26 15:07:46 jm Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Mar 16 10:47:40 JST 2001
.\"     by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.\"
.TH ftpcount 1
.\"O .SH Name
.\"O ftpcount \- show current number of users for each class
.SH 名前
ftpcount \- 各クラスの現在のユーザ数を表示する
.\"O .SH Syntax
.\"O .B ftpcount
.\"O [
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O ]
.SH 書式
.B ftpcount
[
.B \-V
]
.\"O .SH Description
.\"O .NXR "ftpcount command"
.\"O .NXR "system" "show ftpd usage"
.\"O The
.\"O .PN ftpcount
.\"O command
.\"O shows the current number of users (and the limit) for each
.\"O class defined in the ftpaccess file.
.\"O .PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O option causes the program to display copyright and version information, then
.\"O terminate.
.\"O .PN ftpcount.
.SH 説明
.NXR "ftpcount command"
.NXR "system" "show ftpd usage"
.PN ftpcount
コマンドはftpaccessファイルに定義された現在の各クラスの
ユーザ（その制限）の数を表示する。
.PP
.B \-V
オプションはプログラムに著作権とバージョン情報を表示し、終了させる。
.\"O .SH See Also
.\"O ftpwho(1)
.\"O 
.\"O 
.SH 関連項目
ftpwho(1)
