.\"O opyright (c) 1999,2000 WU-FTPD Development Group. 
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994 
.\" The Regents of the University of California.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1993, 1994 Washington University in Saint Louis.  Portions Copyright 
.\" (c) 1996, 1998 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 
.\" 1998 Sendmail, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1983, 1995, 1996, 1997 Eric 
.\" P. Allman.  Portions Copyright (c) 1989 Massachusetts Institute of 
.\" Technology.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Stan Barber.  Portions 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
.\" Foundation, Inc.  Portions Copyright (c) 1997 Kent Landfield. 
.\"
.\" Use and distribution of this software and its source code are governed 
.\" by the terms and conditions of the WU-FTPD Software License ("LICENSE"). 
.\"
.\"     $Id: ftpwho.1,v 1.2 2001/03/26 15:07:46 jm Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Maki KURODA
.\"     all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Mar 16 10:52:25 JST 2001
.\"     by Maki KURODA <mkuroda@mail.tsagrp.co.jp>
.\"
.\"
.TH ftpwho 1
.\"O .SH Name
.\"O ftpwho \- show current process information for each ftp user.
.SH 名前
ftpwho \- 各ftpユーザに現在のプロセス情報を表示する。
.\"O .SH Syntax
.\"O .B ftpwho
.\"O [
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O ]
.SH 書式
.B ftpwho
[
.B \-V
]
.\"O .SH Description
.\"O The
.\"O .B ftpwho
.\"O command
.\"O shows the current process information for each user logged into
.\"O the ftp server.
.\"O .PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O option causes the program to display copyright and version information, then
.\"O terminate.
.\"O .B ftpwho.
.SH 説明
.B ftpwho
コマンドはftpサーバに記録されている各ユーザに現在のプロセスを表示する。
.PP
.B \-V
オプションはプログラムに著作権とバージョン情報を表示し、終了させる。
.\"O .SH Restrictions
.\"O Not very useful if the server was compiled without SETPROCTITLE.
.SH 制限
SETPROCTITLE を指定せずにコンパイルしたサーバではこのコマンドは使えない。
.\"O .SH See Also
.\"O .BR ftpcount(1)
.\"O 
.\"O 
.SH 関連項目
.BR ftpcount(1)
