.\" info(5)
.\" $Id: info.5,v 1.1 2002/08/25 23:38:38 karl Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (C) 2003 OTSUJI Nobutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Apr 23 13:20:32 JST 2003
.\"         by OTSUJI Nobutaka 
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.TH INFO 5 "GNU Info" "FSF"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O info \- readable online documentation
info \- 読みやすいオンライン文書
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The Info file format is an easily-parsable representation for online
.\"O documents.  It can be read by
Info 形式は処理が簡単なオンライン文書の代表である。Info 形式は、例えば
.I emacs(1)
.\"O and
や
.I info(1)
.\"O among other programs.
で閲覧できる。
.\"O .PP
.\"O Info files are usually created from
通常、Info ファイルは
.I texinfo(5)
.\"O sources by
形式のソースファイルから
.IR makeinfo(1) ,
.\"O but can be created from scratch if so desired.
を用いて生成するが、直接作成することも可能である。
.PP
.\"O For a full description of the Texinfo language and associated tools,
.\"O please see the Texinfo manual (written in Texinfo itself).  Most likely,
.\"O running this command from your shell:
Texinfo の文法や関連するツールに関する完全な解説については、
(Texinfo で書かれた) Texinfo マニュアルを参照のこと。シェルからであれば通常
.RS
.I info texinfo
.RE
.\"O or this key sequence from inside Emacs:
Emacs からであれば
.RS
.I M-x info RET m texinfo RET
.RE
.\"O will get you there.
とすれば文書を閲覧できる。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手性
ftp://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/texinfo-<version>.tar.gz
.br
.\"O or any GNU mirror site.
または GNU のミラーサイトから入手できる。
.\"O .SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.SH "バグ報告"
.\"O Please send bug reports to bug-texinfo@gnu.org,
.\"O general questions and discussion to help-texinfo@gnu.org.
バグ報告は bug-texinfo@gnu.org,
一般的な質問や議論は help-texinfo@gnu.org まで連絡されたい。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
info(1), install-info(1), makeinfo(1), texi2dvi(1),
.br
texindex(1).
.br
emacs(1), tex(1).
.br
texinfo(5).
