.\" texinfo(5)
.\" $Id: texinfo.5,v 1.1 2002/09/03 23:44:57 karl Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999, 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (C) 2003 OTSUJI Nobutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Apr 23 13:20:03 JST 2003
.\"         by OTSUJI Nobutaka 
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.TH TEXINFO 5 "GNU Texinfo" "FSF"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O texinfo \- software documentation system
texinfo \- ソフトウェア・ドキュメンテーション・システム
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Texinfo is a documentation system that uses a single source file to
.\"O produce both online information and printed output.  It is primarily
.\"O designed for writing software manuals.
Texinfo は単一のソースファイルからオンライン用と印刷用の両方の文書を出力する
ドキュメンテーション・システムである。
.PP
.\"O For a full description of the Texinfo language and associated tools,
.\"O please see the Texinfo manual (written in Texinfo itself).  Most likely,
.\"O running this command from your shell:
Texinfo の文法や関連するツールに関する完全な解説については、
(Texinfo で書かれた) Texinfo マニュアルを参照のこと。シェルからであれば通常
.RS
.I info texinfo
.RE
.\"O or this key sequence from inside Emacs:
Emacs からであれば
.RS
.I M-x info RET m texinfo RET
.RE
.\"O will get you there.
とすれば文書を閲覧できる。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手性
ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/texinfo/
.br
.\"O or any GNU mirror site.
または GNU のミラーサイトから入手できる。
.\"O .SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.SH "バグ報告"
.\"O Please send bug reports to bug-texinfo@gnu.org,
.\"O general questions and discussion to help-texinfo@gnu.org.
バグ報告は bug-texinfo@gnu.org,
一般的な質問や議論は help-texinfo@gnu.org まで連絡されたい。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
info(1), install-info(1), makeinfo(1), texi2dvi(1), texindex(1).
.br
emacs(1), tex(1).
.br
info(5).
