.\" Translated by Masami Ogoshi <ogochan@nurs.or.jp>
.\" Roff-ed by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.TH MAJORDOMO 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O Majordomo \- manage multiple mailing lists
Majordomo - 複数のメーリングリストを管理します
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B Majordomo
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Majordomo
.\"O is a perl script which automates the management of Internet mailing lists.
.\"O It is executed via electronic mail; users send e-mail to
.\"O .B Majordomo
.\"O with instructions in the body of the message, and the perl script performs
.\"O the requested actions and responds with the results.  Any text in the
.\"O "Subject:" line is ignored.
.B Majordomo
はインターネット上のメーリングリストを自動的に管理する
perl の script です。これはユーザから
.B Majordomo
に対するメール本文中に書かれた命令を実行したり、
perl の script を実行したりし、結果を返します。
この時の"Subject:"行は無視されます。
.\"O .SH "COMMANDS"
.SH コマンド
.\"O .B Majordomo
.\"O understands the following commands (arguments in "[]" are optional):
.B Majordomo
は以下のコマンドを理解します([]でくくられた引数はオプションです)。
.TP 5
.B
subscribe \fIlist\fR [\fIaddress\fR]
.P
.\"O Subscribe yourself (or 
.\"O .I address
.\"O if specified) to the named
.\"O .IR list .
.I list
を講読します(
.I address
の指定も出来ます)。
.TP 5
.B
unsubscribe \fIlist\fR [\fIaddress\fR]
.P
.\"O Unsubscribe yourself (or 
.\"O .I address
.\"O if specified) from the named
.\"O .IR list .
.\"O If
.\"O .IR list
.\"O is ``*'' (an asterisk), unsubscribe from all lists on this Majordomo
.\"O server.
.I list
の講読を中止します(<address>の指定も出来ます)。
.TP 5
.B
auth \fIspecial-word\fP subscribe \fIlist address\fP
.P
.\"O If the
.\"O .I list
.\"O subscribe policy setting includes \fI+confirm\fR,
.\"O Majordomo will ask for confirmation before a subscription
.\"O is approved.
.\"O The conformation request will show the
.\"O .I special-word
.\"O to send with
.\"O .I auth .
*TBT*
.TP 5
.B
get \fIlist\fR \fIfile\fR
.P
.\"O Get the
.\"O .I file
.\"O related to
.\"O .IR list .
.I list
に関係あるファイル
.I file
を取得します。
.TP 5
.B
index \fIlist\fR
.P
.\"O Return an index of the files you can
.\"O .I get
.\"O associated with
.\"O .IR list .
.I get
出来る
.I list
に関連つけられたファイルの索引を返します。
.TP 5
.B
which [\fIaddress\fR]
.P
.\"O Find out to which lists you (or
.\"O .I address
.\"O if specified) are subscribed.
あなた(
.I address
指定出来ます)が講読しているメーリングリストを調べます。
.TP 5
.B
who \fIlist\fR
.P
.\"O Find out who is on the named
.\"O .IR list .
誰が
.I list
にいるか調べます。
.TP 5
.B
info \fIlist\fR
.P
.\"O Retrieve the general introductory information for the named
.\"O .IR list .
.I list
の紹介文を返します。
.TP 5
.B
intro \fIlist\fR
.P
.\"O Retrieve the introductory message sent to new users
.\"O of
.\"O .IR list .
.\"O Non-subscribers may not be able to retrieve this.
*TBT*
.TP 5
.B
lists
.P
.\"O Show the lists served by this Majordomo server. It will also show a 50
.\"O character list description if one has been provided.
この Majordomo で提供されているメーリングリストを見ます。これは
提供されていれば、だいたい 50 文字くらいのものです。
.TP 5
.B
help
.P
.\"O Retrieve an informational message, a brief synopsis of the user portion of
.\"O this manual page.
ユーザマニュアルのメッセージを返します。
.TP 5
.B
end
.P
.\"O Stop processing commands (useful if your mailer adds a signature).
コマンドを終了します(使っているメールソフトがsignatureを勝手に
つける場合に便利です)。
.PP
.\"O A command may be split across multiple lines if all of the lines in
.\"O the command except the last end with a backslash "\\". 
一つのコマンドが複数行にわたる場合、(そのコマンドの)最後の行を
除いたそれぞれの行の末尾にはbackslash("\")をつけます。
.PP
.\"O In addition, the owner of the list can issue the following commands:
追加、メーリングリストのownerは以下のようなコマンドも発行出来ます。
.TP 5
.B
approve \fIpassword\fR subscribe \fIlist\fR \fIaddress\fR
.P
.\"O Instruct Majordomo to add 
.\"O .I address
.\"O to
.\"O .IR list .
.\"O The password is required to authenticate the list owner.  This is very weak
.\"O authentication as the password is transmitted in the clear in an e-mail
.\"O message. No claims are made that it will provide anything other than
.\"O rudimentary protection against abuse of the Majordomo server.
.I address
の人を
.I list
メーリングリストに登録するよう Majordomo に
指示します。この<password>はそのメーリングリストの owner である
ことを認証するために要求されます。これは電子メールのメッセージで
パスワードを送るので、そう強力な認証系とは言えません。
Majordomo への攻撃を守れるより強い保護機構を要求しないで下さい。
.TP 5
.B
approve \fIpassword\fR unsubscribe \fIlist\fR \fIaddress\fR
.P
.\"O Instruct Majordomo to delete
.\"O .I address
.\"O from
.\"O .IR list .
.\"O The password is required to authenticate the list owner.  See the comments
.\"O above regarding the password.
.I address
の人を
.I list
メーリングリストから外すよう Majordomo に
指示します。この<password>はそのメーリングリストの owner である
ことを認証するために要求されます。パスワードに関しては、コメントを見るように。
.TP 5
.B
newinfo \fIlist\fR \fIpassword\fR
.P
.\"O Update the informational message for
.\"O .I list
.\"O with the text which follows on subsequent lines.  No formatting of the
.\"O message occurs, so the list owner should be careful to constrain the message
.\"O to eighty columns.  Majordomo will include everything up to the string
.\"O .B EOF
.\"O or to the end of the mail message, whichever comes first.  This is useful in
.\"O case the owner wants to verify the new message immediately, e.g.,
.I list
メーリングリストに関する情報をこの行に続く文章に更新します。
特にフォーマットは実行されませんので、メーリングリストの所有者は
メッセージが 80 桁になるように注意しなくてはなりません。
Majordomo は
.B EOF
という文字列が来るか、メールの終わりが来るまでの全てを含めます。
これは所有者が新しいメッセージを確認する時に有効です。例えば、
.sp 1
.RS 10
To: majordomo
.sp 0
newinfo list password
.sp
.\"O This is new information for the "list" list.
.sp
EOF
.sp 0
info list
.sp
.RE
.RS 5
.\"O This will simultaneously update the information for the list, and then
.\"O retrieve it for verification.  Note that blank lines are preserved in the
.\"O message.
この例では、インフォメーションの更新と同時にそれがうまく行ったか
確認することが出来ます。
(注意。空白行はメッセージに含まれるものです)
.RE
.TP 5
.B
newintro \fIlist\fR \fIpassword\fR
.P
.\"O Similar to
.\"O .I newinfo ,
.\"O but updates the (optional) introductory message sent to new
.\"O .I list
.\"O subscribers.
*TBT*
.B
passwd \fIlist\fR \fIold-password\fR \fInew-password\fR
.P
.\"O Replace the password for
.\"O .I list
.\"O with
.\"O .IR new-password .
.I list
に与えられたパスワードを
.I new-password
にします。
.TP 5
.B
config \fIlist\fR \fIpassword\fR
.P
.\"O retrieve a self-documenting configuration file for
.\"O the list <list>.  The \fIpassword\fR can be the password
.\"O contained in the file <listname>.passwd or the
.\"O admin_password in the configuration file.
.I list
の設定ファイルを返します。\fIpassword\fR は <listname>.passwd
か環境設定ファイル中の admin_password で指定されたものです。
.TP 5
.B
newconfig \fIlist\fR \fIpassword\fR
.P
.\"O Validates and installs a new configuration file. The config file
.\"O includes everything up to the string
.\"O .B EOF
.\"O or to the end of the mail message, whichever comes first. The config
.\"O file is expected to be a complete config file as returned by the
.\"O "config" command.  Incremental changing of the config file is not yet
.\"O supported.  As soon as the config file is validated and installed its
.\"O settings are available for use. This is useful to remember if you have
.\"O multiple commands in your mail message since they will be subject to
.\"O the settings of the new config file.  If there is an error in the
.\"O config file (incorrect value...), the config file will not be accepted
.\"O and the error message identifying the problem line(s) will be returned
.\"O to the sender. Note that only the errors are returned to the
.\"O sender not the entire config file.
新しい環境設定ファイルの確認とインストールを行います。
この環境ファイルとしては
.B EOF
という文字列が来るまでか、メールの終わりまでのいずれか早い方までになります。
環境ファイルは config コマンドで返して来るのと同じように
完全なものであると仮定されます。部分的な変更については、
まだサポートしていません。(このコマンド実行後)すぐに環境設定ファイルの確認と
インストールは使えるようになります。
これは覚えておくと便利ですが、複数のコマンドをメールに含めた場合、
新しい環境設定ファイルで設定した直後から設定は有効になります。
もし、新しい環境設定ファイルに間違いがあった場合(例えば変な値とか)、
新しい環境設定ファイルは受理されず、間違いのある行が示された
エラーメッセージが送信者に返されます。注意しなければならないことは、
あくまでもエラーのみが返されることです。
環境設定ファイルのエントリではありません。
.TP 5
.B
writeconfig \fIlist\fR \fIpassword\fR 
.P
.\"O Write a new config in standard form. All of the config
.\"O file documentation is optional. Only the keywords and
.\"O values are necessary. If a config file, stripped of
.\"O all comments is installed using newconfig, that is
.\"O what is returned by config.  Writeconfig forces a
.\"O rewrite of the config file with all comments and
.\"O default values in place. It is useful to use after an
.\"O upgrade of majordomo since it will add the new
.\"O keywords for people to change. It also updates the
.\"O documentation in the file if that has changed.
新しい環境設定ファイルを標準形式で書き込みます。全ての環境設定
ファイルの記述が選択可能です。キーワードと値(の組)が必須であるに
過ぎません。仮にconfigによって得た情報を使いnewconfigを使って環境設定
ファイルを持ち込む時に、全てのコメントが除いてあったとします。
writeconfig は強制的に全てのコメントとデフォルト値を規定の場所に
再書き込みします。これは Majordomo を新しくして新しいキーワードを追加して
変更しようとする時に便利です。また、
ファイルの記述を変えようとする時も同様です。
.TP 5
.B mkdigest
.I digest-list-name
[
.I outgoing-address
]
.I password
.P
.\"O This will force a digest for the specified list to be created. It is
.\"O most useful if you don't have an account on the machine that handles
.\"O the digest for your list.
.\"O The optional
.\"O .I outgoing-address
.\"O will override the default address,
.\"O .IR listname -outgoing ,
.\"O for distributing the digests;
.\"O this is usually done for security.
このコマンドは指定されたメーリングリストのダイジェストを作ります。
これはあなたが自分がカウントを持たない機械にメーリングリストを
持っている時に便利です。
*TBT*
.\"O .SH CONFIGURATION
.SH 設定
.\"O (Note that this section has not been updated to majordomo version 1.90).
(注意 この章はまだMajordomo Ver 1.90用に更新していません)
.\"O .B Majordomo
.\"O supports
.\"O .I open
.\"O and
.\"O .I closed
.\"O lists.  An
.\"O .I open
.\"O list is one to which anyone can subscribe themselves.  A subscription
.\"O request sent to
.\"O .B Majordomo
.\"O for a
.\"O .I closed
.\"O list is forwarded to the owner of the list for approval.  If a user tries to
.\"O subscribe an address which is different from their own (for example, a local
.\"O list exploder),
.\"O .B Majordomo
.\"O will forward the request to the list owner for approval, regardless of the
.\"O open or closed status of the list.
Majordomoは
.I 公開
された、あるいは
.I 非公開
のメーリングリストをサポー
トしています。
.I 公開
されたメーリングリストは、誰でもが自分自身で
講読を開始することが出来ます。
.I 非公開
のメールングリスト用
.B Majordomo
に講読の要求をした場合、そのメッセージは承認のために
そのメールリングリストの所有者に回されます。もし講読をしようと
した人のアドレスが、その人本来のアドレスと違う場合(例えば、ローカルな
メーリングリスト分配機構等によって)、
.B Majordomo
は当該メーリングリストが公開か非公開かにかかわらず、
その要求をメーリングリストの所有者に許可申請のために回します。
.PP
.\"O .B Majordomo
.\"O depends on the existence of certain system mail aliases.  The first three
.\"O are for running the perl script on incoming e-mail and specifying the
.\"O responsible person in charge of the server:
.B Majordomo
は正しく書かれたシステムのメールエリアスの内容によって動作を決定します。
最初の 3 行はメールが届いた時にサーバに何か指示をして
変更させる時に perl のスクリプトが走るためのものです。
.sp 1
majordomo: "|/usr/local/mail/majordomo/wrapper majordomo"
.sp 0
majordomo-owner: brent
.sp 0
owner-majordomo: brent
.sp 1
.\"O These next few aliases are for a list called "sample":
次のいくつかのエリアスは"sample"というメーリングリストのためのものです。
.sp 1
sample: :include:/usr/local/mail/lists/sample
.sp 0
owner-sample: sample-owner
.sp 0
sample-request: "|/usr/local/mail/majordomo/wrapper request-answer sample"
.sp 0
owner-sample-request: sample-owner
.sp 0
sample-owner: brent
.sp 0
sample-approval: brent
.sp 1

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/etc/majordomo.cf
.sp 0
/usr/local/lib/mail/majordomo/

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O This man page has not been fully updated to conform to majordomo 1.90.
この man page は Ver 1.90 の機能を完全に記述してはいません。

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O Majordomo and most of the ancillary perl code was written by Brent Chapman,
.\"O <brent@GreatCircle.COM>.  The latest version of the code is available by
.\"O anonymous FTP from FTP.GreatCircle.COM, in directory pub/majordomo.
.\"O This man page was written by Jim Duncan, <jim@math.psu.edu>. Minimal
.\"O update of the man page by John Rouillard <rouilj@cs.umb.edu>.
Majordomo と多くの補助的な perl のコードは
Brent Chapman<brent@GreatCircle.COM>によって書かれました。
最新版のコードは FTP.GreatCircle.COM の pub/majordomo ディレクトリから
anonymous FTP によって入手出来ます。この man page はJim Duncan
<jim@math.psu.edu> によって書かれ、John Rouillard<rouilj@cs.umb.edu>
によって少し更新されています。
