.\"    This file documents the GNU text utilities.
.\" 
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994, 95, 96 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"  
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"  
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu May 29 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH COMM 1 "GNU Text Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
comm \- それぞれソートされた二つのファイルを行ごとに比較する
.SH 書式
.B comm
[\-123] [\-\-help] [\-\-version] file1 file2
.SH 説明
この文書はもうメンテナンスされていないので、不正確・不完全
な可能性がある。現在は texinfo 文書が正式な情報となっている。
.PP
このマニュアルページは GNU 版
.BR comm
について記述したものである。
.B comm
は二つの入力ファイルを読み込み、共通な行および共通でない行をそれぞれ
表示する。二つのファイルは
.B comm
による処理を行う前にソートしておく必要がある。ファイル名 `-' は標準入
力を示す。
.PP
オプションが与えられない場合、
.B comm
は 3 カラムからなる出力を生成する。
第 1 カラムには
.I file1
だけにしか含まれない行を、
第 2 カラムには
.I file2
だけにしか含まれない行を、
そして第 3 カラムには両方のファイルに共通に含まれている行をそれぞれ出
力する。
.SS オプション
.PP
オプション
.IR \-1 、
.IR \-2 、
.I \-3 
はそれぞれ対応するカラムの出力を抑制する。
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
使い方に関するメッセージを標準出力に表示し、実行成功を返して終了する。
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示して終了する。
