.\"    This file documents the GNU text utilities.
.\" 
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Yoshinao ikeuchi all rights reserved.
.\" Translated May 24 1997 by Yoshinao ikeuchi <el4y-ikuc@asahi-net.or.jp>
.\"
.TH PASTE 1L "GNU Text Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 【名前】
paste \- ファイルを行間で連結する
.SH 【書式】
.B paste
[\-s] [\-d delim-list] [\-\-serial] [\-\-delimiters=delim-list]
[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [file...]
.SH 【説明】
このマニュアルはGNUバージョンの\fIpaste\fPコマンドのものである。
\fIpaste\fPコマンドは複数のファイルから、互いに一致する行を次々
とTABで区切って出力する。ファイルが与えられなかった場合、標準入
力が用いられる。ファイル名'-'は標準入力を意味する。
.SH 【オプション】
.TP
.I "-s, --serial"
ファイルをひとつの行にし、それぞれの次の行にファイル
を追加していく。
.TP
.I "-d, --delimiters delim-list"
マージするファイル間のセパレータにTAB以外の物を\fIdelim-
list\fPに順番に指定する。\fIdelim-list\fPの文字を使い果たした
場合、最初の\fIdelim-list\fPを再び使い始める。
.TP
.I "--help"
このメッセージを出力して終了する。
.TP
.I "--version"
バージョンを出力して終了する。
