.\"    This file documents the GNU text utilities.
.\" 
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994, 95, 96 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"  
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"  
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jul 10 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH TAC 1 "GNU Text Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
tac \- ファイルを結合して逆順に表示する
.SH 書式
.B tac
[\-br] [\-s separator] [\-\-before] [\-\-regex] [\-\-separator=separator]
[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [file...]
.SH 説明
この文書はもうメンテナンスされていないので、不正確・不完全
な可能性がある。現在は texinfo 文書が正式な情報となっている。
.PP
このマニュアルページは GNU 版
.BR tac
について記述したものである。
.B tac
は指定されたファイル (ファイル名がひとつも指定されなかったり、 '\-' が
指定された場合には標準入力) の内容を標準出力に書き込む。
その際、レコードは逆順にされる。
レコードはセパレータ文字列によって分離される。特に指定が無ければ改行
文字が用いられる。
デフォルトでは、セパレータ文字列は (入力ファイル中で後置されていた) レ
コードの最後に付加される。
.SS オプション
.TP
.I "\-b, \-\-before"
セパレータ文字列を (入力ファイル中で前置されていた) レコードの先頭に付
加する。
.TP
.I "\-r, \-\-regex"
セパレータを正規表現とみなす
.TP
.I "\-s string, \-\-separator=string"
.I string
をレコードのセパレータに用いる
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
使い方に関するメッセージを標準出力に表示し、実行成功を返して終了する。
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示して終了する。
