.\" $Id: autofs.8.in,v 1.4 2005/01/05 10:12:42 raven Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jul  3 06:08:02 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AUTOFS 8 "9 Sep 1997"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O /etc/rc.d/init.d/autofs \- Control Script for automounter
/etc/rc.d/init.d/autofs \- オートマウントシステムの制御スクリプト
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /etc/rc.d/init.d/autofs
.I start|stop|reload|status
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH 説明
.\"O .B autofs
.\"O control the operation of the
.\"O .BR automount (8)
.\"O daemons running on the Linux system. Usually
.\"O .B autofs
.\"O is invoked at system boot time with the
.\"O .I start
.\"O parameter and at shutdown time with the
.\"O .I stop
.\"O parameter. The
.\"O .B autofs
.\"O script can also manually be invoked by the system administrator to shut
.\"O down, restart or reload the automounters.
.B autofs
は Linux システム上で動作している
.BR automount (8)
デーモンの動作を制御する。
通常
.B autofs
はシステムのブート時に
.I start
引き数を付けて呼び出され、
シャットダウン時に
.I stop
引き数を付けて呼び出される。
.B autofs
スクリプトはシステム管理者が手動で呼び出して、
オートマウントシステムのシャットダウン・
再起動・再読み込みをさせることもできる。
.P
.\"O .SH "OPERATION"
.SH 動作
.\"O .B autofs
.\"O will consult a configuration file
.\"O .I /etc/auto.master
.\"O (see
.\"O .BR auto.master (5))
.\"O to find mount points on the system. For each of those mount points a
.\"O .BR automount (8)
.\"O process is started with the appropriate parameters. You can check the
.\"O active mount points for the automounter with the
.\"O .B /etc/rc.d/init.d/autofs status
.\"O command. If the
.\"O .I auto.master
.\"O configuration file contains a line of the form
.B autofs
は設定ファイル
.I /etc/auto.master
.RB ( auto.master (5)
を参照) を読んで、システム上のマウントオプションを見つける。
各マウントオプションについて、適切な引き数を付けて
.BR automount (8)
プロセスが開始される。
オートマウントシステムのアクティブなマウントポイントは
.B /etc/rc.d/init.d/autofs status
コマンドでチェックすることができる。
.I auto.master
設定ファイルに
.P
.I +map
.B [options]
.P
.\"O then the script will check for an NIS map with the same name.  If such a
.\"O map exists then that map will be processed in the same way as the
.\"O auto.master map, with any optional arguments.
という行がある場合、スクリプトは同じ名前の NIS マップをチェックする。
そのようなマップが存在する場合、そのマップは任意のオプション引き数を付けて
auto.master マップと同じ方法で処理される。
.P
.\"O .B /etc/rc.d/init.d/autofs reload
.\"O will check the current auto.master map against running daemons. It will kill
.\"O those daemons whose entries have changed and then start daemons for new or  
.\"O changed entries.
.B /etc/rc.d/init.d/autofs reload
は実行中のデーモンに現在の auto.master マップをチェックさせる。
エントリが変更されたデーモンは kill され、
新しいエントリまたは変更されたエントリのデーモンが開始される。
.P
.\"O If a map is modified then the change will become effective immediately. If
.\"O the
.\"O .I auto.master
.\"O map is modified then the
.\"O .B autofs
.\"O script must be rerun to activate the changes.
マップが変更されると、その変更はすぐに有効になる。
.I auto.master
マップが変更された場合、変更を有効にするために
.B autofs
スクリプトを再実行しなければならない。
.P
.\"O .B /etc/rc.d/init.d/autofs status
.\"O will display the current configuration and a list of currently running
.\"O automount daemons.
.B /etc/rc.d/init.d/autofs status
は現在の設定と現在実行中の automount デーモンのリストを表示する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR automount (8),
.BR autofs (5),
.BR auto.master (5).
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This manual page was written by Christoph Lameter <chris@waterf.org>,
.\"O for the Debian GNU/Linux system.  Edited by H. Peter Anvin
.\"O <hpa@transmeta.com>.
この man ページは Christoph Lameter <chris@waterf.org> によって
Debian GNU/Linux システムのために書かれた。
H. Peter Anvin <hpa@transmeta.com> によって編集された。
