.\" Linux man page by B. James Phillippe, 1997 <bryan@Terran.ORG>
.\"
.\" This page was written to contribute to the Linux kernel autofs
.\" implementation by H. Peter Anvin (1997).  It is loosly based on
.\" the documentation for mount(8) and amd(8) Linux manpages.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation.
.\"
.\" $Id: automount.8,v 1.8 2004/11/20 13:54:39 raven Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jul  4 03:55:30 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AUTOMOUNT 8 "14 Jan 2000"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O automount \- configure mount points for autofs
automount \- autofs のマウントポイントを設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBautomount\fP [\fIoptions\fP] \fImount-point\fP \fImap-type\fP[,\fIformat\fP] \fImap\fP [\fImap-options\fP]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The \fBautomount\fP program is used to configure a mount point for
.\"O autofs, the inlined Linux automounter.  \fBautomount\fP works by
.\"O taking a base \fImount-point\fP and \fImap\fP file, and using these 
.\"O (combined with other \fIoptions\fP) to automatically mount filesystems 
.\"O within the base \fImount-point\fP when they are accessed in any way.
.\"O The filesystems are then autounmounted after a period of inactivity.
\fBautomount\fP プログラムは
autofs (Linux 組み込みのオートマウントシステム) の
マウントポイントを設定するために使われる。
\fBautomount\fP はベースとなる \fImount-point\fP と \fImap\fP を引き数に取り、
ベースである \fImount-point\fP 以下のファイルシステムがアクセスされるときに、
これらの引き数を (他の \fIoptions\fP と組み合わせて) 使って
自動的にマウントする。
ファイルシステムはアクセスを一定期間受けないと、
自動的にアンマウントされる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.I "\-p, \-\-pid-file"
.\"O Write the pid of the daemon to the specified file.
デーモンのプロセス ID (pid) を指定されたファイルに書き出す。
.TP
.I "\-t, \-\-timeout"
.\"O Set the minimum timeout, in seconds, until directories are unmounted.
.\"O The default is 5 minutes.  Setting the timeout to zero disables
.\"O unmounts completely.
ディレクトリがアンマウントされるまでの最小タイムアウトを秒単位で設定する。
デフォルトは 5 秒である。
タイムアウトを 0 に設定すると、アンマウントは全く行われない。
.TP
.I "\-v, \-\-verbose"
.\"O Enables printing of general status and progress messages.
一般的な状態と進捗メッセージの表示を有効にする。
.TP
.I "\-d, \-\-debug"
.\"O Enables printing of general status and progress messages as well as
.\"O debuging messages.
デバッグメッセージとともに、
一般的な状態と進捗メッセージの表示を有効にする。
.TP
.I "\-g, \-\-ghost"
.\"O Request that directories in the automount be shown but not mounted
.\"O until accesssed. The wildcard map is not ghosted.
automount のディレクトリは表示されるが、
アクセスされるまではマウントしないように要求する。
ワイルドカードマップはゴースト化できない。
.TP
.I "\-V, \-\-version"
.\"O Display the version number, then exit.
バージョン番号を表示して、終了する。
.\"O .SH ARGUMENTS
.SH 引き数
.\"O \fBautomount\fP takes at least three arguments.  Mandatory arguments 
.\"O include \fImount-point\fP, \fImap-type\fP, and \fImap\fP.  Both mandatory
.\"O and optional arguments are described below.
\fBautomount\fP は少なくとも 3 つの引き数を取る。
必須の引き数には \fImount-point\fP, \fImap-type\fP, \fImap\fP が含まれる。
必須の引き数と必須ではない引き数の両方を以下で説明する。
.TP
\fBmount-point\fP
.\"O Base location for autofs-mounted filesystems to be attached.  This is a
.\"O directory name that will be created (as with \fBmkdir \-p\fP) and later
.\"O when \fBautomount\fP terminates will be removed (as with \fBrmdir \-p\fP).
autofs でマウントされるファイルシステムが置かれるベースの位置。
これは (\fBmkdir \-p\fP により) 作成されて、
\fBautomount\fP が終了する時に (\fBrmdir \-p\fP により) 削除される
ディレクトリの名前である。
.TP
\fBmap-type\fP
.\"O Type of map used for this invocation of \fBautomount\fP.  The following are
.\"O valid map types:
\fBautomount\fP の呼び出しに使われるマップのタイプ。
有効なマップのタイプは以下の通り:
.RS
.TP
.B file
.\"O The map is a regular text file.
マップは通常のテキストファイルである。
.TP
.B program
.\"O The map is an executable program, which is passed a key on the command
.\"O line and returns an entry on stdout if successful.
マップは実行可能プログラムである。
このプログラムはコマンドラインからキーが渡され、
成功した場合は標準出力にエントリが返される。
.TP
.B yp
.\"O The map is a NIS (YP) database.
マップは NIS (YP) データベースである。
.TP
.B nisplus
.\"O The map is a NIS+ database.
マップは NIS+ データベースである。
.TP
.B hesiod
.\"O The map is a hesiod database whose
.\"O .B filsys
.\"O entries are used for maps.
マップは hesiod データベースであり、
.B filsys
エントリがマップとして使われる。
.TP
.B ldap
.\"O map names are of the form \fB[//servername/]basedn\fP, where the optional
.\"O \fBservername\fP is the name of the LDAP server to query, and \fBbasedn\fP is
.\"O the DN to do a subtree search under. Two LDAP schema are supported. The
.\"O automountMap and the nisMap (RFC 2307) object classes.
マップ名は \fB[//servername/]basedn\fP という形式である。
オプションの \fBservername\fP はクエリを行う LDAP サーバの名前である。
\fBbasedn\fP は DN であり、その DN 以下でサブツリーの検索が行なわれる。
automountMap オブジェクトクラスと nisMap (RFC 2307) オブジェクトクラスの
2 つの LDAP スキーマがサポートされている。
.P
.\"O Entries in the automountMap schema are \fBautomount\fP objects in
.\"O the specified subtree, where the \fBcn\fP attribute is the key (the wildcard
.\"O key is "/"), and the \fBautomountInformation\fP attribute contains the
.\"O information used by the automounter.  Documentation on the schema
.\"O used by this module is available online at
.\"O \fIhttp://docs.sun.com/source/806-4251-10/mapping.htm\fP.
automountMap スキーマにおけるエントリは、
指定されたサブツリーにある \fBautomount\fP オブジェクトである。
ここで \fBcn\fP 属性はキーであり (ワイルドカードキーは "/")、
\fBautomountInformation\fP 属性は
オートマウントシステムで使用される情報を保持する。
このモジュールで使用されるスキーマのドキュメントは
\fIhttp://docs.sun.com/source/806-4251-10/mapping.htm\fP から
オンラインで入手できる。
.P
.\"O RFC 2307 schema entries are \fBnisObject\fP objects and use the \fBcn\fP
.\"O attribute as the key and the \fBnisMapEntry\fP contains information used
.\"O by the automounter. 
RFC 2307 スキーマエントリは \fBnisObject\fP オブジェクトである。
\fBcn\fP 属性はキーとして使用され、
\fBnisMapEntry\fP はオートマウントシステムで使用される情報を保持する。
.RE
.TP
\fBformat\fP
.\"O Format of the map data; currently the only formats
.\"O recognized are \fBsun\fP, which is a subset of the Sun automounter map
.\"O format, and \fBhesiod\fP, for hesiod filesys entries.  If the format is
.\"O left unspecified, it defaults to \fBsun\fP for all map types except
.\"O \fBhesiod\fP.
マップデータのフォーマット。
現在のところ認識されるフォーマットは、
\fBsun\fP と \fBhesiod\fP のみである。
\fBsun\fP は Sun オートマウントシステムの
マップフォーマットのサブセットであり、
\fBhesiod\fP は hesiod filesys エントリである。
フォーマットが指定されない場合、
\fBhesiod\fP 以外の全てのマップタイプのデフォルトは \fBsun\fP である。
.TP
\fBmap\fP
.\"O Location of mapfile to use.  This is an absolute UNIX pathname in the case
.\"O for maps of types \fBfile\fP or \fBprogram\fP, and the name of a database
.\"O in the case for maps of type \fByp\fP, \fBnisplus\fP, or \fBhesiod\fP.
使用されるマップファイルの位置。
マップタイプが \fBfile\fP または \fBprogram\fP の場合は、
UNIX の絶対パス名である。
マップタイプが \fByp\fP, \fBnisplus\fP, \fBhesiod\fP の場合は、
データベースの名前である。
.TP
\fBoptions\fP
.\"O Any remaining command line arguments without leading dashes (\-) are
.\"O taken as options (\fI\-o\fP) to \fBmount\fP.  Arguments with leading
.\"O dashes are considered options for the maps.
先頭にダッシュ (\-) がない残りのコマンドライン引き数は、
\fBmount\fP のオプション (\fI\-o\fP) として扱われる。
先頭にダッシュが付いた引き数はマップのオプションとして扱われる。
.sp
.\"O The \fBsun\fP format supports the following options:
\fBsun\fP フォーマットは以下のオプションをサポートする:
.RS
.TP
.I "\-Dvariable=value"
.\"O Replace \fIvariable\fP with \fIvalue\fP in map substitutions.
マップ置換において \fIvariable\fP を \fIvalue\fP で置き換える。
.TP
.I "\-strict"
.\"O Treat errors when mounting file systems as fatal. This is important when
.\"O multiple file systems should be mounted (`multimounts'). If this option
.\"O is given, no file system is mounted at all if at least one file system
.\"O can't be mounted.
ファイルシステムをマウントするときのエラーを致命的なものとして扱う。
これは複数のファイルシステムがマウントされる
(`multimounts') の時に重要である。
このオプションが指定された場合、
ファイルシステムが 1 つでもマウントできない場合は、
全てのファイルシステムがマウントされない。
.RE
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O If the \fBautomount\fP daemon catches signal USR1, it will unmount all
.\"O currently unused autofs-mounted filesystems and continue running
.\"O (forced expire).  If it catches signals TERM or USR2 it will unmount
.\"O all unused autofs-mounted filesystems and exit if all filesystems were
.\"O unmounted.  Busy filesystems will not be unmounted.
.\"O The daemon also responds to a HUP signal which triggers an update of
.\"O maps for which ghosting is implemented (currently FILE and NIS maps).
\fBautomount\fP デーモンがシグナル USR1 をキャッチすると、
autofs マウントされているファイルシステムのうち
現在使用されていないもの全てをアンマウントし、
動作し続ける (強制的な期限切れ)。
シグナル TERM または USR2 をキャッチした場合、
autofs マウントされているファイルシステムのうち
現在使用されていないもの全てをアンマウントし、
全てのファイルシステムがアンマウントされた場合には終了する。
使用中 (busy) のファイルシステムはアンマウントされない。
このデーモンは HUP シグナルにも応答する。
HUP シグナルは、ゴースト化が実装されているマップ
(現在のところは FILE と NIS マップ) に対しては、更新の引金となる。
.P
.\"O If the autofs directory itself is busy when the daemon is signalled
.\"O with an exit signal then the daemon will exit without unmounting the
.\"O autofs filesystem.  The filesystem is left in a catatonic
.\"O (non-functional) state, and can be unmounted when it becomes unused.
デーモンに終了シグナルが送られた時に autofs ディレクトリ自身が使用中の場合、
デーモンは autofs ファイルシステムをアンマウントせずに終了する。
ファイルシステムは動作停止 (機能していない) 状態のままにされ、
使用されなくなったときにアンマウントされる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR autofs (5),
.BR mount (8).
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O A whole slew of missing desirable features (see \fBTODO\fP file).
望ましい機能が非常に不足している (\fBTODO\fP ファイルを参照)。

.\"O The documentation leaves a lot to be desired.
ドキュメントの修正したい箇所がそのままにされている。

.\"O Please report other bugs along with a detailed description to
.\"O <autofs@linux.kernel.org>. For instructions on how to join the list
.\"O and for archives visit http://linux.kernel.org/mailman/listinfo/autofs
その他のバグは詳細な説明と共に
<autofs@linux.kernel.org> へ報告してほしい。
メーリングリストへの参加方法とアーカイブについては、
http://linux.kernel.org/mailman/listinfo/autofs を見てほしい。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
H. Peter Anvin <hpa@transmeta.com>
