.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" cardinfo.1 1.8 1999/12/21 22:53:16
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 KOJIMA Mitsuhiro and NAKANO Takeo
.\" all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" based on the draft by KOJIMA Mitsuhiro <isle@st.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH CARDINFO 1 "1999/12/21 22:53:16" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O cardinfo \- PCMCIA card monitor and control utility for X
.SH 名前
cardinfo \- PCMCIA カードの監視・制御を行う X ユーティリティ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B cardinfo
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Cardinfo
.\"O displays the current configurations of all PCMCIA sockets in the
.\"O system.  For each card, the display includes the card name, the card
.\"O state, IO port and interrupt settings, and the names of any devices
.\"O associated with that card.  Each socket also has a menu of commands
.\"O for manipulating the socket state.
.B cardinfo
はシステムにある全ての PCMCIA ソケットの現在の設定を表示する。
各カードについて、カードの名前・状態・使っている I/O ポートと割り込み・
カードに割り当てられている全てのデバイス名、が表示される。
それぞれのソケットごとに、
ソケットの状態を操作するためのメニューも用意されている。
.PP
.\"O The socket state includes a row of abbreviated state flags.  The
.\"O .B CD
.\"O flag indicates that a card is detected in that socket.  The
.\"O .B Vcc
.\"O flag indicates that the socket is powered up.  The
.\"O .B Vpp
.\"O flag indicates that the programming power supply is active.  The
.\"O .B WP
.\"O flag indicates that the card is write protected.
ソケットの状態には状態フラグが短縮形で表示される。
.B CD
フラグはそのソケットにカードが挿入されていることを示し、
.B Vcc
フラグはソケットに電力が供給されていることを示す。
.B Vpp
フラグはプログラミングパワーサプライ (programming power supply)
がアクティブであることを示す。
.B WP
フラグはカードが書きこみ禁止であることを示す。
.PP
.\"O Below the socket status data is a log of card status change events.
.\"O The following events are logged: card insertion and removal, user
.\"O insert and eject requests, suspend and resume, and socket resets.
ソケット状態の下に示されているのは、
カード状態の変更イベントのログである。
記録される状態変化は、カードの挿入と脱着・
ユーザーからの挿入/脱着リクエスト・
サスペンド/レジューム・ソケットのリセット、である。
.PP
.\"O The reset button below the socket displays sends a SIGHUP signal to
.\"O .BR cardmgr ,
.\"O causing all sockets to be reinitialized from scratch.
ソケット表示の下にあるリセットボタンを押すと、
.B cardmgr
に SIGHUP シグナルが送られ、
全てのソケットが始めから再初期化される。
.PP
.\"O .B Cardinfo
.\"O is setuid root so that it can create temporary device
.\"O files for accessing the PCMCIA sockets.  An ordinary user will not be
.\"O able to access any of the socket control functions.
.B cardinfo
は PCMCIA ソケットにアクセスするために
一時的なデバイスファイルを作成するので
root に setuid されている。
通常のユーザーはソケット制御機能を使うことができないようになっている。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O cardmgr(8), cardctl(8).
.BR cardmgr (8),
.BR cardctl (8)

