.\" $Header: /aolnet/dev/src/CVS/sgml/docbook-to-man/cmd/docbook-to-man.sh,v 1.1.1.1 1998/11/13 21:31:59 db3l Exp $
.\"
.\"	transcript compatibility for postscript use.
.\"
.\"	synopsis:  .P! <file.ps>
.\"
.de P!
.fl
\!!1 setgray
.fl
\\&.\"
.fl
\!!0 setgray
.fl			\" force out current output buffer
\!!save /psv exch def currentpoint translate 0 0 moveto
\!!/showpage{}def
.fl			\" prolog
.sy sed -e 's/^/!/' \\$1\" bring in postscript file
\!!psv restore
.
.de pF
.ie     \\*(f1 .ds f1 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f2 .ds f2 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f3 .ds f3 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f4 .ds f4 \\n(.f
.el .tm ? font overflow
.ft \\$1
..
.de fP
.ie     !\\*(f4 \{\
.	ft \\*(f4
.	ds f4\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f3 \{\
.	ft \\*(f3
.	ds f3\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f2 \{\
.	ft \\*(f2
.	ds f2\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f1 \{\
.	ft \\*(f1
.	ds f1\"
'	br \}
.el .tm ? font underflow
..
.ds f1\"
.ds f2\"
.ds f3\"
.ds f4\"
'\" t
.ta 8n 16n 24n 32n 40n 48n 56n 64n 72n
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (C) 2005 Suzuki Takashi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Jul  9 17:17:44 JST 2005
.\"         by Suzuki Takashi <JM@linux.or.jp>.
.\"
.TH "modinfo" "8"
.\"O .SH "NAME"
.SH "名前"
.\"O modinfo \(em program to show information about a Linux Kernel module
modinfo \(em Linux カーネルモジュールに関する情報を表示するプログラム
.\"O .SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SH "書式"
.PP
\fBmodinfo\fR [\fB-0\fP]  [\fB-F \fIfield\fR\fP]  [modulename|filename \&...]
.PP
\fBmodinfo -V\fR
.PP
\fBmodinfo -h\fR
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH "説明"
.PP
.\"O \fBmodinfo\fR extracts information from the Linux
.\"O Kernel modules given on the command line.  If the module name is
.\"O not a filename, then the
.\"O \fB/lib/modules/\fP\fIversion\fR       directory is searched, as done by
.\"O \fBmodprobe\fP\fB(8)\fP.
\fBmodinfo\fR はコマンドラインで与えられた Linux カーネルモジュールから
情報を引き出す。
モジュール名がファイル名でない場合、
\fBmodprobe\fP\fB(8)\fP と同様に
\fB/lib/modules/\fP\fIversion\fR というディレクトリが検索される。

.PP
.\"O \fBmodinfo\fR by default lists each attribute
.\"O of the module in form \fIfieldname\fR :
.\"O \fIvalue\fR, for easy reading.  The
.\"O filename is listed the same way (although it's not really an
.\"O attribute).
\fBmodinfo\fR は、読みやすいようにデフォルトで
\fIfieldname\fR : \fIvalue\fR の形式で各属性を列挙する。
ファイル名も同じように列挙される (本当は属性ではないが) 。

.PP
.\"O This version of \fBmodinfo\fR can understand
.\"O modules of any Linux Kernel architecture.
このバージョンの \fBmodinfo\fR はどの Linux カーネルアーキテクチャの
モジュールも理解することができる。
.\"O .SH "OPTIONS"
.SH "オプション"
.IP "\fB-V\fP \fB--version\fP         " 10
.\"O Print the modinfo version.  Note BACKWARDS COMPATIBILITY
.\"O below: you might be printing the version of
.\"O \fBmodinfo.old\fR.
\fBmodinfo\fR のバージョンを表示する。
下位互換性の項目に注意。
\fBmodinfo.old\fR のバージョンが表示されるかもしれない。

.IP "\fB-F\fP \fB--field\fP         " 10
.\"O Only print this field value, one per line.  This is most
.\"O useful for scripts.  Field names are case-insenitive.
.\"O Common fields (which may not be in every module) include
.\"O \fBauthor\fP, \fBdescription\fP,
.\"O \fBlicense\fP, \fBparam\fP,
.\"O \fBdepends\fP, and \fBalias\fP.
.\"O There are often multiple \fBparam\fP,
.\"O \fBalias\fP and \fBdepends\fP 	    fields.
.\"O The special field \fBfilename\fP 	    lists the filename of the module.
このフィールドの値だけを 1 行ずつ表示する。
スクリプトでは非常に便利である。
フィールド名は大文字小文字を区別しない。
よく用いられるフィールド (全てのモジュールに存在するとは限らない) には
\fBauthor\fP, \fBdescription\fP,
\fBlicense\fP, \fBparam\fP,
\fBdepends\fP, \fBalias\fP といったものがある。
\fBparam\fP, \fBalias\fP, \fBdepends\fP フィールドは複数あることが多い。
特別なフィールド \fBfilename\fP はモジュールのファイル名を列挙する。

.IP "\fB-0\fP \fB--null\fP         " 10
.\"O Use the ASCII zero character to separate field values,
.\"O instead of a new line.  This is useful for scripts, since
.\"O a new line can theoretically appear inside a field.
フィールドの値を区切るのに改行ではなく ASCII 0 (ヌル) 文字を使う。
理論的には改行がフィールドの中に現れることもあるため、
スクリプトでは有用である。

.IP "\fB-a\fP \fB-d\fP \fB-l\fP \fB-p\fP \fB-n\fP         " 10
.\"O These are shortcuts for \fBauthor\fP,
.\"O \fBdescription\fP,
.\"O \fBlicense\fP.  \fBparam\fP and
.\"O \fBfilename\fP respectively, to ease the
.\"O transition from the old modutils
.\"O \fBmodinfo\fR.
それぞれ \fBauthor\fP, \fBdescription\fP,
\fBlicense\fP.  \fBparam\fP, \fBfilename\fP の
ショートカットである。
古い modutils の \fBmodinfo\fR からの移行を容易にするためのものである。
.\"O .SH "BACKWARDS COMPATIBILITY"
.SH "下位互換性"
.PP
.\"O This version of \fBmodinfo\fR is for kernel
.\"O modules \fB2.5.48\fP and above.  If it detects a
.\"O kernel with support for old-style modules, it will attempt to
.\"O run \fBmodprobe.old\fR in its place, so it is
.\"O completely transparent to the user.
このバージョンの \fBmodinfo\fP は、
カーネル \fB2.5.48\fP およびそれ以降のためのものである。
古い形式のモジュールに対応したカーネルを検出すると、
その場で \fBmodprobe.old\fP を実行しようとする。
そのため、ユーザは全く意識しなくてよい。
.PP
.\"O Note that the output of this version of
.\"O \fBmodinfo\fR is simpler and more regular than
.\"O the older version: scripts attempting to use the default
.\"O output may get confused with complex fields.
このバージョンの \fBmodinfo\fR の出力は
古いバージョンに比べてより単純でより一般的になっていることに注意。
デフォルトの出力を使おうとするスクリプトは
複雑な出力で混乱するかもしれない。

.PP
.\"O You can force the new \fBmodinfo\fR to always
.\"O be used, by setting the \fBNEW_MODINFO\fP 	environment variable.
新しい \fBmodinfo\fR が常に使われるように、
強制的に設定することもできる。
\fBNEW_MODINFO\fP 環境変数を設定すればよい。
.\"O .SH "COPYRIGHT"
.SH "著作権"
.PP
.\"O This manual page Copyright 2003, Rusty Russell, IBM Corporation.
このマニュアルページの著作権表示は Copyright 2002, Rusty Russell, IBM Corporation.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
.PP
\fBmodprobe\fP\fB(8)\fP,
\fBmodinfo.old\fP\fB(8)\fP
.\" created by instant / docbook-to-man, Tue 09 Mar 2004, 08:43
