=cut
Copyright (c) 1994-1996,1998-2003 Todd C. Miller <Todd.Miller@courtesan.com>
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
   derived from this software without specific prior written permission
   from the author.

4. Products derived from this software may not be called "Sudo" nor
   may "Sudo" appear in their names without specific prior written
   permission from the author.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Sponsored in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) and Air Force Research Laboratory, Air Force
Materiel Command, USAF, under agreement number F39502-99-1-0512.

$Sudo: sudo.pod,v 1.55 2003/03/15 20:31:02 millert Exp $
=pod

=begin JM-copyright

Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000-2004 Yuichi SATO
        all rights reserved.
Translated Sat Oct  7 14:39:18 JST 2000
        by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
Updated & Modified Fri Dec  6 04:40:44 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
Updated & Modified Fri Apr 16 00:05:41 JST 2004 by Yuichi SATO

=end JM-copyright

=begin JM-word

WORD:        real uid        実ユーザ ID
WORD:        real gid        実グループ ID
WORD:        effective uid   実効ユーザ ID
WORD:        effective gid   実効グループ ID
WORD:        ownership       所有者
WORD:        permission      アクセス権
WORD:        DISCLAIMER      放棄宣言

=end JM-word

=head1 NAME

=begin JM-comment

sudo - execute a command as another user

=end JM-comment

sudo - 別のユーザとしてコマンドを実行する

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<sudo> B<-V> | B<-h> | B<-l> | B<-L> | B<-v> | B<-k> | B<-K> | B<-s> |
[ B<-H> ] [B<-P> ] [B<-S> ] [ B<-b> ] | [ B<-p> I<prompt> ]
[ B<-c> I<class>|I<-> ] [ B<-a> I<auth_type> ]
[ B<-u> I<username>|I<#uid> ] I<command>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=begin JM-comment

B<sudo> allows a permitted user to execute a I<command> as the
superuser or another user, as specified in the I<sudoers> file.
The real and effective uid and gid are set to match those of the
target user as specified in the passwd file (the group vector is
also initialized when the target user is not root).  By default,
B<sudo> requires that users authenticate themselves with a password
(NOTE: by default this is the user's password, not the root password).
Once a user has been authenticated, a timestamp is updated and the
user may then use sudo without a password for a short period of
time (C<@timeout@> minutes unless overridden in I<sudoers>).

=end JM-comment

B<sudo> は、許可されたユーザに対して、
スーパーユーザや別のユーザの権限で I<command> を実行することを許す。
この指定は I<sudoers> ファイルでなされる。
実ユーザ ID・グループ ID と実効ユーザ ID・グループ ID は、
成り代わるユーザのものと置き換えられる。
passwd ファイルでの指定が用いられる。
(成り代わるユーザが root でない場合、
ユーザの入っているグループも初期化される)。
デフォルトでは、B<sudo> はパスワードを使った
自分自身に対する認証を必要とする
(注意: このときのパスワードは
そのユーザのパスワードであり、root パスワードではない)。
一度ユーザが認証されると、タイムスタンプが更新され、
短い期間 (I<sudoers> で上書きされない限り、
デフォルトでは C<@timeout@> 分間) 
パスワードなしで sudo を使うことができる。

=begin JM-comment

B<sudo> determines who is an authorized user by consulting the file
F<@sysconfdir@/sudoers>.  By giving B<sudo> the B<-v> flag a user
can update the time stamp without running a I<command.> The password
prompt itself will also time out if the user's password is not
entered within C<@password_timeout@> minutes (unless overridden via
I<sudoers>).

=end JM-comment

B<sudo> は、権限のあるユーザが誰かを
F<@sysconfdir@/sudoers> ファイルによって決定する。
B<sudo> に B<-v> フラグをつけて実行すると、
I<command> を実行することなく、タイムスタンプを更新できる。
パスワードプロンプト自身も、ユーザのパスワードが
C<@password_timeout@> 分間入力されないとタイムアウトする
(I<sudoers> で上書きされない限り)。

=begin JM-comment

If a user who is not listed in the I<sudoers> file tries to run a
command via B<sudo>, mail is sent to the proper authorities, as
defined at configure time or the I<sudoers> file (defaults to root).
Note that the mail will not be sent if an unauthorized user tries
to run sudo with the B<-l> or B<-v> flags.  This allows users to
determine for themselves whether or not they are allowed to use
B<sudo>.

=end JM-comment

I<sudoers> ファイルに記載されていないユーザが
B<sudo> を使ってコマンドを実行すると、
誰か偉い人にメールが送られる。
偉い人を誰にするかは (コンパイルの) 設定時
または I<sudoers> ファイルで定義される
(デフォルトでは root) 。
権限のないユーザが B<-l> または B<-v> フラグをつけて
sudo を実行した場合は、メールが送られない点に注意すること。
これにより、ユーザは自分が B<sudo> が使用可能であるかを
自分自身で調べることができる。

=begin JM-comment

B<sudo> can log both successful and unsuccessful attempts (as well
as errors) to syslog(3), a log file, or both.  By default B<sudo>
will log via syslog(3) but this is changeable at configure time
or via the I<sudoers> file.

=end JM-comment

B<sudo> は成功した命令・失敗した命令の両方を (あるいはエラーも)、
syslog(3) やログファイル (あるいはその両方) に記録できる。
デフォルトでは B<sudo> は syslog(3) を使ってログをとる。
これはコンパイルの設定時または I<sudoers> ファイルで変更できる。

=head1 OPTIONS

=begin JM-comment

B<sudo> accepts the following command line options:

=end JM-comment

B<sudo> は、以下のコマンドラインオプションを受け付ける:

=over 4

=item -V

=begin JM-comment

The B<-V> (I<version>) option causes B<sudo> to print the
version number and exit.  If the invoking user is already root
the B<-V> option will print out a list of the defaults B<sudo>
was compiled with as well as the machine's local network addresses.

=end JM-comment

(I<version>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> はバージョン番号を表示して終了する。
このコマンドを呼び出したユーザが既に root であった場合、
B<-V> では B<sudo> をコンパイルした時の
デフォルト値のリストと、マシンのローカルネットワークアドレスを表示する。

=item -l

=begin JM-comment

The B<-l> (I<list>) option will list out the allowed (and
forbidden) commands for the user on the current host.

=end JM-comment

(I<list>) オプションが指定されると、
そのユーザに対して現在のホスト上で許可された
(禁止された) コマンドのリストが表示される。

=item -L

=begin JM-comment

The B<-L> (I<list> defaults) option will list out the parameters
that may be set in a I<Defaults> line along with a short description
for each.  This option is useful in conjunction with grep(1).

=end JM-comment

(I<list> defaults) オプションが指定されると、
(sudoers の) I<Defaults> 行に設定できるパラメータが
短い説明をつけてリストされる。
このオプションは、grep(1) と一緒に使うと便利である。

=item -h

=begin JM-comment

The B<-h> (I<help>) option causes B<sudo> to print a usage message and exit.

=end JM-comment

(I<help>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> は使用法のメッセージを表示して終了する。

=item -v

=begin JM-comment

If given the B<-v> (I<validate>) option, B<sudo> will update the
user's timestamp, prompting for the user's password if necessary.
This extends the B<sudo> timeout for another C<@timeout@> minutes
(or whatever the timeout is set to in I<sudoers>) but does not run
a command.

=end JM-comment

(I<validate>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> はユーザのタイムスタンプを更新する。
必要ならば、ユーザのパスワードを問い合わせるプロンプトを出す。
このオプションは、コマンドを実行することなく、
(I<sudoers> でタイムアウトが何分に設定されていても)
B<sudo> のタイムアウトを更に C<@timeout@> 分間延長する。

=item -k

=begin JM-comment

The B<-k> (I<kill>) option to B<sudo> invalidates the user's timestamp
by setting the time on it to the epoch.  The next time B<sudo> is
run a password will be required.  This option does not require a password
and was added to allow a user to revoke B<sudo> permissions from a .logout
file.

=end JM-comment

(I<kill>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> は有効期間を紀元年 (epoch) に設定することで、
ユーザのタイムスタンプを無効にする。
次回 B<sudo> を実行するときは、パスワードが必要とされる。
このオプションにはパスワードが必要ない。
ユーザが .logout ファイルで B<sudo> 権限を
取り消すことができるように追加された。

=item -K

=begin JM-comment

The B<-K> (sure I<kill>) option to B<sudo> removes the user's timestamp
entirely.  Likewise, this option does not require a password.

=end JM-comment

(sure I<kill>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> は ユーザのタイムスタンプを完全に削除する。
このオプションにはパスワードが必要ない。

=item -b

=begin JM-comment

The B<-b> (I<background>) option tells B<sudo> to run the given
command in the background.  Note that if you use the B<-b>
option you cannot use shell job control to manipulate the process.

=end JM-comment

(I<background>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> は指定されたコマンドをバックグラウンドで実行する。
B<-b> を使った場合、プロセスの操作に
シェルのジョブ制御を使うことができない点に注意すること。

=item -p

=begin JM-comment

The B<-p> (I<prompt>) option allows you to override the default
password prompt and use a custom one.  The following percent (`C<%>')
escapes are supported:

=end JM-comment

(I<prompt>) オプションが指定されると、
デフォルトのパスワードプロンプトを上書きして、
カスタム化したものを使うことが可能になる。
以下のようなパーセント (`C<%>') エスケープがサポートされている:

=over 8

=item C<%u>

=begin JM-comment

expanded to the invoking user's login name

=end JM-comment

起動したユーザのログイン名に展開される。

=item C<%U>

=begin JM-comment

expanded to the login name of the user the command will
be run as (defaults to root)

=end JM-comment

コマンドを実行するユーザのログイン名に展開される
(デフォルトは root である)。

=item C<%h>

=begin JM-comment

expanded to the local hostname without the domain name

=end JM-comment

ドメイン名を含まないローカルホスト名に展開される。

=item C<%H>

=begin JM-comment

expanded to the local hostname including the domain name
(on if the machine's hostname is fully qualified or the I<fqdn>
sudoers option is set)

=end JM-comment

(マシンのホスト名が完全名である場合、
または I<fqdn> sudoers オプションが設定されている場合)
ドメイン名を含むローカルホスト名に展開される。

=item C<%%>

=begin JM-comment

two consecutive C<%> characters are collaped into a single C<%> character

=end JM-comment

2 つ連続した C<%> 文字は 1 つの C<%> 文字にされる。

=back 8

=item -c

=begin JM-comment

The B<-c> (I<class>) option causes B<sudo> to run the specified command
with resources limited by the specified login class.  The I<class>
argument can be either a class name as defined in /etc/login.conf,
or a single '-' character.  Specifying a I<class> of C<-> indicates
that the command should be run restricted by the default login
capabilities for the user the command is run as.  If the I<class>
argument specifies an existing user class, the command must be run
as root, or the B<sudo> command must be run from a shell that is already
root.  This option is only available on systems with BSD login classes
where B<sudo> has been configured with the --with-logincap option.

=end JM-comment

(I<class>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> は指定されたコマンドを
ログインクラスで指定されたリソースの制限内で実行する。
引き数 I<class> には、/etc/login.conf で定義されているクラス名を指定するか、
あるいは 1 個の '-' 文字を指定することができる。
I<class> を C<-> に指定すると、
コマンドは、そのコマンドを実行したユーザの
デフォルトのログイン権限によって制限を受ける。
引き数 I<class> が存在しているユーザクラスを指定している場合、
コマンドは root として実行されなければならない
(もしくは B<sudo> コマンドを既に root になっているシェルから
実行しなければならない)。
このオプションは、BSD ログインクラスのあるシステムでのみ有効で、
かつ B<sudo> に --with-logincap オプションが
設定されていることが必要である。

=item -a

=begin JM-comment

The B<-a> (I<authentication type>) option causes B<sudo> to use the
specified authentication type when validating the user, as allowed
by /etc/login.conf.  The system administrator may specify a list
of sudo-specific authentication methods by adding an "auth-sudo"
entry in /etc/login.conf.  This option is only available on systems
that support BSD authentication where B<sudo> has been configured
with the --with-bsdauth option.

=end JM-comment

(I<authentication type>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> はユーザの認証に /etc/login.conf で許可されている
認証タイプを使用する。
システム管理者は /etc/login.conf に
"auth-sudo" エントリを追加することにより、
sudo 独自の認証法を指定することができる。
このオプションは BSD 認証をサポートするシステムで、
B<sudo> に --with-bsdauth オプションが指定されて
(コンパイルされて) いる場合にしか使用できない。

=item -u

=begin JM-comment

The B<-u> (I<user>) option causes B<sudo> to run the specified command
as a user other than I<root>.  To specify a I<uid> instead of a
I<username>, use I<#uid>.

=end JM-comment

(I<user>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> は I<root> 以外のユーザとして指定したコマンドを実行する。
I<username> でなく I<uid> を指定する場合は、I<#uid> を使うこと。

=item -s

=begin JM-comment

The B<-s> (I<shell>) option runs the shell specified by the I<SHELL>
environment variable if it is set or the shell as specified
in passwd(5).

=end JM-comment

(I<shell>) オプションが指定されると、
環境変数 I<SHELL> が設定されている場合は、そのシェルを実行する。
さもなければ、passwd(5) で指定されているシェルを実行する。

=item -H

=begin JM-comment

The B<-H> (I<HOME>) option sets the C<HOME> environment variable
to the homedir of the target user (root by default) as specified
in passwd(5).  By default, B<sudo> does not modify C<HOME>.

=end JM-comment

(I<HOME>) オプションが指定されると、
環境変数 C<HOME> が passwd(5) で指定された
対象ユーザ (デフォルトでは root) のホームディレクトリに設定される。 
デフォルトでは、B<sudo> は C<HOME> を変更しない。

=item -P

=begin JM-comment

The B<-P> (I<preserve group vector>) option causes B<sudo> to preserve
the user's group vector unaltered.  By default, B<sudo> will initialize
the group vector to the list of groups the target user is in.
The real and effective group IDs, however, are still set to match
the target user.

=end JM-comment

(I<preserve group vector>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> はユーザのグループリストを変更しない。
デフォルトでは、B<sudo> はグループリストを
対象ユーザが所属するグループのリストで初期化する。
ただし実グループ ID と実効グループ ID は、
対象ユーザにマッチするように設定される。

=item -S

=begin JM-comment

The B<-S> (I<stdin>) option causes B<sudo> to read the password from
standard input instead of the terminal device.

=end JM-comment

(I<stdin>) オプションが指定されると、
B<sudo> は端末デバイスではなく標準入力からパスワードを読む。

=item --

=begin JM-comment

The B<--> flag indicates that B<sudo> should stop processing command
line arguments.  It is most useful in conjunction with the B<-s> flag.

=end JM-comment

B<--> オプションは、B<sudo> がコマンドライン引き数の
処理を終了することを示している。
B<-s> オプションと一緒に使うと、とても便利である。

=back

=head1 RETURN VALUES

=begin JM-comment

Upon successful execution of a program, the return value from B<sudo>
will simply be the return value of the program that was executed.

=end JM-comment

プログラムが正常に実行されると、
B<sudo> の返り値は単純に実行されたプログラムの返り値になる。

=begin JM-comment

Otherwise, B<sudo> quits with an exit value of 1 if there is a
configuration/permission problem or if B<sudo> cannot execute the
given command.  In the latter case the error string is printed to
stderr.  If B<sudo> cannot stat(2) one or more entries in the user's
C<PATH> an error is printed on stderr.  (If the directory does not
exist or if it is not really a directory, the entry is ignored and
no error is printed.)  This should not happen under normal
circumstances.  The most common reason for stat(2) to return
"permission denied" is if you are running an automounter and one
of the directories in your C<PATH> is on a machine that is currently
unreachable.

=end JM-comment

設定やアクセス権の問題があった場合、
もしくは、B<sudo> が指定されたコマンドを実行できなかった場合、
B<sudo> は終了値 1 で終了する。
後者の場合は、エラー文字列が標準エラー出力に表示される。
B<sudo> がユーザの C<PATH> のエントリのどれかを
stat(2) できない場合、エラーが標準エラー出力に表示される
(ディレクトリが存在しない場合、またはエントリが実際のディレクトリでない場合は、
エントリは無視され、エラーは表示されない)。
これは通常の環境では起こらない。
stat(2) が "permission denied" を返す最も一般的な理由は、
automounter を稼働させているときに、
C<PATH> にあるディレクトリのどれかが
現在アクセスできない計算機上にあるというケースである。

=head1 SECURITY NOTES

=begin JM-comment

B<sudo> tries to be safe when executing external commands.  Variables
that control how dynamic loading and binding is done can be used
to subvert the program that B<sudo> runs.  To combat this the
C<LD_*>, C<_RLD_*>, C<SHLIB_PATH> (HP-UX only), and C<LIBPATH> (AIX
only) environment variables are removed from the environment passed
on to all commands executed.  B<sudo> will also remove the C<IFS>,
C<ENV>, C<BASH_ENV>, C<KRB_CONF>, C<KRBCONFDIR>, C<KRBTKFILE>,
C<KRB5_CONFIG>, C<LOCALDOMAIN>, C<RES_OPTIONS>, C<HOSTALIASES>,
C<NLSPATH>, C<PATH_LOCALE>, C<TERMINFO>, C<TERMINFO_DIRS> and
C<TERMPATH> variables as they too can pose a threat.  If the
C<TERMCAP> variable is set and is a pathname, it too is ignored.
Additionally, if the C<LC_*> or C<LANGUAGE> variables contain the
C</> or C<%> characters, they are ignored.  If B<sudo> has been
compiled with SecurID support, the C<VAR_ACE>, C<USR_ACE> and
C<DLC_ACE> variables are cleared as well.  The list of environment
variables that B<sudo> clears is contained in the output of
C<sudo -V> when run as root.

=end JM-comment

B<sudo> は外部コマンドを実行する場合、安全であるように努める。
動的ロードや動的バインドを制御する環境変数を使って、
B<sudo> が実行するプログラムの安全性を下げようとすることができる。
これに対抗するため、環境変数 C<LD_*>, C<_RLD_*>, 
C<SHLIB_PATH> (HP-UX のみ), 
C<LIBPATH> (AIX のみ) は、
実行されるコマンドに渡される環境変数からは、いかなる場合も削除される。
B<sudo> は、環境変数 C<IFS>,
C<ENV>, C<BASH_ENV>, C<KRB_CONF>, 
C<KRBCONFDIR>, C<KRBTKFILE>,
C<KRB5_CONFIG>, C<LOCALDOMAIN>, 
C<RES_OPTIONS>, C<HOSTALIASES>,
C<NLSPATH>, C<PATH_LOCALE>,
C<TERMINFO>, C<TERMINFO_DIRS>,
C<TERMPATH> も同様な脅威を引き起こすので削除する。
C<TERMCAP> にパス名が設定されている場合も無視される。
さらに C<LC_*>, C<LANGUAGE> 変数に
C</>, C<%> 文字が含まれている場合も無視される。
B<sudo> が SecurID をサポートするようにコンパイルされている場合、
C<VAR_ACE>, C<USR_ACE>, 
C<DLC_ACE> 変数も削除される。
B<sudo> が削除する環境変数のリストは、
root で C<sudo -V> を実行したときに表示される。

=begin JM-comment

To prevent command spoofing, B<sudo> checks "." and "" (both denoting
current directory) last when searching for a command in the user's
PATH (if one or both are in the PATH).  Note, however, that the
actual C<PATH> environment variable is I<not> modified and is passed
unchanged to the program that B<sudo> executes.

=end JM-comment

コマンドスプーフィング (だましコマンド) を阻止するため、
ユーザの PATH でコマンドを検索するときに、
B<sudo> は (カレントディレクトリを意味する) "." と "" 
(のいずれかもしくは両方が PATH にあるかどうか) を最後にチェックする。
しかし、実際の環境変数  C<PATH> は修正I<されず>、
そのまま B<sudo> が実行するプログラムに渡される点に注意すること。

=begin JM-comment

For security reasons, if your OS supports shared libraries and does
not disable user-defined library search paths for setuid programs
(most do), you should either use a linker option that disables this
behavior or link B<sudo> statically.

=end JM-comment

使用している OS が共有ライブラリをサポートしているのに、
setuid プログラムに対して
ユーザ定義のライブラリ検索パスを許している場合
(ほとんどはそうである)、セキュリティのため、
これを許さないようにするリンカオプションを使うか、
B<sudo> を静的にリンクすべきである。

=begin JM-comment

B<sudo> will check the ownership of its timestamp directory
(F<@timedir@> by default) and ignore the directory's contents if
it is not owned by root and only writable by root.  On systems that
allow non-root users to give away files via chown(2), if the timestamp
directory is located in a directory writable by anyone (e.g.: F</tmp>),
it is possible for a user to create the timestamp directory before
B<sudo> is run.  However, because B<sudo> checks the ownership and
mode of the directory and its contents, the only damage that can
be done is to "hide" files by putting them in the timestamp dir.
This is unlikely to happen since once the timestamp dir is owned
by root and inaccessible by any other user the user placing files
there would be unable to get them back out.  To get around this
issue you can use a directory that is not world-writable for the
timestamps (F</var/adm/sudo> for instance) or create F<@timedir@>
with the appropriate owner (root) and permissions (0700) in the
system startup files.

=end JM-comment

B<sudo> はタイムスタンプディレクトリ
(デフォルトでは F<@timedir@>) の所有者をチェックし、
所有者が root でない場合、または root のみの書き込み属性でない場合、
ディレクトリの中身を無視する。
root 以外のユーザでも chown(2) を使って
自分のファイルを他人に渡せるようなシステムでは、
タイムスタンプディレクトリが全てのユーザに書き込み可能なディレクトリ
(例えば、F</tmp>) である場合、
ユーザが B<sudo> の実行前にタイムスタンプディレクトリを作成できてしまう。
しかし B<sudo> はディレクトリと中身の所有者とアクセス権をチェックするので、
受けるダメージとしては「隠し」ファイルを
タイムスタンプディレクトリに入れられるだけである。
タイムスタンプディレクトリを root の所有にして、
他のユーザからはアクセス不可能としてしまえば、
そこにファイルを置いたユーザはファイルを取り出せなくなるので、
こういったことは起こりづらい。
この問題を避けるには、全てのユーザからは書き込めないディレクトリ
(例えば、F</var/adm/sudo>) をタイムスタンプディレクトリとして使うか、
システムのスタートアップファイルで F<@timedir@> を
適切な所有者 (root)とアクセス権 (0700) で作成すればよい。

=begin JM-comment

B<sudo> will not honor timestamps set far in the future.
Timestamps with a date greater than current_time + 2 * C<TIMEOUT>
will be ignored and sudo will log and complain.  This is done to
keep a user from creating his/her own timestamp with a bogus
date on systems that allow users to give away files.

=end JM-comment

B<sudo> は、遠い未来の時刻になっているタイムスタンプのセットを受け付けない。
現在の時刻 + 2 * C<TIMEOUT> より先の時刻になっている
タイムスタンプは無視され、sudo はログに記録を残して警告を出す。
これにより、ユーザによるファイル譲渡が可能なシステム上で、
ユーザが偽の日付でタイムスタンプを作成するのを防ぐ。

=begin JM-comment

Please note that B<sudo> will only log the command it explicitly
runs.  If a user runs a command such as C<sudo su> or C<sudo sh>,
subsequent commands run from that shell will I<not> be logged, nor
will B<sudo>'s access control affect them.  The same is true for
commands that offer shell escapes (including most editors).  Because
of this, care must be taken when giving users access to commands
via B<sudo> to verify that the command does not inadvertently give
the user an effective root shell.

=end JM-comment

B<sudo> は明示的に実行されたコマンドしか
ログに記録しない点に注意すること。
ユーザが C<sudo su> や
C<sudo sh> といったコマンドを実行した場合、
シェルでそれ以降に実行されたコマンドはログに記録I<されず>、
B<sudo> のアクセス制御も効かない。
これはシェルエスケープを提供するコマンド
(多くのエディタも含まれる) でも同じである。
そのため、B<sudo> を介してユーザがコマンドへ
アクセスするのを許可する場合は、
有効な root のシェルをそのコマンドでうっかり与えてしまわないように
注意しなければならない。

=head1 EXAMPLES

=begin JM-comment

Note: the following examples assume suitable sudoers(5) entries.

=end JM-comment

注意: 以下の例は、適切な sudoers(5) エントリがあることを仮定している。

=begin JM-comment

To get a file listing of an unreadable directory:

=end JM-comment

読み込み不可のディレクトリのファイルリストを取得する。

 % sudo ls /usr/local/protected

=begin JM-comment

To list the home directory of user yazza on a machine where the
filesystem holding ~yazza is not exported as root:

=end JM-comment

~yazza の存在するファイルシステムが root でエクスポートされていないマシン上で、
ユーザ yazza のホームディレクトリの中身をリストする。

 % sudo -u yazza ls ~yazza

=begin JM-comment

To edit the F<index.html> file as user www:

=end JM-comment

ファイル F<index.html> をユーザ www として編集する。

 % sudo -u www vi ~www/htdocs/index.html

=begin JM-comment

To shutdown a machine:

=end JM-comment

マシンをシャットダウンする。

 % sudo shutdown -r +15 "quick reboot"

=begin JM-comment

To make a usage listing of the directories in the /home
partition.  Note that this runs the commands in a sub-shell
to make the C<cd> and file redirection work.

=end JM-comment

/home パーティションにあるディレクトリのディスク使用量リストを作成する。
C<cd> とファイルリダイレクションが動作するように、
サブシェルでコマンドを実行している点に注意すること。

 % sudo sh -c "cd /home ; du -s * | sort -rn > USAGE"

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=begin JM-comment

B<sudo> utilizes the following environment variables:

=end JM-comment

B<sudo> は、以下の環境変数を使用する。

=begin JM-comment

 PATH			Set to a sane value if SECURE_PATH is set
 SHELL			Used to determine shell to run with -s option
 USER			Set to the target user (root unless the -u option
			is specified)
 HOME			In -s or -H mode (or if sudo was configured with
			the --enable-shell-sets-home option), set to
			homedir of the target user.
 SUDO_PROMPT		Used as the default password prompt
 SUDO_COMMAND		Set to the command run by sudo
 SUDO_USER		Set to the login of the user who invoked sudo
 SUDO_UID		Set to the uid of the user who invoked sudo
 SUDO_GID		Set to the gid of the user who invoked sudo
 SUDO_PS1		If set, PS1 will be set to its value

=end JM-comment

 PATH			SECURE_PATH が設定されていると
			安全な値に設定される。
 SHELL			-s オプションで実行するシェルを
			決定するために使われる。
 USER			対象となるユーザを設定する 
			(-u オプションで指定されない限り root)。
 HOME			-s または -H オプション 
			(または、sudo のコンパイル時に
			--enable-shell-sets-home オプションが
			設定されていた) 場合に、
			対象ユーザのホームディレクトリを設定する。
 SUDO_PROMPT		デフォルトのパスワードプロンプトとして使われる。
 SUDO_COMMAND		sudo が実行するコマンドに設定される。
 SUDO_USER		sudo を起動したユーザのログイン名に設定される。
 SUDO_UID		sudo を起動したユーザのユーザ ID に設定される。
 SUDO_GID		sudo を起動したユーザのグループ ID に設定される。
 SUDO_PS1		この変数が設定されている場合、
			PS1 がこの変数の値に設定される。

=head1 FILES

=begin JM-comment

 @sysconfdir@/sudoers		List of who can run what
 @timedir@		Directory containing timestamps

=end JM-comment

 @sysconfdir@/sudoers		誰が何を可能であるかのリスト。
 @timedir@		タイムスタンプの含まれるディレクトリ。

=head1 AUTHORS

=begin JM-comment

Many people have worked on B<sudo> over the years; this
version consists of code written primarily by:

=end JM-comment

多くの人々が長年に渡り B<sudo> の製作に携わってきた。
このバージョンには、最初に

	Todd Miller
	Chris Jepeway

=begin JM-comment

See the HISTORY file in the B<sudo> distribution or visit
http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/history.html for a short history
of B<sudo>.

=end JM-comment

によって書かれたコードが含まれている。
B<sudo> の簡単な履歴については、
B<sudo> ディストリビューションの HISTORY ファイルを参照するか、
http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/history.html を参照すること。

=head1 BUGS

=begin JM-comment

If you feel you have found a bug in sudo, please submit a bug report
at http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/bugs/

=end JM-comment

sudo のバグを発見したと思った場合は、
http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/bugs/ にバグの報告を送って下さい。

=head1 DISCLAIMER

=begin JM-comment

B<Sudo> is provided ``AS IS'' and any express or implied warranties,
including, but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability
and fitness for a particular purpose are disclaimed.
See the LICENSE file distributed with B<sudo> for complete details.

=end JM-comment

B<Sudo> is provided ``AS IS'' and any express or implied warranties,
including, but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability
and fitness for a particular purpose are disclaimed.
See the LICENSE file distributed with B<sudo> for complete details.

=head1 CAVEATS

=begin JM-comment

There is no easy way to prevent a user from gaining a root shell if
that user has access to commands allowing shell escapes.

=end JM-comment

ユーザがシェルエスケープの可能なコマンドにアクセスできる場合、
ユーザに root のシェルを入手させないための簡単な方法はない。

=begin JM-comment

If users have sudo C<ALL> there is nothing to prevent them from creating
their own program that gives them a root shell regardless of any '!'
elements in the user specification.

=end JM-comment

ユーザに sudo  C<ALL> の権限がある場合、
そのユーザの設定に '!' 指定をしても、
自分でプログラムを書けば root シェルを入手できてしまう。
これを防ぐ簡単な方法はない。

=begin JM-comment

Running shell scripts via B<sudo> can expose the same kernel bugs
that make setuid shell scripts unsafe on some operating systems
(if your OS supports the /dev/fd/ directory, setuid shell scripts
are generally safe).

=end JM-comment

シェルスクリプトを B<sudo> で実行すると、
カーネルのバグを突いてしまい、
OS によっては setuid シェルスクリプトを危険なものにしてしまうかもしれない
(使用している OS が /dev/fd/ ディレクトリをサポートしている場合、
setuid シェルスクリプトは一般的に安全である)。

=head1 SEE ALSO

grep(1), su(1), stat(2), login_cap(3), sudoers(5), passwd(5), visudo(8)
