=cut
Copyright (c) 1996,1998-2003 Todd C. Miller <Todd.Miller@courtesan.com>
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
   derived from this software without specific prior written permission
   from the author.

4. Products derived from this software may not be called "Sudo" nor
   may "Sudo" appear in their names without specific prior written
   permission from the author.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Sponsored in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) and Air Force Research Laboratory, Air Force
Materiel Command, USAF, under agreement number F39502-99-1-0512.

$Sudo: visudo.pod,v 1.31 2003/03/15 20:31:02 millert Exp $
=pod

=begin JM-copyright

Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000-2003 Yuichi SATO
        all rights reserved.
Translated Tue Oct 10 22:29:13 JST 2000
        by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
Updated & Modified Sun Jan 19 05:54:17 JST 2003
        by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>

=end JM-copyright

=begin JM-word

WORD:        syntax error    文法エラー
WORD:        parse           パース
WORD:        DISCLAIMER      放棄宣言

=end JM-word

=head1 NAME

=begin JM-comment

visudo - edit the sudoers file

=end JM-comment

visudo - sudoers ファイルを編集する

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<visudo> [ B<-c> ] [ B<-f> I<sudoers> ] [ B<-q> ] [ B<-s> ] [ B<-V> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=begin JM-comment

B<visudo> edits the I<sudoers> file in a safe fashion, analogous to
vipw(8).  B<visudo> locks the I<sudoers> file against multiple
simultaneous edits, provides basic sanity checks, and checks
for parse errors.  If the I<sudoers> file is currently being
edited you will receive a message to try again later.

=end JM-comment

B<visudo> は、I<vipw>(8) と同じような安全な方法で
I<sudoers> ファイルを編集する。
B<visudo> は複数同時の編集に対して I<sudoers> ファイルをロックし、
基本的な文法エラーやパースエラーをチェックしてくれる。
I<sudoers> ファイルが現在すでに編集中であった場合、
"try again later" というメッセージが出される。

=begin JM-comment

There is a hard-coded list of editors that B<visudo> will use set
at compile-time that may be overridden via the I<editor> I<sudoers>
C<Default> variable.  This list defaults to the path to vi(1) on
your system, as determined by the I<configure> script.  Normally,
B<visudo> does not honor the C<EDITOR> or C<VISUAL> environment
variables unless they contain an editor in the aforementioned editors
list.  However, if B<visudo> is configured with the I<--with-enveditor>
flag or the I<enveditor> C<Default> variable is set in I<sudoers>,
B<visudo> will use any the editor defines by C<EDITOR> or C<VISUAL>.
Note that this can be a security hole since it allows the user to
execute any program they wish simply by setting C<EDITOR> or C<VISUAL>.

=end JM-comment

B<visudo> が使用するエディタのリストは、
コンパイル時に設定され、ハードコードされている。
これは I<editor> I<sudoers> C<Default> 変数で上書きできる。
このリストのデフォルトはシステムにある vi(1) へのパスで、
I<configure> スクリプトで決定される。
上で述べたリストのエディタが
C<EDITOR> や C<VISUAL> 環境変数にない限り、
通常 B<visudo> はこれらの環境変数を使わない。
ただし B<visudo> が I<--with-enveditor> フラグをつけて
コンパイル時に設定されている場合、
または I<sudoers> で
I<enveditor> C<Default> 変数が設定されている場合、
B<visudo> は
C<EDITOR> や C<VISUAL> で定義されている
任意のエディタを使用する。
これはセキュリティホールになるので注意すること。
C<EDITOR> や C<VISUAL> に設定するだけで、
ユーザに任意のプログラムの実行を許可してしまう。

=begin JM-comment

B<visudo> parses the I<sudoers> file after the edit and will
not save the changes if there is a syntax error.  Upon finding
an error, B<visudo> will print a message stating the line number(s)
where the error occurred and the user will receive the
"What now?" prompt.  At this point the user may enter "e"
to re-edit the I<sudoers> file, "x" to exit without
saving the changes, or "Q" to quit and save changes.  The
"Q" option should be used with extreme care because if B<visudo>
believes there to be a parse error, so will B<sudo> and no one
will be able to B<sudo> again until the error is fixed.
If "e" is typed to edit the  I<sudoers> file after a parse error
has been detected, the cursor will be placed on the line where the
error occurred (if the editor supports this feature).

=end JM-comment

B<visudo> は、編集後 I<sudoers> ファイルをパースし、
文法エラーがあった場合は変更を保存しない。
エラーが見つかると、B<visudo> はそれが起こった
行番号を示すメッセージが表示し、
"What now?" というプロンプトを出す。
この場合、
I<sudoers> ファイルを再編集するならば "e",
変更を保存せずに終了するならば "x",
終了と変更の保存をするならば "Q" 
を入力すればよい。
"Q" オプションは特別に注意を払って使用すべきである。
なぜなら、B<visudo> はパースエラーになるといっているので、
パースエラーが修正されるまでは、B<sudo> と全てのユーザが
B<sudo> を実行できなくなるからである。
パースエラーが見つかった後で
"e" を入力して I<sudoers> を編集すると、
カーソルがエラーが起こった箇所に置かれる
(エディタがこの機能をサポートしている場合のみ)。

=head1 OPTIONS

=begin JM-comment

B<visudo> accepts the following command line options:

=end JM-comment

B<visudo> は、以下のようなコマンドラインオプションを受け付ける。

=over 4

=item -c

=begin JM-comment

Enable B<check-only> mode.  The existing I<sudoers> file will be
checked for syntax and a message will be printed to the
standard output detailing the status of I<sudoers>.
If the syntax check completes successfully, B<visudo> will
exit with a value of 0.  If a syntax error is encountered,
B<visudo> will exit with a value of 1.

=end JM-comment

B<check-only> (チェックのみ) モードを有効にする。
既存の I<sudoers> ファイルの文法チェックが行われ、
I<sudoers> の情報の詳細を標準出力に表示する。
文法チェックが成功した場合、
B<visudo> は値 0 で終了する。
文法エラーがあった場合、
B<visudo> は値 1 で終了する。

=item -f

=begin JM-comment

Specify and alternate I<sudoers> file location.  With this option
B<visudo> will edit (or check) the I<sudoers> file of your choice,
instead of the default, @sysconfdir@/sudoers.  The lock file used
is the specified I<sudoers> file with ".tmp" appended to it.

=end JM-comment

I<sudoers> ファイルの場所を指定して別のファイルを使う。
このオプションを使うと、
B<visudo> はデフォルトの /etc/sudoers ではなく、
ユーザが選んだ I<sudoers> ファイルを編集 (またはチェック) する。
使用されるロックファイルは、
指定した I<sudoers> ファイルに ".tmp" を付けたものである。

=item -q

=begin JM-comment

Enable B<quiet> mode.  In this mode details about syntax errors
are not printed.  This option is only useful when combined with
the B<-c> flag.

=end JM-comment

B<quiet> (表示抑制) モードを有効にする。
このモードでは文法エラーの詳細は表示されない。
このオプションは B<-c> フラグと組み合わせた場合にのみ役立つ。

=item -s

=begin JM-comment

Enable B<strict> checking of the I<sudoers> file.  If an alias is
used before it is defined, B<visudo> will consider this a parse
error.  Note that it is not possible to differentiate between an
alias and a hostname or username that consists solely of uppercase
letters, digits, and the underscore ('_') character.

=end JM-comment

I<sudoers> ファイルの B<strict> (厳密な) チェックを可能にする。
エイリアスが定義される前に使用されている場合、
B<visudo> はパースエラーとみなす。
エイリアスと、大文字・数字・アンダースコア ('_') のみを含む
ホスト名またはユーザ名を区別するのは不可能であることに注意すること。

=item -V

=begin JM-comment

The B<-V> (version) option causes B<visudo> to print its version number
and exit.

=end JM-comment

(version) オプションは、
B<visudo> にバージョン番号を表示させた後、終了させる。

=back

=head1 ERRORS

=over 4

=item sudoers file busy, try again later.

=begin JM-comment

Someone else is currently editing the I<sudoers> file.

=end JM-comment

誰か他のユーザが、現在 I<sudoers> ファイルを編集している。

=item @sysconfdir@/sudoers.tmp: Permission denied

=begin JM-comment

You didn't run B<visudo> as root.

=end JM-comment

root 権限で B<visudo> を実行しなかった。

=item Can't find you in the passwd database

=begin JM-comment

Your userid does not appear in the system passwd file.

=end JM-comment

あなたのユーザ ID がシステムの passwd ファイルのなかに見つからない。

=item Warning: undeclared Alias referenced near ...

=begin JM-comment

Either you are using a {User,Runas,Host,Cmnd}_Alias before
defining it or you have a user or hostname listed that
consists solely of uppercase letters, digits, and the
underscore ('_') character.  If the latter, you can ignore
the warnings (B<sudo> will not complain).  In B<-s> (strict)
mode these are errors, not warnings.

=end JM-comment

定義する前に {User,Runas,Host,Cmnd}_Alias のどれかを使用している。
または、大文字・数字・アンダースコア ('_') のみを含んだ
ユーザまたはホスト名がリストにある。
後者の場合、B<sudo> は警告を出さないので) 警告を無視することができる。
B<-s> (strict 厳密な) モードでは、これらは警告ではなくエラーになる。

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=begin JM-comment

The following environment variables are used only if B<visudo>
was configured with the I<--with-env-editor> option:

=end JM-comment

B<visudo> に (コンパイル時に) 
I<--with-env-editor> オプションが設定されていた場合にのみ、
以下の環境変数が使われる。

=begin JM-comment

 EDITOR			Invoked by visudo as the editor to use
 VISUAL			Used Invoked visudo if EDITOR is not set

=end JM-comment

 EDITOR			エディタとして visudo に起動される。
 VISUAL			EDITOR が設定されていない場合、
			visudo に起動されて使用される。

=head1 FILES

=begin JM-comment

 @sysconfdir@/sudoers		List of who can run what
 @sysconfdir@/sudoers.tmp	Lock file for visudo

=end JM-comment

 @sysconfdir@/sudoers		誰が何を実行できるかのリスト。
 @sysconfdir@/sudoers.tmp	visudo のロックファイル。

=head1 AUTHOR

=begin JM-comment

Many people have worked on I<sudo> over the years; this version of
B<visudo> was written by:

=end JM-comment

多くの人々が長年に渡り I<sudo> の製作に携わってきた。
このバージョンの B<visudo> は、

 Todd Miller		<Todd.Miller@courtesan.com>

=begin JM-comment

See the HISTORY file in the sudo distribution or visit
http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/history.html for more details.

=end JM-comment

によって書かれた。
更に詳しくは、sudo ディストリビューションの HISTORY ファイルを参照するか、
http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/history.html を参照すること。

=head1 BUGS

=begin JM-comment

If you feel you have found a bug in sudo, please submit a bug report
at http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/bugs/

=end JM-comment

sudo のバグを発見したと思った場合は、
http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/bugs/ にバグの報告を送って下さい。

=head1 DISCLAIMER

B<Visudo> is provided ``AS IS'' and any express or implied warranties,
including, but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability
and fitness for a particular purpose are disclaimed.
See the LICENSE file distributed with B<sudo> for complete details.

=head1 CAVEATS

=begin JM-comment

There is no easy way to prevent a user from gaining a root shell if 
the editor used by B<visudo> allows shell escapes.

=end JM-comment

B<visudo> の使用するエディタがシェルにエスケープできる場合、
ユーザに root のシェルを入手させないための簡単な方法はない。

=head1 SEE ALSO

vi(1), sudoers(5), sudo(8), vipw(8)
