.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar 23 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ypbind 8 "May 1997" "ypbind Version 3.3"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ypbind - NIS binding process
.SH 名前
ypbind \- NIS バインドプロセス
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B
/usr/sbin/ypbind
[
.BR \-v | -version | --version
] [
.BR \-d | \-debug | --debug
] [
.BR \-ipc | --ipc 
] [
.BR \-mmap | --mmap
] [
.BR \-broken_server | --broken_server
] [
.B \-ypset
] [
.B \-ypsetme
] [
.BR \-no-ping | --no-ping
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O finds the server for a NIS domain and stores the information about it
.\"O in a
.\"O .B binding file.
.\"O The binding file resides in the directory
.\"O .B /var/yp/binding
.\"O and is conventionally named
.\"O .BR domainname.version .
.\"O The only supported version is version 2.
.B ypbind
は NIS ドメインのサーバーを検索して、取得した情報を
.B binding ファイル
に保存する。 binding ファイルは
.B /var/yp/binding
ディレクトリに置かれ、伝統的に
.B domainname.version
という名前をつけられる。サポートしているバージョンは 2 だけである。
 
.\"O Unless the option
.\"O .B \-debug
.\"O is used, ypbind detaches itself from the controlling terminal and puts
.\"O itself into background.
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O uses
.\"O .B syslog()
.\"O for logging errors and warnings.
オプション
.B \-debug
が指定されていなければ、 ypbind は自分自身を起動された端末から切り離し、
バックグラウンドジョブとなる。
.B ypbind
はエラーや警告を
.B syslog()
を通して記録する。

.\"O At startup or when receiving signal SIGHUP,
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O parses the file
.\"O .B /etc/yp.conf
.\"O and tries to use the entries for its initial binding. Valid entries
.\"O are
.B ypbind
は起動時や SIGHUP シグナルを受けたときに
.B /etc/yp.conf
を参照し、ファイル中のエントリをバインドしようとする。有効なエントリは
以下の通り。

.B domain
.I nisdomain
.B server
.I hostname
.RS
.\"O Use server
.\"O .I hostname
.\"O for the domain
.\"O .IR nisdomain .
ドメイン
.I nisdomain
に対してサーバー
.I hostname
を用いる。
.RE

.B domain
.I nisdomain
.B broadcast
.RS
.\"O Use broadcast on the local net for domain
.\"O .IR nisdomain .
ドメイン
.I nisdomain
に対して、ローカルなネットにブロードキャストを用いる。
.RE

.B ypserver
.I server
.RS
.\"O Use server
.\"O .I server
.\"O for the local domain. The IP-address of
.\"O .I server
.\"O must be listed in
.\"O .BR /etc/hosts .
ローカルなドメインのサーバーとして
.I server
を用いる。
.I server
の IP アドレスは
.B /etc/hosts
に記述されている必要がある。
.RE

.\"O If the file does not exist of if there are no valid entries,
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O broadcasts on the local net looking for a NIS server for the local
.\"O domain. 
ファイルが存在しない場合や有効なエントリがファイルに存在しない場合は、
.B ypbind
はローカルなネットにブロードキャストを出して、ローカルなドメインの NIS 
サーバーを検索する。

.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O is split into two processes. The master process services RPC requests
.\"O asking for binding info. The slave process initializes the binding and
.\"O checks it periodically. Upon failure, the binding is invalidated and
.\"O the process tries again to find a valid server.
.B ypbind
は 2 つのプロセスに別れる。マスタープロセスはバインド情報を問い合わせ
るための RPC リクエストを行う。スレーブプロセスはバインド情報を初期化
し、その内容を定期的にチェックする。障害が起こった場合にはバインド情
報は無効化され、プロセスは再度有効なサーバーを検索する。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.IP \-ypset
.\"O .BR ypset (8)
.\"O may be used to change the binding for a domain.
.BR ypset (8)
によってバインドするドメインを変更できるようにする。

.IP \-ypsetme
.\"O .BR ypset (8)
.\"O may only be used from the local host to change the
.\"O binding for a domain.
.BR ypset (8)
によるドメインの変更を、ローカルなドメインからのみに制限する。

.IP \-debug
.\"O starts
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O in debug mode.
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O will not put itself into background, and error messages and debug
.\"O output are written to standard error.
.B ypbind
をデバッグモードで起動する。
.B ypbind
は自身をバックグラウンドへ移動せず、エラーメッセージやデバッグ出力を標
準エラー出力に表示する。

.IP \-ipc
.\"O lets
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O use IPC for the master-slave communication. It requires a kernel with IPC
.\"O enabled. You must use this, if your root-Filesystem is on NFS.
.B ypbind
のマスター−スレーブ間の通信に IPC を用いる。カーネルで IPC が有効にさ
れていなければならない。ルートファイルシステムが NFS の場合はこのモー
ドを用いなければならない。

.IP \-mmap
.\"O lets
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O use mmap for the master-slave communication. This may fail with some older
.\"O kernels.
.B ypbind
のマスター−スレーブ間の通信に mmap を用いる。古いカーネルでは失敗する
かも知れない。

.IP \-broken_server
.\"O lets
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O accept answers from servers running on an illegal port number. This should
.\"O usually be avoided, but is required on Solaris 2.4 (there should be a patch
.\"O for Solaris which fixes this broken behaviour.)
不正なポート番号を用いているサーバーからの返事を受けるようにする。これ
は通常望ましくないが、 Solaris 2.4 の場合には必要となる (この不正な振
る舞いに対する Solaris のパッチは多分存在すると思うが)。

.IP \-no-ping
.\"O prevents
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O from continually checking if the binding is alive. This option is
.\"O intented for use with dialup connections to prevent
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O from keeping the connection unnessecarily open or causing autodials.
バインドが有効かどうかの定期的なチェックを行わない。このオプションはダ
イアルアップ接続などの場合に指定するとよい。
.B ypbind
が不必要に接続を継続したり、自動ダイアルするのを避けることができる。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.B /etc/yp.conf
.\"O - configuration file.
\- 設定ファイル。

.BI /var/yp/binding/ domainname.version
.\"O - binding file containing information about
.\"O .IR domain .
\- binding ファイル。ドメインに関する情報が含まれている。

.B /var/run/ypbind.pid
.\"O - contains the process id of the currently running
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O master process.
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O sets a write lock to this file to prevent multiple copies of itself
.\"O from running.
\- 現在実行されている
.B ypbind
マスタープロセスのプロセス id が入っている。
.B ypbind
はこのファイルを write ロックして、複数の
.B ypbind
プロセスが起動されないようにする。

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Binding to multiple domains is untested.
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O will only bind to one single server per domain.
.\"O Load sharing between multiple servers for a single domain is
.\"O not supported.
複数のドメインに対するバインドはテストされていない。
.B ypbind
はドメインあたり一つのサーバーにしかバインドできない。一つのドメインで
の複数のサーバーによる負荷分散はサポートされていない。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O was written by Swen Thuemmler <swen@uni-paderborn.de>. Michael Rausch
.\"O <mrausch@ernie.mi.uni-koeln.de> added support for SysV-IPC. Numerous
.\"O bugfixes from other contributors.
.B ypbind
は Swen Thuemmler <swen@uni-paderborn.de> が書いた。 Michael Rausch
<mrausch@ernie.mi.uni-koeln.de> が SysV-IPC のサポートを追加した。
多数のバグフィックスが他の貢献者によってなされた。

