'\" t
.TH captoinfo 1M ""
.ds n 5
.ds d /usr/share/terminfo
.\"0 .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"0 \fBcaptoinfo\fR - convert a \fItermcap\fR description into a \fIterminfo\fR description
\fBcaptoinfo\fR - \fItermcap\fR の記述を \fIterminfo\fR の記述に変換する
.\"0 .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBcaptoinfo\fR [\fB-v\fIn\fR \fIwidth\fR]  [\fB-V\fR] [\fB-1\fR] [\fB-w\fR \fIwidth\fR] \fIfile\fR . . .
.\"0 .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"0 \fBcaptoinfo\fR looks in \fIfile\fR for \fBtermcap\fR descriptions.  For each
.\"0 one found, an equivalent \fBterminfo\fR description is written to standard
.\"0 output.  Termcap \fBtc\fR capabilities are translated directly to terminfo
.\"0 \fBuse\fR capabilities.
\fBcaptoinfo\fR は \fBtermcap\fR を記述した \fIfile\fR を見つける。
見つかったものを、\fBterminfo\fR 用に記述したものに書き換えたものを標準出力に出力する。
termcap の \fBtc\fR の機能は terminfo の \fBuse\fR の機能に直接変換される。

.\"0 If no \fIfile\fR is given, then the environment variable \fBTERMCAP\fR is used
.\"0 for the filename or entry.  If \fBTERMCAP\fR is a full pathname to a file, only
.\"0 the terminal whose name is specified in the environment variable \fBTERM\fR is
.\"0 extracted from that file.  If the environment variable \fBTERMCAP\fR is not
.\"0 set, then the file \fB\*d\fR is read.
もし \fIfile\fR が与えられなかったら、環境変数 \fBTERMCAP\fR が ファイル名もしくは
エントリ用にしようされる。もし \fBTERMCAP\fR が 絶対パスで ファイルを指定しいたら、
環境変数 \fBTERM\fR 中に指定された端末の名前のみそのファイルから展開される。
もし環境変数 \fBTERMCAP\fR が設定されていないなら、ファイル \fB\*d\fR が読まれる。
.TP 5
\fB-v\fR 
.\"0 print out tracing information on standard error as the program runs.
プログラムが起動しているものとして標準エラーにトレースした情報を出力する。
.TP 5
\fB-V\fR
.\"0 print out the version of the program in use on standard error and exit.
標準エラーに使用しているプログラムのバージョンを出力して終了する。
.TP 5
\fB-1\fR
.\"0 cause the fields to print out one to a line.  Otherwise, the fields
.\"0 will be printed several to a line to a maximum width of 60
.\"0 characters.
フィールドに一行へ出力させる。そうではなくて、フィールドは最大幅60文字で
それぞれ出力される。
.TP 5
\fB-w\fR
.\"0 change the output to \fIwidth\fR characters.
\fIwidth\fR 文字の出力を変更する。
.\"0 .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP 20
\*d
.\"0 Compiled terminal description database.
端末を記述したデータベースをコンパイルする。
.\"0 .SH TRANSLATIONS FROM NONSTANDARD CAPABILITIES
.SH 非標準機能からの変換
.PP
.\"0 Some obsolete nonstandard capabilities will automatically be translated
.\"0 into standard (SVr4/XSI Curses) terminfo capabilities by \fBcaptoinfo\fR.
.\"0 Whenever one of these automatic translations is done, the program
.\"0 will issue an notification to stderr, inviting the user to check that
.\"0 it has not mistakenly translated a completely unknown and random
.\"0 capability and/or syntax error.
幾つかの時代遅れの非標準的な機能は \fBcaptoinfo\fR によって 標準的な(SVr4/XSI Curses) 
terminfo の機能に自動的に変換される。
これらの自動変換が行われるときはいつも、ユーザに未知のものや、でたらめ機能や/もしくは
文法エラーなど間違えなく完全に変換されているかチェックするように、
プログラムは標準エラーに注意を出力する。

.PP
.TS H
c c c c
c c c c
l l l l.
.\"0 Nonstd	Std	From	Terminfo
.\"0 name	name		capability
非標準	標準	出自	Terminfo
名前	名前		機能
-
BO	mr	AT&T	enter_reverse_mode
CI	vi	AT&T	cursor_invisible
CV	ve	AT&T	cursor_normal
DS	mh	AT&T	enter_dim_mode
EE	me	AT&T	exit_attribute_mode	
FE	LF	AT&T	label_on
FL	LO	AT&T	label_off
XS	mk	AT&T	enter_secure_mode
EN	@7	XENIX	key_end
GE	ae	XENIX	exit_alt_charset_mode
GS	as	XENIX	enter_alt_charset_mode
HM	kh	XENIX	key_home
LD	kL	XENIX	key_dl
PD	kN	XENIX	key_npage
PN	po	XENIX	prtr_off
PS	pf	XENIX	prtr_on
PU	kP	XENIX	key_ppage
RT	@8	XENIX	kent
UP	ku	XENIX	kcuu1
KA	k;	Tek	key_f10
KB	F1	Tek	key_f11
KC	F2	Tek	key_f12
KD	F3	Tek	key_f13
KE	F4	Tek	key_f14
KF	F5	Tek	key_f15
BC	Sb	Tek	set_background
FC	Sf	Tek	set_foreground
HS	mh	Iris	enter_dim_mode
.TE
.PP
.\"0 XENIX termcap also used to have a set of extension capabilities
.\"0 for forms drawing, designed to take advantage of the IBM PC
.\"0 high-half graphics.  They were as follows:
XENIX の termcap も フォームの描画に IBM PC の high-half グラフィクスの利点を利用する
ようにデザインされた拡張機能を使用している。(??)
それらは以下のものである:
.PP
.TS H
c c
l l.
Cap	Graphic
_
G2	upper left
G3	lower left
G1	upper right
G4	lower right
GR	pointing right
GL	pointing left
GU	pointing up
GD	pointing down
GH	horizontal line
GV	vertical line
GC	intersection
G6	upper left
G7	lower left
G5	upper right
G8	lower right
Gr	tee pointing right
Gr	tee pointing left
Gu	tee pointing up
Gd	tee pointing down
Gh	horizontal line
Gv	vertical line
Gc	intersection
GG	acs magic cookie count
.TE
.PP
.\"0 If the single-line capabilities occur in an entry, they will automatically
.\"0 be composed into an \fBacsc\fR string.  The double-line capabilities and
.\"0 \fBGG\fR are discarded with a warning message.
もしシングルライン(??)の機能がエントリ中にあるなら、それらは自動的に \fBacsc\fR 文字列
に構成される。ダブルライン(??)機能と \fBGG\fR は 警告と共に捨てられる。
.PP
.\"0 IBM's AIX has a terminfo facility descended from SVr1 terminfo but incompatible
.\"0 with the SVr4 format. The following AIX extensions are automatically
.\"0 translated:
IBM の AIX は SVr1 terminfo に由来する terminfo の便宜を持ち合わせているが、
それは SVr4 のフォーマットは互換性のないものである。以下の AIX の拡張は自動的に
変換される:
.PP
.TS
c c
l l.
IBM	XSI
_
ksel	kslt
kbtab	kcbt
font0	s0ds
font1	s1ds
font2	s2ds
font3	s3ds
.TE
.PP
.\"0 Additionally, the AIX \fBbox1\fR capability will be automatically translated to
.\"0 an \fBacsc\fR string.
それに付け加えて、AIX の \fBbox1\fR 機能は自動的に \fBacsc\fR 文字列に変換される。
.PP
.\"0 Hewlett-Packard's terminfo library supports two nonstandard terminfo 
.\"0 capabilities \fBmeml\fR (memory lock) and \fBmemu\fR (memory unlock).
.\"0 These will be discarded with a warning message.
Hewlett-Packard の terminfo ライブラリは \fBmeml\fR (memory lock) 
と \fBmemu\fR (memory unlock) の2つの非標準の機能をサポートしている。
これらは警告と共に捨てられる。
.\"0 .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"0 This utility is actually a link to \fItic\fR(1M), running in \fI-I\fR mode.
このユーティリティは実際は \fItic\fR(1M) へのリンクであり、\fI-I\fR モードで
実行される。

.\"0 The trace option isn't identical to SVr4's.  Under SVr4, instead of following
.\"0 the -v with a trace level n, you repeat it n times.
トレースオプションは SVr4 のものを識別しない。SVr4 では トレースレベル n の -v の代わりに
n 回繰り返すこと。

.\"0 .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 参照
\fBcurses\fR(3X), \fBinfocmp\fR(1M), \fBterminfo\fR(\*n)
.\"0 .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"0 Eric S. Raymond <esr@snark.thyrsus.com>
Eric S. Raymond <esr@snark.thyrsus.com>
.\"#
.\"# The following sets edit modes for GNU EMACS
.\"# Local Variables:
.\"# mode:nroff
.\"# fill-column:79
.\"# End:
