.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)biff.1	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/14/91
.\"	$Id: biff.1,v 1.2 2000/06/18 16:27:42 argrath Exp $
.\"
.\" Translated Sun Mar 26 JST 1995 by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jun 18 JST 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.Dd July 31, 1999
.Dt BIFF 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.16)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm biff
.\"O .Nd "be notified if mail arrives and who it is from"
.Nd メールの到着と、それが誰からのメールかを知らせる
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm biff
.Op Cm ny
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Biff
.\"O informs the system whether you want to be notified when mail arrives
.\"O during the current terminal session.
.Nm biff
は、現在の端末セッション中にメールが到着した場合、
それを報告してほしいかどうかをシステムに知らせる。
.Pp
.\"O Options supported by
.\"O .Nm biff :
.Nm  biff
がサポートしているオプションとしては、以下のものがある:
.Bl -tag -width 4n
.It Cm n
.\"O Disables notification.
報告しないように設定する。
.It Cm y
.\"O Enables notification.
報告するように設定する。
.El
.Pp
.\" オプションを指定しない場合は現在状態を表示します。
.\"O When mail notification is enabled, the header and first few lines of
.\"O the message will be printed on your screen whenever mail arrives.
メールの到着を報告するように設定しているときにメールが届いた場合、
メールのヘッダとメッセージの最初の数行が自分の画面に表示される。
.\"O A
.\"O .Dq Li biff y
.\"O command is often included in the file
.\"O .Pa \&.login
.\"O or
.\"O .Pa \&.profile
.\"O to be executed at each login.
ログイン毎に実行されるよう、
.Dq Li biff y
コマンドはたいてい
.Pa \&.login
や 
.Pa \&.profile
などに書く。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Biff
.\"O operates asynchronously via the
.\"O .Xr comsat 8
.\"O service. If that service is not enabled,
.\"O .Nm biff
.\"O will not do anything. In that case, or for synchronous notification,
.\"O use the
.\"O .Ar MAIL
.\"O variable of
.\"O .Xr sh 1
.\"O or the
.\"O .Ar mail
.\"O variable of
.\"O .Xr csh 1 .
.Nm biff
は
.Xr comsat
サービスを利用して非同期に動作する。
このサービスが有効でない場合、
.Nm biff
は何もしない。
このような場合、あるいは同期して動作させる場合は、
.Xr sh 1
の 
.Ev MAIL
変数を用いるか、
.Xr csh 1
の 
.Ev mail
変数を利用すること。
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr csh 1 ,
.Xr mail 1 ,
.Xr sh 1 ,
.Xr comsat 8
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 歴史
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in 
.\"O .Bx 4.0 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.0
から登場した。
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O .Xr su 1 ,
.\"O and biff don't seem to get on too well. This is probably due to the tty 
.\"O still being owned by the person using su. This can result in 
.\"O .Dq Li Permission denied 
.\"O messages when attempting to change the biff status of your session.
.Xr su 1
と biff はあまり相性が良くないようだ。
これはおそらく tty が su を用いた人間に所有されたままになるためだろう。
これにより、biff の状態を変更しようとした時に
.Dq Li Permission denied
になってしまうかもしれない。
.Pp
.\"O Please report bugs to netbug@ftp.uk.linux.org including diffs/patches,
.\"O compiler error logs or as complete a bug report as is possible.
バグは差分/パッチ、コンパイラーエラーログ、
または出来るだけ完全なバグレポートと共に
netbug@ftp.uk.linux.org に報告してほしい。
