.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)finger.1	6.14 (Berkeley) 7/27/91
.\"	$Id: finger.1,v 1.2 2000/11/02 09:41:14 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Thu May 29 1997
.\"         by KAWABATA Takahiro <kawabata@ne.scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	long-format	詳細な形式
.\"
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt FINGER 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm finger
.\"O .Nd user information lookup program
.Nd ユーザー情報を調査するプログラム
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm finger
.Op Fl lmsp
.Op Ar user ...
.Op Ar user@host ...
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm finger
.\"O displays information about the system users.
.Nm finger
は、システムのユーザーについての情報を表示する。
.Pp
.\"O Options are:
オプションは以下の通りである。
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It Fl s
.\"O .Nm Finger
.\"O displays the user's login name, real name, terminal name and write
.\"O status (as a ``*'' after the terminal name if write permission is
.\"O denied), idle time, login time, office location and office phone
.\"O number.
.Nm finger
は、ユーザーのログイン名・本名・端末の名前と書き込み属性
(書き込みが許可されていない場合、端末名の後に ``*'' が付く)・
アイドル時間・ログイン時刻・
オフィスの場所・オフィスの電話番号を表示する。
.Pp
.\"O Login time is displayed as month, day, hours and minutes, unless
.\"O more than six months ago, in which case the year is displayed rather
.\"O than the hours and minutes.
ログイン時刻は、月・日・時・分、の順に表示される。
ただし、ログインしてから 6 ヶ月以上経過している場合には、
時・分ではなく年が表示される。
.Pp
.\"O Unknown devices as well as nonexistent idle and login times are
.\"O displayed as single asterisks.
不明なデバイス・アイドルしていない場合のアイドル時間・ログイン時刻は、
1 個のアスタリスクとして表示される。
.Pp
.It Fl l
.\"O Produces a multi-line format displaying all of the information
.\"O described for the
.\"O .Fl s
.\"O option as well as the user's home directory, home phone number, login
.\"O shell, mail status, and the contents of the files
.\"O .Dq Pa .plan ,
.\"O .Dq Pa .project ,
.\"O .Dq Pa .pgpkey
.\"O and
.\"O .Dq Pa .forward
.\"O from the user's home directory.
.Fl s
のオプションで得られる情報に加えて、ユーザーのホームディレクトリ・
電話番号・ログインシェル・メールの着信状況・
ユーザーのホームディレクトリにある
.Dq Pa .plan ,
.Dq Pa .project ,
.Dq Pa .pgpkey ,
.Dq Pa .forward
ファイルの内容、といった全ての情報を複数行にわたる形式で表示する。
.Pp
.\"O Phone numbers specified as eleven digits are printed as ``+N-NNN-NNN-NNNN''.
.\"O Numbers specified as ten or seven digits are printed as the appropriate
.\"O subset of that string.
.\"O Numbers specified as five digits are printed as ``xN-NNNN''.
.\"O Numbers specified as four digits are printed as ``xNNNN''.
11 桁の電話番号は ``+N-NNN-NNN-NNNN'' と表示される。
10 桁および 7 桁の電話番号は、11 桁のときの一部を取り出した形式で表示される。
また、5 桁の電話番号は ``xN-NNNN'' と表示され、
4 桁の電話番号は ``xNNNN'' と表示される。
.Pp
.\"O If write permission is denied to the device, the phrase ``(messages off)''
.\"O is appended to the line containing the device name.
.\"O One entry per user is displayed with the
.\"O .Fl l
.\"O option; if a user is logged on multiple times, terminal information
.\"O is repeated once per login.
端末への書き込みが許可されていない場合、
端末名が表示されている行に ``(messages off)'' と表示される。
.Fl l
オプションの場合、一人のユーザーに対して一つのエントリが表示される。
つまり、一人のユーザーが複数の端末でログインしている場合、
端末の数だけ端末情報が繰り返して表示される。
.Pp
メールがない場合、メールの着信状況は ``No Mail.'' と表示される。
新しいメールが届いたあとにユーザーがメールボックスを参照した場合は、
``Mail last read DDD MMM ## HH:MM YYYY (TZ)'' と表示される。
新しいメールがある場合は、
``New mail received ...'', ``  Unread since ...'' と表示される。
.Pp
.It Fl p
.\"O Prevents
.\"O the
.\"O .Fl l
.\"O option of
.\"O .Nm finger
.\"O from displaying the contents of the
.\"O .Dq Pa .plan ,
.\"O .Dq Pa .project
.\"O and
.\"O .Dq Pa .pgpkey
.\"O files.
.Nm finger
の
.Fl l
オプションで
.Dq Pa .plan ,
.Dq Pa .project ,
.Dq Pa .pgpkey
ファイルの内容を表示させないようにする。
.It Fl m
.\"O Prevent matching of
.\"O .Ar user
.\"O names.
.\"O .Ar User
.\"O is usually a login name; however, matching will also be done on the
.\"O users' real names, unless the
.\"O .Fl m
.\"O option is supplied.
.\"O All name matching performed by
.\"O .Nm finger
.\"O is case insensitive.
ユーザー名
.Ar user
のマッチをさせない。
通常、
.Ar user
はログイン名とマッチされる。
しかし、
.Fl m
オプションが指定されない限り、ユーザーの本名ともマッチされる。
.Nm finger
が行う名前のマッチでは、大文字と小文字は区別されない。
.El
.Pp
.\"O If no options are specified,
.\"O .Nm finger
.\"O defaults to the
.\"O .Fl l
.\"O style output if operands are provided, otherwise to the
.\"O .Fl s
.\"O style.
.\"O Note that some fields may be missing, in either format, if information
.\"O is not available for them.
オプションが指定されていない場合に、引き数が与えられていると、
.Nm finger
はデフォルトで
.Fl l
形式の出力をする。
また、引き数が与えられていないと、
デフォルトで
.Fl s
形式の出力をする。
情報が入手できないフィールドは、
どちらの形式においても表示されない点に注意すること。
.Pp
.\"O If no arguments are specified,
.\"O .Nm finger
.\"O will print an entry for each user currently logged into the system.
引き数が与えられていない場合、
.Nm finger
は現在システムにログインしている各ユーザーの情報を表示する。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Finger
.\"O may be used to look up users on a remote machine.
.\"O The format is to specify a
.\"O .Ar user
.\"O as
.\"O .Dq Li user@host ,
.\"O or
.\"O .Dq Li @host ,
.\"O where the default output
.\"O format for the former is the
.\"O .Fl l
.\"O style, and the default output format for the latter is the
.\"O .Fl s
.\"O style.
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl l
.\"O option is the only option that may be passed to a remote machine.
.Nm finger
はリモートマシン上のユーザーを調べる場合にも利用できる。
そのときには、
.Ar user
を
.Dq Li user@host
または
.Dq Li @host
という形式で指定する。
前者の場合、デフォルトの表示は
.Fl l
形式である。
後者の場合、デフォルトの表示は
.Fl s
形式である。
.Fl l
オプションは、リモートマシンに渡される唯一のオプションである。
.Pp
.\"O If standard output is a socket, 
.\"O .Nm finger
.\"O will emit a carriage return (^M) before every linefeed (^J). This is
.\"O for processing remote finger requests when invoked by
.\"O .Xr fingerd 8 .
標準出力がソケットの場合、
.Nm finger
は全てのラインフィード (^J) の前にキャリッジリターン (^M) を送る。
これは、
.Xr fingerd 8
によって起動されたときに、
リモートの finger からの問い合わせを処理するためである。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width mmmmmmmmmmmmmmm
.It Pa ~/.nofinger
.\"O If finger finds this file in a user's home directory, it will, for
.\"O finger requests originating outside the local host, firmly deny the
.\"O existence of that user.  For this to work, the finger program, as
.\"O started by
.\"O .Xr fingerd 8 ,
.\"O must be able to see the
.\"O .Pa .nofinger
.\"O file. This generally means that the home directory containing the file
.\"O must have the other-users-execute bit set (o+w). See
.\"O .Xr chmod 1 .
.\"O If you use this feature for privacy, please test it with ``finger
.\"O @localhost'' before relying on it, just in case.
このファイルがユーザーのホームディレクトリにあると、
ローカルホスト外からの finger の問い合わせに対して、
そのユーザーがいないものとして必ず拒否する。
これを有効にするためには、
.Xr fingerd 8
によって起動された finger プログラムが
.Pa .nofinger
ファイルを読めなければならない。
一般的に言うと、このファイルのあるホームディレクトリに
他のユーザーの実行ビットセット (o+x) がなければいけないということである。
.Xr chmod 1
を参照すること。
この機能をプライバシーのために使いたい場合は、
信頼する前に万一に備えて、
``finger @localhost'' でテストをすること。
.It ~/.plan
.It ~/.project
.It ~/.pgp
.\"O These files are printed as part of a long-format request. The
.\"O .Pa .project
.\"O file is limited to one line; the
.\"O .Pa .plan
.\"O file may be arbitrarily long.
これらのファイルは、詳細な形式での問い合わせの一部として表示される。
.Pa .project
ファイルは 1 行に制限されるが、
.Pa .plan
ファイルは全て表示される。
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr chfn 1 ,
.Xr passwd 1 ,
.Xr w 1 ,
.Xr who 1
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm finger
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 3.0 .
.Nm finger
コマンドは
.Bx 3.0
で登場した。
