.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)rcp.1	6.14 (Berkeley) 7/27/91
.\"	$Id: rcp.1,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:15 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul 25 1995
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp> 
.\" Updated Tue Nov 14 21:33:16 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt RCP 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm rcp
.\"O .Nd remote file copy
.Nd リモートファイルのコピー
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm rcp
.Op Fl px
.Op Fl k Ar realm
.Ar file1 file2
.Nm rcp
.Op Fl px
.Op Fl r
.Op Fl k Ar realm
.Ar file ...
.Ar directory
.\"O Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Rcp
.\"O copies files between machines.  Each
.\"O .Ar file
.\"O or
.\"O .Ar directory
.\"O argument is either a remote file name of the
.\"O form ``rname@rhost:path'', or a local file name (containing no `:' characters,
.\"O or a `/' before any `:'s).
.Nm rcp
は、計算機間でファイルをコピーをするプログラムである。
引き数
.Ar file
と
.Ar directory
は、``rname@rhost:path'' という形式のリモート計算機上のファイル名、
またはローカルファイル名
(`:' を含んでいない名前と `:' の前に `/' がある名前) である。
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It Fl r
.\"O If any of the source files are directories,
.\"O .Nm rcp
.\"O copies each subtree rooted at that name; in this case
.\"O the destination must be a directory.
コピー元のうちのどれかがディレクトリの場合、
.Nm rcp
はそのディレクトリをルートとするサブツリーをコピーする
(ディレクトリ下の各ファイルを再帰的にコピーする)。
この場合、コピー先もディレクトリでなければならない。
.It Fl p
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl p
.\"O option causes
.\"O .Nm rcp
.\"O to attempt to preserve (duplicate) in its copies the modification
.\"O times and modes of the source files, ignoring the
.\"O .Ar umask  .
.Fl p
オプションを指定すると、
.Nm rcp
は
.Ar umask
を無視して、コピー元ファイルの修正時刻とアクセス権を
コピー先ファイルに保存 (複製) する。
.\"O By default, the mode and owner of
.\"O .Ar file2
.\"O are preserved if it already existed; otherwise the mode of the source file
.\"O modified by the
.\"O .Xr umask  2
.\"O on the destination host is used.
デフォルトでは、コピー先ファイル
.Ar file2
が既に存在している場合は、そのアクセス権と所有者は引き継がれ、
コピー先ファイルが存在しない場合は、
コピー先ホストの
.Xr umask 2
でマスクしたアクセス権が使われる。
.It Fl k
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl k
.\"O option requests
.\"O .Nm rcp
.\"O to obtain tickets
.\"O for the remote host in realm
.\"O .Ar realm
.\"O instead of the remote host's realm as determined by
.\"O .Xr krb_realmofhost  3  .
.Fl k
オプションを指定すると、
.Nm rcp
は
.Xr krb_realmofhost 3
で決定されるリモートホストの管理領域 (realm) ではなく、
.Ar realm
で指定した管理領域におけるリモートホストのチケットを取得しようとする。
.It Fl x
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl x
.\"O option turns on
.\"O .Tn DES
.\"O encryption for all data passed by
.\"O .Nm rcp .
.\"O This may impact response time and
.\"O .Tn CPU
.\"O utilization, but provides
.\"O increased security.
.Fl x
オプションは
.Nm rcp
で送るすべてのデータの
.Tn DES
暗号化を有効にする。
これにより、レスポンスタイムと
.Tn CPU
の利用率に影響が生じるが、セキュリティは向上する。
.El
.Pp
.\"O If
.\"O .Ar path
.\"O is not a full path name, it is interpreted relative to
.\"O the login directory of the specified user
.\"O .Ar ruser
.\"O on
.\"O .Ar rhost  ,
.\"O or your current user name if no other remote user name is specified.
.\"O A
.\"O .Ar path
.\"O on a remote host may be quoted (using \e, ", or \(aa)
.\"O so that the metacharacters are interpreted remotely.
.Ar path
がフルパス名でない場合、
.Ar rhost
上のユーザー
.Ar ruser
のログインディレクトリからの相対パスとして解釈される。
また、フルパスでない場合に
リモートユーザー名が指定されていないと、
現在のユーザー名のログインディレクトリからの相対パスとして解釈される。
メタキャラクタがリモートマシンのシェルで解釈されるように、
リモートホスト上の
.Ar path
を (\e, ", \(aa を使って) クォートする必要がある。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Rcp
.\"O does not prompt for passwords; it performs remote execution
.\"O via
.\"O .Xr rsh  1  ,
.\"O and requires the same authorization.
.Nm rcp
はパスワードを要求するプロンプトを出さない。
このプログラムは
.Xr rsh 1
を使ってリモート実行を行い、これと同様のユーザーの認証を必要とする。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Rcp
.\"O handles third party copies, where neither source nor target files
.\"O are on the current machine.
.Nm rcp
は、コピー元ファイルもコピー先ファイルもリモートマシン上にある場合のような、
第三者によるコピーも可能である。
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr cp 1 ,
.Xr ftp 1 ,
.Xr rsh 1 ,
.Xr rlogin 1
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm rcp
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.\"O The version of
.\"O .Nm rcp
.\"O described here
.\"O has been reimplemented with Kerberos in
.\"O .Bx 4.3 Reno .
.Nm rcp
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
ここで説明している
.Nm rcp
は、
.Bx 4.3 Reno
で Kerberos を組み込んで再実装されたバージョンである。
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O Doesn't detect all cases where the target of a copy might
.\"O be a file in cases where only a directory should be legal.
コピー先がディレクトリでなければならない場合に
ファイルが指定されていても、
全ての場合で検出できるとは限らない。
.Pp
.\"O Is confused by any output generated by commands in a
.\"O .Pa \&.login ,
.\"O .Pa \&.profile ,
.\"O or
.\"O .Pa \&.cshrc
.\"O file on the remote host.
リモートホスト上のファイル
.Pa \&.login ,
.Pa \&.profile ,
.Pa \&.cshrc
にあるコマンドが生成する出力によって混乱することがある。
.Pp
.\"O The destination user and hostname may have to be specified as
.\"O ``rhost.rname'' when the destination machine is running the
.\"O .Bx 4.2
.\"O version of
.\"O .Nm rcp  .
コピー先のマシンで
.Bx 4.2
バージョンの
.Nm rcp
が動作している場合、コピー先のユーザー名とホスト名を
``rhost.rname'' のように指定しなければならない。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
