.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Michael Sadd (sadd@cornell.edu)
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 21:29:45 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:
.\"
.TH REXEC 1 "August 15, 1999"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O rexec -- remote execution client for an exec server
rexec -- exec サーバのためのリモート実行クライアント
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B rexec 
[  
.B \-a \-c \-d \-h \-n \-s
] [--] host command
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Rexec
.\"O calls the 
.\"O .B rexec(3)
.\"O routine to act as a client for the remote host's
.\"O .B rexecd(8)
.\"O server.  
.B rexec
は、リモートホスト上の
.B rexecd(8)
サーバのクライアントとして動作するために
.B rexec(3)
ルーチンを呼び出す。
.PP
.\"O It asks that ``command'' be run on the host computer,
.\"O using username/password authentication. See 
.\"O .B rexec(3)
.\"O and
.\"O .B rexecd(8)
.\"O for details of the protocol.
このプログラムは、ユーザー名とパスワードによる認証を使い、
ホスト計算機上で ``command'' を実行するように要求する。
プロトコルの詳細は
.B rexec(3)
と
.B rexecd(8)
を参照すること。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O .B Rexec
.\"O accepts the following options:
.B rexec
は以下のオプションを受け付ける。
.\"
.LP
\fB\-a\fP
.IP
.\"O Do not set up an auxiliary channel for standard error from command;
.\"O the remote standard error and output are then both returned on the
.\"O local standard output.  By default, 
.\"O .B rexec
.\"O asks that a separate channel be set up for diagnostic output
.\"O from the remote command.
コマンドからの標準エラーに対して補助的な (auxiliary) チャンネルを設定しない。
つまり、リモートの標準エラーと標準出力の両方がローカルの標準出力に返される。
デフォルトでは、
.B rexec
はリモートコマンドからの対話出力に対して
別々のチャンネルを設定するように要求する。
.\"
.LP
\fB\-c\fP
.IP
.\"O Do not close remote standard input when local standard input closes.
.\"O Normally the standard input to the remote command is closed when
.\"O the local standard input is closed.
ローカルの標準入力が閉じられた場合でも、リモートの標準入力を閉じない。
通常、ローカルの標準入力が閉じられた場合は、リモートの標準入力も閉じられる。
.\"
.LP
\fB\-d\fP
.IP
.\"O Turn on debugging information. In particular the command sent to the
.\"O remote host will be echoed.
デバッグ情報を表示する。
特に、リモートホストに送られたコマンドはエコーされる。
.\"
.LP
\fB\-h\fP
.IP
.\"O Print a usage message.
使用法についてのメッセージを表示する。
.\"
.LP
\fB\-n\fP
.IP
.\"O Explicitly prompt for name and password.  Otherwise,
.\"O $HOME/.netrc will be scanned for login information.
明示的にユーザー名とパスワードを要求する。
このオプションが指定されない場合、
ログイン情報として $HOME/.netrc を調べる。
.\"
.LP
\fB\-s\fP
.IP
.\"O Do not echo signals received by the rexec onto the remote
.\"O process.  Normally, signals which can be trapped are passed
.\"O on to the remote process; then, when you type CNTRL-C, the remote
.\"O process terminates as well.
リモートプロセスに対して rexec が受け付けたシグナルを送らない。
通常、捕捉されたシグナルはリモートプロセスに渡される。
これにより、CNTRL-C を入力した場合にリモートプロセスも終了する。
.\"
.LP
\fB\--\fP
.IP
.\"O Signals end of options to
.\"O .B rexec
.\"O to allow option switches in ``command.''
.B rexec
が ``command'' のオプションに切り替えるためのオプション終了の印。
.PP
.\"O The only option that is very useful is -n; 
.\"O even then, if you have not
.\"O set up a password in $HOME/.netrc, you should still be prompted.
とても役立つオプションは -n だけである。
$HOME/.netrc にパスワードを設定していない場合でも、
パスワードを要求するプロンプトを出してくれる。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.PP
rexec othermachine -- cat ">remote_file; date" <local_file
.PP
.\"O will send local_file to the othermachine as remote_file.
この例では、ローカルのファイル local_file を
別の計算機 othermachine 上に remote_file という名前で書き出している。

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O When a signal is received locally, the signal is passed to the remote
.\"O command using
.\"O blocking i/o.  Even though it is only one byte, this may result
.\"O in delay in teminating the local command if communications are slow.
.\"O Also, the signal remains raised in the local rexec procedure, so
.\"O typically the remote command cannot ask for further user input
.\"O after the signal is sent.
シグナルをローカルで受け取った場合、
そのシグナルはブロック I/O を使ってリモートコマンドに渡される。
シグナルが 1 バイトであっても、通信が遅い場合には
ローカルコマンドを終了するのが遅れる。
さらに、シグナルがローカルの rexec 手続きに残ったままになり、
シグナルが送られた後に
リモートコマンドがユーザー入力を受け付けられなくなる場合もある。
.PP
.\"O It is annoying to have to use the ``--'' flag to include options in
.\"O the remote command without quoting them.  This is because the GNU
.\"O getopt(3) routine is being called.  This behavior may be corrected 
.\"O by setting the POSIXLY_CORRECT environtmental variable.
リモートコマンドにオプションを渡すのに、クォートするのではなく、
``--'' フラグを使わなくてはならない点が面倒である。
これは GNU の getopt(3) ルーチンが呼ばれるためである。
この動作は、環境変数 POSIXLY_CORRECT を設定することで修正される。
.PP
.\"O Please send bug reports or system incompatibilities to the author.
バグ報告とシステム間の非互換性に関しては、著者に連絡して下さい。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
rexec(3), rexecd(8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.PP
Michael Sadd 
.br
sadd@msc.cornell.edu
.br
http://www.msc.cornell.edu/~sadd/
