.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)rlogin.1	6.19 (Berkeley) 7/27/91
.\"	$Id: rlogin.1,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"             all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Sun Jun 06 1993
.\"     by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Nov 14 21:41:39 JST 2000
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	delayed-suspend character	遅延サスペンド文字
.\"     
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt RLOGIN 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm rlogin
.\"O .Nd remote login
.Nd リモートマシンにログインする
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Ar rlogin
.Op Fl 8EKLdx
.Op Fl e Ar char
.Op Fl k Ar realm
.Op Fl l Ar username
.Ar host
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Rlogin
.\"O starts a terminal session on a remote host
.\"O .Ar host  .
.Nm rlogin
はリモートホスト
.Ar host
上でターミナルセッションを開始する。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Rlogin
.\"O first attempts to use the Kerberos authorization mechanism, described below.
.\"O If the remote host does not supporting Kerberos the standard Berkeley
.\"O .Pa rhosts
.\"O authorization mechanism is used.
.\"O The options are as follows:
.Nm rlogin
は以下で説明する Kerberos 認証機構を最初に使おうとする。
リモートホストが Kerberos 認証をサポートしていない場合、
標準的な Berkeley
.Pa rhosts
認証機構が使われる。
オプションは以下の通りである。
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It Fl 8
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl 8
.\"O option allows an eight-bit input data path at all times; otherwise
.\"O parity bits are stripped except when the remote side's stop and start
.\"O characters are other than
.\"O ^S/^Q .
.Fl 8
オプションを指定すると、常に 8 ビットの入力データパスが許可される。
このオプションが指定されない場合、
リモートサーバ側のストップ文字とスタート文字が
^S と ^Q 以外である場合を除き、パリティビットは除去される。
.It Fl E
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl E
.\"O option stops any character from being recognized as an escape character.
.\"O When used with the
.\"O .Fl 8
.\"O option, this provides a completely transparent connection.
.Fl E
オプションを指定すると、
全ての文字がエスケープ文字として認識されないようになる。
.Fl 8
オプションとともに用いると、完全に透過な接続になる。
.It Fl K
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl K
.\"O option turns off all Kerberos authentication.
.Fl K
オプションは全ての Kerberos 認証をオフにする。
.It Fl L
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl L
.\"O option allows the rlogin session to be run in ``litout'' (see
.\"O .Xr tty 4 )
.\"O mode.
.Fl L
オプションにより rlogin セッションを ``litout'' モード
.Ns ( Xr tty 4
を参照) で実行することが可能になる。
.It Fl d
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl d
.\"O option turns on socket debugging (see
.\"O .Xr setsockopt 2 )
.\"O on the TCP sockets used for communication with the remote host.
.Fl d
オプションは、リモートサーバとの通信に使われる TCP ソケットに対して
ソケットデバッグ
.Ns ( Xr setsockopt 2
を参照) をオンにする。
.It Fl e
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl e
.\"O option allows user specification of the escape character, which is
.\"O ``~'' by default.
.\"O This specification may be as a literal character, or as an octal
.\"O value in the form \ennn.
.Fl e
オプションによりユーザーはエスケープ文字を指定できる。
デフォルトではエスケープ文字は ``~'' である。
エスケープ文字の指定は、表示可能な文字でも、
\ennn という形式の 8 進数の値でもよい。
.It Fl k
.\"O The
.\"O .FL k
.\"O option requests rlogin to obtain tickets for the remote host
.\"O in realm
.\"O .Ar realm
.\"O instead of the remote host's realm as determined by
.\"O .Xr krb_realmofhost  3  .
.Fl k
オプションにより、rlogin に
.Xr krb_realmofhost  3
によって決定されるリモートホストの管理領域 (realm) ではなく、
.Ar realm
で指定した管理領域におけるリモートホストのチケットを取得させる。
.\"O SATO: .It Fl l
.\"O SATO: .Fl l
.\"O SATO: オプションによりリモートログインに使うユーザー名
.\"O SATO: .Ar username
.\"O SATO: を指定する。
.\"O SATO: 指定されない場合、ローカルのユーザー名が使われる。
.It Fl x
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl x
.\"O option turns on
.\"O .Tn DES
.\"O encryption for all data passed via the
.\"O rlogin session.
.\"O This may impact response time and
.\"O .Tn CPU
.\"O utilization, but provides
.\"O increased security.
.Fl x
オプションにより、rlogin セッションを経由して渡される全てのデータを
.Tn DES
暗号化させる。
これにより、応答時間と
.Tn CPU
使用率に影響を及ぼすが、高いセキュリティが得られる。
.El
.Pp
.\"O A line of the form ``<escape char>.'' disconnects from the remote host.
.\"O Similarly, the line ``<escape char>^Z'' will suspend the
.\"O .Nm rlogin
.\"O session, and ``<escape char><delayed-suspend char>'' suspends the
.\"O send portion of the rlogin, but allows output from the remote system.
.\"O By default, the tilde (``~'') character is the escape character, and
.\"O normally control-Y (``^Y'') is the delayed-suspend character.
``<エスケープ文字>.'' という形式の行を入力すると、
リモートホストとの接続を切断する。
同様に、``<エスケープ文字>^Z'' という行を入力すると、
.Nm rlogin
セッションをサスペンドする。
また、``<エスケープ文字><遅延サスペンド文字>'' を入力すると、
rlogin の送信部分のみをサスペンドするが、リモートホストからの出力は受け付ける。
デフォルトでは、チルダ (``~'') 文字がエスケープ文字で、
通常は control-Y (``^Y'') が遅延サスペンド文字である。
.Pp
.\"O All echoing takes place at the remote site, so that (except for delays)
.\"O the
.\"O .Nm rlogin
.\"O is transparent.
.\"O Flow control via ^S/^Q and flushing of input and output on interrupts
.\"O are handled properly.
(遅延を除き)
.Nm rlogin
を透過的にするために、全てのエコーはリモートサイトで行われる。
^S/^Q によるフロー制御や割り込み発生時の入出力のフラッシュは正しく行われる。
.\"O .Sh KERBEROS AUTHENTICATION
.Sh Kerberos 認証
.\"O Each user may have a private authorization list in the file
.\"O .Pa .klogin
.\"O in their home directory.
.\"O Each line in this file should contain a Kerberos principal name of the
.\"O form
.\"O .Ar principal.instance@realm  .
.\"O If the originating user is authenticated to one of the principals named
.\"O in
.\"O .Pa .klogin ,
.\"O access is granted to the account.
各ユーザは、ホームディレクトリにある
.Pa .klogin
ファイルに個人の認証リストを入れておくことができる。
このファイルの各行には
.Ar principal.instance@realm
という形式の Kerberos の principal 名がなければならない。
接続元のユーザーが
.Pa .klogin
にあるいずれかの principal 名で認証された場合、
そのアカウントに対してアクセスが許可される。
.\"O The principal
.\"O .Ar accountname.@localrealm
.\"O is granted access if
.\"O there is no
.\"O .Pa .klogin
.\"O file.
.\"O Otherwise a login and password will be prompted for on the remote machine
.\"O as in
.\"O .Xr login  1  .
.Pa .klogin
ファイルがない場合、
.Ar accountname.@localrealm
を principal としてアクセスを許可する。
それ以外の場合は、
.Xr login  1
と同じように、login と password のプロンプトがリモートマシンに表示される。
.\"O To avoid certain security problems, the
.\"O .Pa .klogin
.\"O file must be owned by
.\"O the remote user.
いくつかのセキュリティ問題を避けるため、
.Pa .klogin
ファイルはリモートユーザーの所有になっていなければならない。
.Pp
.\"O If Kerberos authentication fails, a warning message is printed and the
.\"O standard Berkeley
.\"O .Nm rlogin
.\"O is used instead.
Kerberos 認証が失敗した場合、警告メッセージが表示され、
代わりに標準的な Berkeley
.Nm rlogin
が使われる。
.\"O .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Sh 環境変数
.\"O The following environment variable is utilized by
.\"O .Nm rlogin :
以下の環境変数が
.Nm rlogin
で使われる。
.Bl -tag -width TERM
.It Ev TERM
.\"O Determines the user's terminal type.
ユーザーの端末タイプを決定する。
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr rsh 1 ,
.Xr kerberos 3 ,
.Xr krb_sendauth 3 ,
.Xr krb_realmofhost 3
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm rlogin
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm rlogin
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O .Nm Rlogin
.\"O will be replaced by
.\"O .Xr telnet  1
.\"O in the near future.
.\"O .Pp
.\"O More of the environment should be propagated.
.Nm rlogin
は近い将来
.Xr telnet  1
に置き換えられるだろう。
.Pp
より多くの環境変数が引き継がれるべきである。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
