.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)rsh.1	6.10 (Berkeley) 7/24/91
.\"	$Id: rsh.1,v 1.2 2000/11/22 09:48:53 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000-2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"             all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Sun Aug 01 1993
.\"     by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Wed Nov 22 17:46:02 JST 2000
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Thu Apr 19 21:17:05 JST 2001
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"     
.\"WORD:	
.\"
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt RSH 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm rsh
.\"O .Nd remote shell
.Nd リモートシェル
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm rsh
.Op Fl Kdnx
.Op Fl k Ar realm
.Op Fl l Ar username
.Ar host
.Op command
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Rsh
.\"O executes
.\"O .Ar command
.\"O on
.\"O .Ar host  .
.Nm rsh
はコマンド
.Ar command
をホスト
.Ar host
上で実行する。
.Pp
.\"O .Nm Rsh
.\"O copies its standard input to the remote command, the standard
.\"O output of the remote command to its standard output, and the
.\"O standard error of the remote command to its standard error.
.Nm rsh
は標準入力をリモートコマンドに対してコピーする。
また、リモートコマンドの標準出力を
.Nm rsh
の標準出力にコピーし、
リモートコマンドの標準エラーを
.Nm rsh
の標準エラーにコピーする。
.\"O Interrupt, quit and terminate signals are propagated to the remote
.\"O command;
.\"O .Nm rsh
.\"O normally terminates when the remote command does.
.\"O The options are as follows:
interrupt, quit, terminate の各シグナルは、
リモートコマンドに通知される。
リモートコマンドが正常終了した場合、
.Nm rsh
は正常終了する。
使用可能なオプションは以下の通りである。
.Bl -tag -width flag
.It Fl K
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl K
.\"O option turns off all Kerberos authentication.
.Fl K
オプションにより Kerberos 認証が行われなくなる。
.It Fl d
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl d
.\"O option turns on socket debugging (using
.\"O .Xr setsockopt  2  )
.\"O on the
.\"O .Tn TCP
.\"O sockets used for communication with the remote host.
.Fl d
オプションは、リモートホストとの通信に使われる
.Tn TCP
ソケットに対して
.Ns ( Xr setsockopt  2
を使った) ソケットデバッグを有効にする。
.It Fl k
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl k
.\"O option causes
.\"O .Nm rsh
.\"O to obtain tickets for the remote host in
.\"O .Ar realm
.\"O instead of the remote host's realm as determined by
.\"O .Xr krb_realmofhost  3  .
.Fl k
オプションは、
.Nm rsh
に
.Xr krb_realmofhost  3
によって決定されるリモートホストの管理領域 (realm) ではなく、
.Ar realm
で指定した管理領域におけるリモートホストに対するチケットを取得させる。
.It Fl l
.\"O By default, the remote username is the same as the local username.
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl l
.\"O option allows the remote name to be specified.
.\"O Kerberos authentication is used, and authorization is determined
.\"O as in
.\"O .Xr rlogin  1  .
デフォルトでは、リモートユーザー名はローカルユーザー名と同じである。
.Fl l
オプションにより、リモートユーザー名が指定できる。
Kerberos 認証が使われ、ユーザー認証は
.Xr rlogin  1
と同じ仕組みで決定される。
.It Fl n
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl n
.\"O option redirects input from the special device
.\"O .Pa /dev/null
.\"O (see the
.\"O .Sx BUGS
.\"O section of this manual page).
.Fl n
オプションを使うと、特殊デバイス
.Pa /dev/null
から入力を受け取る (このマニュアルページの
.Sx バグ
のセクションを参照すること)。
.It Fl x
.\"O The
.\"O .Fl x
.\"O option turns on
.\"O .Tn DES
.\"O encryption for all data exchange.
.\"O This may introduce a significant delay in response time.
.Fl x
オプションは、全てのデータ交換について
.Tn DES
暗号化を有効にする。
これを用いるとレスポンスが著しく遅れるかもしれない。
.El
.Pp
.\"O If no
.\"O .Ar command
.\"O is specified, you will be logged in on the remote host using
.\"O .Xr rlogin  1  .
コマンド
.Ar command
が指定されない場合、ユーザーは
.Xr rlogin  1
を用いてリモートホストにログインする。
.Pp
.\"O Shell metacharacters which are not quoted are interpreted on local machine,
.\"O while quoted metacharacters are interpreted on the remote machine.
.\"O For example, the command
クォートされていないシェルのメタキャラクタは、ローカルマシン上で解釈される。
逆に、クォートされたメタキャラクタはリモートマシン上で解釈される。
例えば、コマンド
.Pp
.Dl rsh otherhost cat remotefile >> localfile
.Pp
.\"O appends the remote file
.\"O .Ar remotefile
.\"O to the local file
.\"O .Ar localfile ,
.\"O while
は、リモートファイル
.Ar remotefile
をローカルファイル
.Ar localfile
に追加する。
逆に、
.Pp
.Dl rsh otherhost cat remotefile \&">>\&" other_remotefile
.Pp
.\"O appends
.\"O .Ar remotefile
.\"O to
.\"O .Ar other_remotefile .
は、リモートファイル
.Ar remotefile
をリモートファイル
.Ar other_remotefile
に追加する。
.\" .Pp
.\" Many sites specify a large number of host names as commands in the
.\" directory /usr/hosts.
.\" If this directory is included in your search path, you can use the
.\" shorthand ``host command'' for the longer form ``rsh host command''.
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /etc/hosts -compact
.It Pa /etc/hosts
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr rlogin 1 ,
.Xr kerberos 3 ,
.Xr krb_sendauth 3 ,
.Xr krb_realmofhost 3
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm rsh
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm rsh
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O If you are using
.\"O .Xr csh  1
.\"O and put a
.\"O .Nm rsh
.\"O in the background without redirecting its input away from the terminal,
.\"O it will block even if no reads are posted by the remote command.
.\"O If no input is desired you should redirect the input of
.\"O .Nm rsh
.\"O to
.\"O .Pa /dev/null
.\"O using the
.\"O .Fl n
.\"O option.
.Xr csh  1
を使用している場合に、
.Nm rsh
の入力を端末にリダイレクトしたままバックグラウンドで動作させると、
リモートコマンドから入力がない場合でも
.Nm rsh
は動作をブロックする。
入力が必要ない場合は、
.Fl n
オプションを用いて
.Nm rsh
の入力を
.Pa /dev/null
にリダイレクトするべきである。
.Pp
.\"O You cannot run an interactive command
.\"O (like
.\"O .Xr rogue  6
.\"O or
.\"O .Xr vi  1  )
.\"O using
.\"O .Nm rsh  ;
.\"O use
.\"O .Xr rlogin  1
.\"O instead.
.Nm rsh
を用いて
.Ns ( Xr rogue  6
や
.Xr vi  1
のような) 対話コマンドを実行することはできない。
代わりに
.Xr rlogin  1
を使うこと。
.Pp
.\"O Stop signals stop the local
.\"O .Nm rsh
.\"O process only; this is arguably wrong, but currently hard to fix for reasons
.\"O too complicated to explain here.
停止シグナル (SIGSTOP) はローカルの
.Nm rsh
プロセスを停止させるだけである。
これはおそらく間違った動作であるが、
ここで説明するには複雑すぎる理由により、
現時点では修正することが困難である。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
