.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$Id: rup.1,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 21:41:39 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	load average	平均負荷
.\"
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt RUP 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm rup 
.\"O .Nd remote status display
リモートホストの状態を表示する
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm rup 
.Op Fl dshlt
.Op Ar host ...
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm rup
.\"O displays a summary of the current system status of a particular
.\"O .Em host 
.\"O or all hosts on the local network.
.Nm rup
は、特定のホスト
.Em host
またはローカルネットワーク上の全てのホストについて、
現在のシステム状態の概要を表示する。
.\"O The output shows the current time of day, how long the system has
.\"O been up,
.\"O and the load averages.
出力として、現在時刻・システムが起動してからの時間・平均負荷が表示される。
.\"O The load average numbers give the number of jobs in the run queue
.\"O averaged over 1, 5 and 15 minutes.
平均負荷の数値は、それぞれ 1, 5, 15 分の間に
実行キューにあったジョブ数の平均値である。
.Pp
.\"O The following options are available:
以下のオプションが使用可能である。
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl d
.\"O For each host, report what its local time is.
.\"O This is useful for checking time syncronization on a network.
各ホストについて、ローカル時刻を表示する。
ネットワーク上での時刻の同期を調べるのに役立つ。
.It Fl s
.\"O Print time data in seconds (seconds of uptime or seconds since the
.\"O epoch), for scripts.
スクリプトで使うために、時間データを秒で表示する
(システムが起動してからの秒数と紀元年 (epoch) からの秒数を表示する)。
.It Fl h
.\"O Sort the display alphabetically by host name.
ホスト名のアルファベット順にソートして表示する。
.It Fl l
.\"O Sort the display by load average.
平均負荷の順にソートして表示する。
.It Fl t
.\"O Sort the display by up time.
稼働時間の順にソートして表示する。
.El
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Xr rpc.rstatd 8
.\"O daemon must be running on the remote host for this command to
.\"O work.
このコマンドが動作するためには、リモートホスト上で
.Xr rpc.rstatd 8
デーモンが稼働していなければならない。
.\"O .Nm rup
.\"O uses an RPC protocol defined in /usr/include/rpcsvc/rstat.x.
.Nm rup
は /usr/include/rpcsvc/rstat.x で定義されている RPC プロトコルを使う。
.\"O .Sh EXAMPLE
.Sh 例
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
example% rup otherhost
otherhost      up 6 days, 16:45,  load average: 0.20, 0.23, 0.18
example%
.Ed
.\"O .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Sh 返り値
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It rup: RPC: Program not registered
.\"O The
.\"O .Xr rpc.rstatd 8
.\"O daemon has not been started on the remote host.
.Xr rpc.rstatd 8
デーモンがリモートホスト上で起動していない。
.It rup: RPC: Timed out
.\"O A communication error occurred.  Either the network is
.\"O excessively congested, or the
.\"O .Xr rpc.rstatd 8
.\"O daemon has terminated on the remote host.
通信エラーが発生した。ネットワークが非常に混雑している。もしくは、
.Xr rpc.rstatd 8
デーモンがリモートホスト上で終了させられた。
.It rup: RPC: Port mapper failure - RPC: Timed out
.\"O The remote host is not running the portmapper (see
.\"O .Xr portmap 8 ),
.\"O and cannot accomodate any RPC-based services.  The host may be down.
リモートホストが portmapper 
.Ns ( Xr portmap 8
を参照) を実行しておらず、RPC を用いたサービスを提供していない。
ホストがダウンしている可能性がある。
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr ruptime 1 ,
.Xr portmap 8 ,
.Xr rpc.rstatd 8
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm rup
.\"O command
.\"O appeared in
.\"O .Tn SunOS .
.Nm rup
コマンドは
.Tn SunOS
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
