.\"	$OpenBSD: ruptime.1,v 1.3 1997/03/26 00:45:46 deraadt Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)ruptime.1	6.9 (Berkeley) 4/23/91
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Sep 16 1993
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp> 
.\" Modified Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	load average	平均負荷
.\"
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt RUPTIME 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm ruptime
.\"O .Nd show host status of local machines
.Nd ローカルの計算機のステータスを表示する
.\".Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm ruptime
.Op Fl alrtu
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Ruptime
.\"O gives a status line like
.\"O .Ar uptime
.\"O for each machine on the local network; these are formed from packets
.\"O broadcast by each host on the network once a minute.
.Nm ruptime
は、ローカルネットワーク上の各マシンについて、
.Ar uptime
に似たステータス行を表示する。
この表示は、ネットワーク上の各ホストから 1 分ごとに
ブロードキャストされるパケットをもとに作成される。
.Pp
.\"O Machines for which no status report has been received for 11
.\"O minutes are shown as being down.
ステータスレポートが 11 分以上途切れているマシンは、
ダウンしていると表示される。
.Pp
.\"O Options:
オプション:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a
.\"O Users idle an hour or more are not counted unless the
.\"O .Fl a
.\"O flag is given.
.Fl a
フラグが指定されない限り、
1 時間以上アイドルになっているユーザーは表示されない。
.It Fl l
.\"O Sort by load average.
平均負荷の順にソートする。
.It Fl r
.\"O Reverses the sort order.
逆順にソートする。
.It Fl t
.\"O Sort by uptime.
uptime の順にソートする。
.It Fl u
.\"O Sort by number of users.
ユーザー数の順にソートする。
.El
.Pp
.\"O The default listing is sorted by host name.
デフォルトのリストでは、ホスト名でソートされている。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /var/spool/rwho/whod.* -compact
.It Pa /var/spool/rwho/whod.*
.\"O data files
データファイル
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr rup 1 ,
.Xr rwho 1 ,
.Xr uptime 1 ,
.Xr rwhod 8
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O .Nm Ruptime
.\"O appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm ruptime
は
.Bx 4.2
から登場した。

