.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)rwho.1	6.7 (Berkeley) 4/23/91
.\"	$Id: rwho.1,v 1.12 2000/07/30 23:57:06 dholland Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Sep 16 1993
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp> 
.\" Modified Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt RWHO 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm rwho
.\"O .Nd who is logged in on local machines
.Nd ローカルのマシンに誰がログインしているか
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm rwho
.Op Fl a
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm rwho
.\"O command produces output similar to
.\"O .Xr who ,
.\"O but for all machines on the local network.
.\"O If no report has been
.\"O received from a machine for 11 minutes then
.\"O .Nm rwho
.\"O assumes the machine is down, and does not report users last known
.\"O to be logged into that machine.
.Nm rwho
コマンドは、ローカルネットワーク上の全てのマシンについて、
.Xr who
と似た出力を行う。
マシンから 11 分以上応答がない場合、
.Nm rwho
はマシンがダウンしているものとみなし、ユーザーのログイン情報を表示しない。
.Pp
.\"O If a users hasn't typed to the system for a minute or more, then
.\"O .Nm rwho
.\"O reports this idle time.  If a user hasn't typed to the system for
.\"O an hour or more, then
.\"O the user will be omitted from the output of
.\"O .Nm rwho
.\"O unless the
.\"O .Fl a
.\"O flag is given.
ユーザーがシステムに 1 分以上入力を行っていない場合、
.Nm rwho
はアイドル時間を表示する。
ユーザーがシステムに 1 時間以上入力を行っていない場合、
.Fl a
オプションが指定されない限り、そのユーザーは
.Nm rwho
の出力から省略される。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /var/spool/rwho/rwhod.* -compact
.It Pa /var/spool/rwho/whod.*
.\"O information about other machines
他のマシンの情報
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr finger 1 ,
.Xr rup 1 ,
.Xr ruptime 1 ,
.Xr rusers 1 ,
.Xr who 1 ,
.Xr rwhod 8
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm rwho
.\"O command
.\"O appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.3 .
.Nm rwho
コマンドは
.Bx 4.3
から登場した。
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O This is unwieldy when the number of machines
.\"O on the local net is large.
ローカルネット上のマシンが多い場合、手に負えなくなる。
