.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)talk.1	6.6 (Berkeley) 4/22/91
.\"	$Id: talk.1,v 1.15 2000/07/30 23:57:02 dholland Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Aug 01 1993
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp> 
.\" Updated and Modified Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd November 24, 1999
.Dt TALK 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm talk
.\"O .Nd talk to another user
.Nd 他のユーザーと会話をする
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm talk
.Ar person
.Op Ar ttyname
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Talk
.\"O is a visual communication program which copies lines from your
.\"O terminal to that of another user.
.Nm talk
は、視覚的な通信プログラムであり、
ユーザーの端末の行を他のユーザーの端末にコピーする。
.Pp
.\"O Options available:
使用可能なオプションは以下の通りである。
.Bl -tag -width ttyname
.It Ar person
.\"O If you wish to talk to someone on your own machine, then
.\"O .Ar person
.\"O is just the person's login name.  If you wish to talk to a user on
.\"O another host, then
.\"O .Ar person
.\"O is of the form
.\"O .Ql user@host .
自分が使っているマシン上にいる誰かと会話をしたい場合は、
.Ar person
を相手のログイン名にする。
他のホスト上にいるユーザーと会話をしたい場合は、
.Ar person
を
.Ql user@host
の形式で指定する。
.It Ar ttyname
.\"O If you wish to talk to a user who is logged in more than once, the
.\"O .Ar ttyname
.\"O argument may be used to indicate the appropriate terminal
.\"O name, where
.\"O .Ar ttyname
.\"O is of the form
.\"O .Ql ttyXX
.\"O or
.\"O .Ql pts/X .
複数の端末にログインしているユーザーと会話をしたい場合は、
使用する端末名を指示するための引き数
.Ar ttyname
を指定することができる。
ここで、
.Ar ttyname
は
.Ql ttyXX
または
.Ql pts/X
という形式である。
.El
.Pp
.\"O When first called,
.\"O .Nm talk
.\"O contacts the talk daemon on the other user's machine, which sends the
.\"O message
最初に呼び出しを行うとき、
.Nm talk
は相手ユーザーのマシンの talk デーモンとコンタクトをとり、
以下のようなメッセージを相手に送る。
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
Message from TalkDaemon@his_machine...
talk: connection requested by your_name@your_machine.
talk: respond with: talk your_name@your_machine
.Ed
.Pp
.\"O to that user. At this point, he then replies by typing
この時点で、相手は以下のように入力して返答する。
.Pp
.Dl talk \ your_name@your_machine
.Pp
.\"O It doesn't matter from which machine the recipient replies, as
.\"O long as his login name is the same.  Once communication is established,
.\"O the two parties may type simultaneously; their output will appear
.\"O in separate windows.  Typing control-L (^L)
.\".Ql ^L
.\"O will cause the screen to
.\"O be reprinted. The erase, kill line, and word erase characters
.\"O (normally ^H, ^U, and ^W respectively)
.\"O will behave normally.  To exit, just type the interrupt character
.\"O (normally ^C);
.\"O .Nm talk
.\"O then moves the cursor to the bottom of the screen and restores the
.\"O terminal to its previous state.
ログイン名が同じであれば、相手はどのマシンから返事をしてもかまわない。
一度、相手との接続が確立すると、
2 人のユーザーは同時に書き込みを行うことができる。
2 人の書き込みは、分割されたウィンドウに表示される。
control-L
.Ql ^L
を打ち込むと、画面を再描画する。
削除 (erase)・行削除 (kill line)・単語削除 (word erase) 文字
(通常はそれぞれ ^H, ^U, ^W に対応) は通常の動作する。
会話を終了する場合は、単に中断 (interrupt) 文字 (通常は ^C) を入力すればよい。
そうすると
.Nm talk
は、カーソルを画面の一番下に移動させ、端末を元の状態に戻す。
.Pp
.\"O As of netkit-ntalk 0.15
.\"O .Nm talk
.\"O supports scrollback; use esc-p and esc-n to scroll your window, and
.\"O ctrl-p and ctrl-n to scroll the other window. These keys are now
.\"O opposite from the way they were in 0.16; while this will probably be
.\"O confusing at first, the rationale is that the key combinations with 
.\"O escape are harder to type and should therefore be used to scroll one's
.\"O own screen, since one needs to do that much less often.
netkit-ntalk 0.15 から
.Nm talk
は後方スクロールが可能になった。
自分のウインドウをスクロールするには、esc-p と esc-n を使う。
相手のウインドウをスクロールするには、ctrl-p と ctrl-n を使う。
このキーは、0.16 のキーとは逆になっている。
最初は戸惑うかも知れないが、
自分自身の画面をスクロールする必要はあまりないため、
エスケープキーとの入力しづらい組合せを使用している。
.Pp
.\"O If you do not want to receive talk requests, you may block them using the
.\"O .Xr mesg 1
.\"O command.  By default, talk requests are normally not blocked.
.\"O Certain commands, in particular
.\"O .Xr nroff 1 ,
.\"O .Xr pine 1 ,
.\"O and
.\"O .Xr pr 1 ,
.\"O may block messages temporarily in order to
.\"O prevent messy output.
talk からの呼び出しを受けたくない場合、
.Xr mesg 1
コマンドを使ってブロックすることができる。
デフォルトでは talk からの呼び出しはブロックされない。
.Xr nroff 1 ,
.Xr pine 1 ,
.Xr pr 1
などは出力が見にくくなるのを防ぐため、一時的にメッセージをブロックする。
.Pp
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /var/run/utmp -compact
.It Pa /etc/hosts
.\"O to find the recipient's machine
受信者のマシンを見つけるために用いる
.It Pa /var/run/utmp
.\"O to find the recipient's tty
受信者の端末名 (tty) を見つけるために用いる
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr mail 1 ,
.Xr mesg 1 ,
.Xr who 1 ,
.Xr write 1 ,
.Xr talkd 8
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.\"O The protocol used to communicate with the talk daemon is braindead.
talk デーモンとの通信に使われるプロトコルは、たいした機能がない。
.Pp
.\"O Also, the version of
.\"O .Xr talk 1
.\"O released with
.\"O .Bx 4.2
.\"O uses a different and even more braindead protocol that is completely
.\"O incompatible. Some vendor Unixes (particularly those from Sun) have
.\"O been found to use this old protocol.
.Bx 4.2
と一緒にリリースされたバージョンの
.Xr talk 1
は、別のもっと機能がないプロトコルを使っていて、全く互換性がない。
ベンダー (特に Sun) の出している Unix に古いプロトコルが
使用されていることが判っている。
.Pp
.\"O Old versions of
.\"O .Nm talk
.\"O may have trouble running on machines with more than one IP address,
.\"O such as machines with dynamic SLIP or PPP connections. This problem is
.\"O fixed as of netkit-ntalk 0.11, but may affect people you are trying to
.\"O communicate with.
古いバージョンの
.Nm talk
は、動的な SLIP や PPP 接続をしているような、
複数の IP アドレスを持つマシンで実行すると問題があった。
この問題は netkit-ntalk 0.11 で修正されたが、
通信しようとする相手に影響があるかも知れない。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.2 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.2
で登場した。
