.\" Copyright (c) 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)tftp.1	5.4 (Berkeley) 4/22/91
.\"	$Id: tftp.1,v 1.11 2000/07/30 23:57:10 dholland Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Aug 18 1995
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp> 
.\" Updated and Modified Wed Nov 22 17:46:02 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt TFTP 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm tftp
.\"O .Nd trivial file transfer program
.Nd 簡単なファイル転送プログラム
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm tftp
.Op Ar host
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Tftp
.\"O is the user interface to the Internet
.\"O .Tn TFTP
.\"O (Trivial File Transfer Protocol),
.\"O which allows users to transfer files to and from a remote machine.
.Nm tftp
は、Internet
.Tn TFTP
(Trivial File Transfer Protocol, 簡易ファイル転送プロトコル) の
ユーザーインターフェースである。
このプログラムにより、ユーザーはリモートマシンと相互にファイルを転送できる。
.\"O The remote
.\"O .Ar host
.\"O may be specified on the command line, in which case
.\"O .Nm tftp
.\"O uses
.\"O .Ar host
.\"O as the default host for future transfers (see the
.\"O .Cm connect
.\"O command below).
リモートホスト
.Ar host
をコマンドラインから指定できる。
この場合、
.Nm tftp
は
.Ar host
をこれ以後のファイル転送のデフォルトホストとして使う
(以下の
.Cm connect
コマンドを参照すること)。
.\"O .Sh COMMANDS
.Sh コマンド
.\"O Once
.\"O .Nm tftp
.\"O is running, it issues the prompt
.\"O .LI tftp>
.\"O and recognizes the following commands:
.Nm tftp
を起動すると、プロンプト
.LI tftp>
を表示して、以下のコマンドを認識する。
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width verbose -compact
.It Cm \&? Ar command-name ...
.\"O Print help information.
ヘルプ情報を表示する。
.Pp
.It Cm ascii
.\"O Shorthand for "mode ascii"
"mode ascii" の略。
.Pp
.It Cm binary
.\"O Shorthand for "mode binary"
"mode binary" の略。
.Pp
.It Cm connect Ar host-name Op Ar port
.\"O Set the
.\"O .Ar host
.\"O (and optionally
.\"O .Ar port )
.\"O for transfers.
転送を行うためのホスト
.Ar host
(オプションとしてポート番号
.Ar port )
を設定する。
.\"O Note that the
.\"O .Tn TFTP
.\"O protocol, unlike the
.\"O .Tn FTP
.\"O protocol,
.\"O does not maintain connections betweeen transfers; thus, the
.\"O .Cm connect
.\"O command does not actually create a connection,
.\"O but merely remembers what host is to be used for transfers.
.Tn TFTP
プロトコルは、
.Tn FTP
プロトコルと違い、
転送中の接続を管理しない点に注意すること。
よって、
.Cm connect
コマンドは、実際に接続を確立するのではなく、
単にどのホストが転送に使われるのかを記憶するだけである。
.\"O You do not have to use the 
.\"O .Cm connect
.\"O command; the remote host can be specified as part of the
.\"O .Cm get
.\"O or
.\"O .Cm put
.\"O commands.
ユーザーは
.Cm connect
コマンドを使う必要はなく、
リモートホストは
.Cm get
や
.Cm put
コマンドを使うときに指定できる。
.Pp
.It Cm get Ar filename
.It Cm get Ar remotename localname
.It Cm get Ar file1 file2 ...  fileN
.\"O Get a file or set of files from the specified
.\"O .Ar sources .
.\"O .Ar Source
.\"O can be in one of two forms:
.\"O a filename on the remote host, if the host has already been specified,
.\"O or a string of the form
.\"O .Ar hosts:filename
.\"O to specify both a host and filename at the same time.
.\"O If the latter form is used,
.\"O the last hostname specified becomes the default for future transfers.
指定した転送元
.Ar source
からファイルを取得する。
転送元
.Ar source
の指定方法は 2 通りある。
ホストが既に指定されている場合、リモートホスト上のファイル名を指定する。
もしくは
.Ar hosts:filename
という形式で、ホストとファイル名を同時に指定する。
後者の形式を使った場合、
最後に指定されたホスト名が以降のファイル転送のデフォルトになる。
.Pp
.It Cm mode Ar transfer-mode
.\"O Set the mode for transfers; 
.\"O .Ar transfer-mode
.\"O may be one of
.\"O .Em ascii
.\"O or
.\"O .Em binary .
.\"O The default is
.\"O .Em ascii .
転送モードを設定する。
.Ar transfer-mode
は
.Em ascii
または
.Em binary
である。
デフォルトは
.Em ascii
である。
.Pp
.It Cm put Ar file
.It Cm put Ar localfile remotefile
.It Cm put Ar file1 file2 ... fileN remote-directory
.\"O Put a file or set of files to the specified
.\"O remote file or directory.
.\"O The destination
.\"O can be in one of two forms:
.\"O a filename on the remote host, if the host has already been specified,
.\"O or a string of the form
.\"O .Ar hosts:filename
.\"O to specify both a host and filename at the same time.
.\"O If the latter form is used,
.\"O the hostname specified becomes the default for future transfers.
.\"O If the remote-directory form is used, the remote host is
.\"O assumed to be a
.\"O .Tn UNIX
.\"O machine.
指定したリモートファイルやリモートディレクトリにファイルを転送する。
転送先の指定方法は 2 通りある。
ホストが既に指定されている場合、リモートホスト上のファイル名を指定する。
もしくは
.Ar hosts:filename
という形式で、ホストとファイル名を同時に指定する。
後者の形式を使った場合、
最後に指定されたホスト名が以降のファイル転送のデフォルトになる。
リモートディレクトリを指定する形式を使った場合、
リモートホストは
.Tn UNIX
マシンとみなされる。
.Pp
.It Cm quit
.\"O Exit
.\"O .Nm tftp .
.\"O An end of file also exits.
.Nm tftp
を終了する。
end of file でも終了する。
.Pp
.It Cm rexmt Ar retransmission-timeout
.\"O Set the per-packet retransmission timeout, in seconds.
パケット毎の再送タイムアウト時間を秒単位で設定する。
.Pp
.It Cm status
.\"O Show current status.
現在の状態を表示する。
.Pp
.It Cm timeout Ar total-transmission-timeout
.\"O Set the total transmission timeout, in seconds.
全体の転送タイムアウト時間を秒単位で設定する。
.Pp
.It Cm trace
.\"O Toggle packet tracing.
パケットトレース機能の使用・不使用を切替える。
.Pp
.It Cm verbose
.\"O Toggle verbose mode.
詳細表示モードの使用・不使用を切替える。
.El
.\"O .Sh BUGS
.Sh バグ
.Pp
.\"O Because there is no user-login or validation within
.\"O the
.\"O .Tn TFTP
.\"O protocol, the remote site will probably have some
.\"O sort of file-access restrictions in place.  The
.\"O exact methods are specific to each site and therefore
.\"O difficult to document here.
.Tn TFTP
プロトコルには、ユーザーログインや認証がないので、
リモートサイトには何らかのファイルアクセス制限が
適切に設定されている場合がある。
詳しい方法はサイト毎に異なるので、ここでは記述しきれない。
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .Bx 4.3 .
.Nm
コマンドは
.Bx 4.3
で登場した。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
