.\" Copyright (c) 1989 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Jef Poskanzer and Craig Leres of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Portions of the code documented by this man page are 
.\" Copyright (C) 1991 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.\" Please see the file COPYING for details.
.\"
.\"
.\"     @(#)write.1	6.5 (Berkeley) 4/24/91
.\"
.\" Modified for Linux, Mon Mar  8 18:22:44 1993, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Modified to describe network write, Apr 29 1996, dholland@hcs.harvard.edu
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Nov 22 17:46:02 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	protocol	取り決め
.\"
.Dd August 15, 1999
.Dt WRITE 1
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm write
.\"O .Nd send a message to another user
.Nd 他のユーザーにメッセージを送る
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm write
.Ar user[@host]
.Op Ar ttyname
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm Write
.\"O allows you to communicate with other users, by copying lines from your
.\"O terminal to theirs, possibly across the netwoerk.
.Nm write
は、ネットワーク越しにユーザーの端末の行を
他のユーザーの端末にコピーすることにより、
他のユーザーとの通信を可能にする。
.Pp
.\"O When you run the
.\"O .Nm write
.\"O command, the user you are writing to gets a message of the form:
.Nm write
コマンドを実行すると、
相手のユーザーは以下の形式のメッセージを受け取る。
.Pp
.Dl Message from yourname@yourhost on yourtty at hh:mm ...
.Pp
.\"O Any further lines you enter will be copied to the specified user's
.\"O terminal as you finish typing them.
.\"O If the other user wants to reply, they must run
.\"O .Nm write
.\"O as well.
この後に入力された行は、指定されたユーザーの端末に
入力が終るごとにコピーされる。
相手のユーザーが返答したい場合は、同様に
.Nm write
を実行しなければならない。
.Pp
.\"O When you are done, type an end-of-file or interrupt character.
.\"O The other user will see the message
.\"O .Ql EOF
.\"O indicating that the
.\"O conversation is over.
メッセージを送り終ったら、end-of-file かインタラプト文字を入力すること。
相手のユーザーは、会話が終ったことを表す
.Ql EOF
というメッセージを受け取る。
.Pp
.\"O You can prevent people (other than the super-user) from writing to you
.\"O with the
.\"O .Xr mesg 1
.\"O command.
.\"O Some commands, for example
.\"O .Xr nroff 1
.\"O and
.\"O .Xr pr 1 ,
.\"O disallow writing automatically, so that your output isn't overwritten.
ユーザーは (スーパーユーザー以外の) 他のユーザーが
メッセージを書き込むのを
.Xr mesg 1
コマンドを使って防ぐことができる。
.Xr nroff 1
や
.Xr pr 1
といったコマンドは、ユーザーの出力が上書きされないように、
自動的に書き込みを不可にする。
.Pp
.\"O If the user you want to write to is logged in on more than one terminal,
.\"O you can specify which terminal to write to by specifying the terminal
.\"O name as the second operand to the
.\"O .Nm write
.\"O command.
.\"O Alternatively, you can let
.\"O .Nm write
.\"O select one of the terminals \- it will pick the one with the shortest
.\"O idle time.
.\"O This is so that if the user is logged in at work and also dialed up from
.\"O home, the message will go to the right place.
メッセージを書き込みたい相手のユーザーが
複数の端末にログインしている場合、
.Nm write
コマンドの 2 番目の引き数として端末名を指定することにより、
どの端末に書き込むかを指定できる。
逆に、ユーザーは書き込む端末を
.Nm write
に選ばせることができる \- この場合、アイドル時間が最も短い端末を選択する。
ユーザーが職場でログインしている場合や、
自宅からダイヤルアップで接続している場合でも、
この選択方式によりメッセージは適切な端末に送られる。
.Pp
.\"O The traditional protocol for writing to someone is that the string
.\"O .Ql \-o ,
.\"O either at the end of a line or on a line by itself, means that it's the
.\"O other person's turn to talk.
.\"O The string
.\"O .Ql oo
.\"O means that the person believes the conversation to be over. When this
.\"O protocol fails or is not used, you may find the "reprint" character,
.\"O normally ^R, useful.
誰かにメッセージを書く際の伝統的な取り決めとしては、
次のようなものがある。
文字列
.Ql \-o
が行末や単独で一行にある場合、
それは相手のユーザーの話す番になったことを意味する。
文字列
.Ql oo
は、ユーザーが会話が終了したと考えていることを意味する。
この取り決めが失敗した場合や使われなかった場合、
「再描画」文字 (通常は ^R) が役立つことに気づくかもしれない。
.Pp
.\"O An additional protocol that has developed locally: when conversing
.\"O with more than one person, place an identifier in parentheses, such 
.\"O as (d), at the beginning of each line. This serves to distinguish
.\"O messages coming from different people, and also serves to indicate to
.\"O the person at the other end that they should do the same.
ローカルで発展した他の取り決めとしては、次のようなものがある。
複数のユーザーで会話をする場合、
各行の先頭に (d) といった括弧に入った識別情報を置く。
これは複数のユーザーから来たメッセージを区別するとともに、
相手のユーザーにも同じようにすべきであると教える働きがある。
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr mesg 1 ,
.Xr talk 1 ,
.Xr finger 1 ,
.Xr rwho 1 ,
.Xr who 1
.\"O .Sh HISTORY
.Sh 履歴
.\"O A
.\"O .Nm
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O .At v6 .
.\"O The network aware 
.\"O .Nm
.\"O was developed by MIT in conjunction with Project Athena.
.Nm
コマンドは
.At v6
で登場した。
ネットワーク上の人々は
.Nm
が Project Athena に関連して MIT で開発されたことを知っている。
.Sh 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
FreeBSD jpman project <http://www.jp.freebsd.org/man-jp/>
による翻訳を参考にさせていただいた。
