'\" t
.\" ** The above line should force tbl to be used as a preprocessor **
.\"
.\" Man page for fetchmail
.\"
.\" For license terms, see the file COPYING in this directory.
.\" 
.\"WORD: message terminator	メッセージ終端子
.\"WORD: preauthentication	予備認証
.\"WORD: poll name	poll 名
.\"WORD: via name	via 名
.\"WORD: server greeting time サーバのグリーティング回数
.\"WORD: public SSL certificate	公開 SSL 証明書
.\"WORD: negotiation	調停
.\"WORD: validation	身元確認
.\"WORD: well known port	既知のポート
.\"WORD: originator	差出人
.\" 
.\" Translated Wed Aug 18 22:35:36 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jan 16 04:43:32 JST 2000 to match fetchmail-5.2.3
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Dec 26 05:47:25 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jul 14 09:59:59 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Oct 14 01:24:38 JST 2001 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated Fri Nov  9 20:17:22 JST 2001 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 19 14:57:52 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\" 
.TH fetchmail 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O fetchmail \- fetch mail from a POP, IMAP, ETRN, or ODMR-capable server
fetchmail \- POP, IMAP, ETRN, ODMR 機能を持つサーバからメールを取得する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBfetchmail\fR [\fIoption...\fR] [\fImailserver...\fR]
.br
\fBfetchmailconf\fR

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is a mail-retrieval and forwarding utility; it fetches mail from
.\"O remote mailservers and forwards it to your local (client) machine's
.\"O delivery system.  You can then handle the retrieved mail using normal
.\"O mail user agents such as \fImutt\fR(1), \fIelm\fR(1) or \fIMail\fR(1).
.\"O The \fIfetchmail\fR utility can be run in a daemon mode to repeatedly
.\"O poll one or more systems at a specified interval.
.I fetchmail
はメールを取得・転送するためのユーティリティです。
.I fetchmail
はリモートのメールサーバからメールを取得し、
これをローカル (クライアント) マシンの配送システムに転送します。
受け取ったメールは、その後 \fImutt\fR(1), \fIelm\fR(1), \fIMail\fR(1) など、
普通のメールユーザエージェントで扱うことができます。
\fIfetchmail\fR ユーティリティはデーモンモードで実行し、
指定した時間間隔で 1 つあるいは複数のシステムを
繰り返しポーリングすることができます。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O program can gather mail from servers supporting any of the common
.\"O mail-retrieval protocols: POP2, POP3, IMAP2bis, IMAP4, and IMAPrev1.
.I fetchmail
プログラムは一般的なメール取得プロトコル
(POP2, POP3, IMAP2bis, IMAP4, IMAPrev1) の
いずれかをサポートしているサーバからメールを集めてくることができます。
.\"O It can also use the ESMTP ETRN extension and ODMR.  (The RFCs describing all
.\"O these protocols are listed at the end of this manual page.)
また、ESMTP の ETRN 拡張と ODMR を使うこともできます。
(これらのプロトコルを説明している RFC 全ては、
このオンラインマニュアルの最後に列挙します。)
.PP
.\"O While
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is primarily intended to be used over on-demand TCP/IP links (such as
.\"O SLIP or PPP connections), it may also be useful as a message transfer
.\"O agent for sites which refuse for security reasons to permit
.\"O (sender-initiated) SMTP transactions with sendmail.
.I fetchmail
は基本的に (SLIP や PPP 等の)
オンデマンド TCP/IP 接続上で使うためのものですが、
sendmail を使った (送信者開始の) SMTP トランザクションを
セキュリティ上の理由から認めないサイトでは、
メッセージ転送エージェントとしても役立つかもしれません。
.PP
.\"O As each message is retrieved \fIfetchmail\fR normally delivers it via SMTP to
.\"O port 25 on the machine it is running on (localhost), just as though it
.\"O were being passed in over a normal TCP/IP link.  The mail will then be
.\"O delivered locally via your system's MDA (Mail Delivery Agent, usually
.\"O \fIsendmail\fR(8) but your system may use a different one such
.\"O as \fIsmail\fR, \fImmdf\fR, \fIexim\fR, or \fIqmail\fR).  All the
.\"O delivery-control mechanisms (such as \fI.forward\fR files) normally
.\"O available through your system MDA and local delivery agents will
.\"O therefore work.
それぞれのメッセージを取得すると、
通常 \fIfetchmail\fR は自身が動作しているマシン (localhost) の
25 番ポートに SMTP 経由でこのメッセージを配送します。
この動作は、ちょうど通常の TCP/IP 接続上で
メッセージが渡されたかのように行われます。
次に、メールはシステムの MDA (Mail Delivery Agent (メール配送エージェント)、
普通は \fIsendmail\fR(8) ですが、システムによっては
\fIsmail\fR, \fImmdf\fR, \fIexim\fR, \fIqmail\fR 等が
使われているかもしれません) 経由でローカルに配送されます。
したがって、配送制御機構 (\fI.forward\fR ファイル等) は、
システムの MDA とローカル配送エージェントを通じて
全て通常通り使うことができます。
.PP
.\"O If no port 25 listener is available, but your fetchmail compilation
.\"O detected or was told about a reliable local MDA, it will use that MDA
.\"O for local delivery instead.  At build time, fetchmail normally looks
.\"O for executable 
.\"O .IR procmail (1)
.\"O and 
.\"O .IR sendmail (1)
.\"O binaries.
25 番ポートのリスナはないが、fetchmail のコンパイル時に
信頼できるローカル MDA を検知または指定された場合、
代わりとしてローカル配信にその MDA を使います。
通常、ビルド時に fetchmail は
実行可能プログラム
.IR procmail (1)
と
.IR sendmail (1)
のバイナリを探します。
.PP
.\"O If the program
.\"O .I fetchmailconf
.\"O is available, it will assist you in setting up and editing a
.\"O fetchmailrc configuration.  It runs under X and requires that the
.\"O language Python and the Tk toolkit be present on your system.  If
.\"O you are first setting up fetchmail for single-user mode, it is
.\"O recommended that you use Novice mode.  Expert mode provides
.\"O complete control of fetchmail configuration, including the
.\"O multidrop features.  In either case, the `Autoprobe' button
.\"O will tell you the most capable protocol a given mailserver
.\"O supports, and warn you of potential problems with that server.
プログラム
.I fetchmailconf
が使用可能であれば、このプログラムを使って
fetchmailrc の設定ファイルを楽に設定・編集することができます。
このプログラムは X 上で動作し、
またシステム上に Python 言語と Tk ツールキットがあることが必要です。
単独ユーザモード用に初めて fetchmail を設定する場合には、
初心者モード (Novice mode) を使うことをお勧めします。
上級者モード (Expert mode) を使うと、
マルチドロップ機能を含む fetchmail の設定を完全に制御することができます。
どちらの場合でも、`Autoprobe (自動検出)' ボタンを押すと、
指定されたメールサーバが最もうまくサポートしているプロトコルを教えてくれ、
そのサーバで起こる可能性がある問題も指摘してくれます。

.\"O .SH GENERAL OPERATION
.SH 一般的な操作
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is controlled by command-line options and a run control file,
.\"O .IR ~/.fetchmailrc\fR ,
.\"O the syntax of which we describe in a later section (this file is what
.\"O the \fIfetchmailconf\fR program edits).  Command-line options override
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O declarations.
.I fetchmail
の動作はコマンドラインオプションと実行制御ファイル
.IR ~/.fetchmailrc\fR
で制御することができます。
実行制御ファイルの文法は後のセクションで説明します
(このファイルは \fIfetchmailconf\fR プログラムが編集します)。
コマンドラインオプションは、
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
での宣言を上書き指定します。
.PP
.\"O Each server name that you specify following the options on the
.\"O command line will be queried.  If you don't specify any servers
.\"O on the command line, each `poll' entry in your 
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O file will be queried.
問い合わせは、コマンドラインのオプションの後に指定した
全てのサーバに対して行われます。
コマンド行でサーバを指定していない場合には、
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
ファイルの `poll' エントリそれぞれに対して問い合わせが行われます。
.PP
.\"O To facilitate the use of
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O in scripts and pipelines, it returns an appropriate exit code upon 
.\"O termination -- see EXIT CODES below.
.I fetchmail
は、スクリプトやパイプラインで使いやすいように、
終了時に適切な終了コードを返すようになっています。
後述の「終了コード」セクションをご覧ください。
.PP
.\"O The following options modify the behavior of \fIfetchmail\fR.  It is
.\"O seldom necessary to specify any of these once you have a
.\"O working \fI.fetchmailrc\fR file set up.
以下のオプションで \fIfetchmail\fR の動作が変わります。
一度うまく動作する \fI.fetchmailrc\fR ファイルが設定できれば、その後は
これらのオプションを指定する必要はほとんどないでしょう。
.PP
.\"O Almost all options have a corresponding keyword which can be used to
.\"O declare them in a 
.\"O .I fetchmailrc
.\"O file.
ほとんど全てのオプションには対応するキーワードがあり、これらは
.I fetchmailrc
ファイルで宣言することができます。
.PP
.\"O Some special options are not covered here, but are documented instead
.\"O in sections on AUTHENTICATION and DAEMON MODE which follow.
ここでは一部の特殊なオプションは説明しておらず、
代わりに後述の「認証」と「デーモンモード」に関するセクションで説明しています。
.\"O .SS General Options
.SS 一般設定のオプション
.TP
.B \-V, --version
.\"O Displays the version information for your copy of 
.\"O .I fetchmail.
.\"O No mail fetch is performed.
.\"O Instead, for each server specified, all the option information
.\"O that would be computed if
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O were connecting to that server is displayed.  Any non-printables in
.\"O passwords or other string names are shown as backslashed C-like
.\"O escape sequences.  This option is useful for verifying that your
.\"O options are set the way you want them.
お使いの
.I fetchmail
のバージョン情報を表示します。メールの取得は行いません。その代わり、
.I fetchmail
が実際にサーバに接続した場合に使われるはずのオプション情報全てが、
指定されているそれぞれのサーバについて表示されます。
パスワードやその他の名称文字列に含まれる表示不可能な文字は、
C 言語と同様にバックスラッシュを使った
エスケープシーケンスとして表示されます。
このオプションは、
オプションが希望通りに設定されていることを確かめる際に便利です。
.TP
.B \-c, --check
.\"O Return a status code to indicate whether there is mail waiting,
.\"O without actually fetching or deleting mail (see EXIT CODES below).
.\"O This option turns off daemon mode (in which it would be useless).  It
.\"O doesn't play well with queries to multiple sites, and doesn't work
.\"O with ETRN or ODMR.  It will return a false positive if you leave read but
.\"O undeleted mail in your server mailbox and your fetch protocol can't
.\"O tell kept messages from new ones.  This means it will work with IMAP,
.\"O not work with POP2, and may occasionally flake out under POP3.
実際にはメールの取得や削除を行わず、
取得待ちのメールがあるかどうかを示すステータスコードだけを返します
(後述の「終了コード」を参照)。
このオプションはデーモンモードを無効にします (無意味になるため)。
複数サイトへの問い合わせはうまく動作しませんし、
ETRN や ODMR でも動作しません。
既読であるが削除されていないメールがサーバのメールボックスに残っており、
かつメール取得のプロトコルが保存されているメッセージと
新しいメッセージを区別できない場合には、偽を表す正の値が返されます。
つまり、このオプションは IMAP では動作し、POP3 では動作しません。
また、POP3 では時々失敗することがあります。
.TP
.B \-s, --silent
.\"O Silent mode.  Suppresses all progress/status messages that are
.\"O normally echoed to standard error during a fetch (but does not
.\"O suppress actual error messages).  The --verbose option overrides this.
静粛モード。通常はメール取得の途中に標準エラー出力に出力される、
進行状況/ステータスメッセージを全て止めます
(しかし、実際のエラーメッセージは止めません)。
--verbose オプションはこのオプションを上書きします。
.TP
.B \-v, --verbose
.\"O Verbose mode.  All control messages passed between 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O and the mailserver are echoed to stdout.  Overrides --silent.
.\"O Doubling this option (-v -v) causes extra diagnostic information
.\"O to be printed. 
詳細表示モード。
.I fetchmail
とメールサーバの間でやりとりされた制御メッセージを
全て標準出力に出力します。
--silent オプションを上書きします。
このオプションを 2 つ付けると (-v -v)、追加の診断情報が出力されます。
.\"O .SS Disposal Options
.SS メールの扱いに関するオプション
.TP
.B \-a, --all
.\"O (Keyword: fetchall)
(キーワード: fetchall)
.\"O Retrieve both old (seen) and new messages from the mailserver.  The
.\"O default is to fetch only messages the server has not marked seen.
.\"O Under POP3, this option also forces the use of RETR rather than TOP.
.\"O Note that POP2 retrieval behaves as though --all is always on (see
.\"O RETRIEVAL FAILURE MODES below) and this option does not work with ETRN
.\"O or ODMR.
古い (既読) メッセージと新しいメッセージを
両方ともメールサーバから取得します。
デフォルトでは、サーバが既読の印を付けていないメッセージだけを取得します。
POP3 を使う場合、このオプションを指定すると
TOP ではなく必ず RETR が使われます。
POP2 のメール取得は、--all が常に有効であるかのように動作します
(後述の「取得失敗モード」を参照)。
このオプションは ETRN と ODMR では動作しません。
.TP
.B \-k, --keep
.\"O (Keyword: keep)
(キーワード: keep)
.\"O Keep retrieved messages on the remote mailserver.  Normally, messages 
.\"O are deleted from the folder on the mailserver after they have been retrieved.
.\"O Specifying the 
.\"O .B keep 
.\"O option causes retrieved messages to remain in your folder on the
.\"O mailserver.  This option does not work with ETRN or ODMR.
取得したメッセージをリモートのメールサーバに残します。
通常は、メールを取得した後に
メールサーバのフォルダからメッセージが削除されます。
.B keep 
オプションを指定すると、
取得したメッセージはメールサーバのユーザのフォルダに残ります。
このオプションは ETRN と ODMR では動作しません。
.TP
.B \-K, --nokeep
.\"O (Keyword: nokeep)
(キーワード: nokeep)
.\"O Delete retrieved messages from the remote mailserver.  This
.\"O option forces retrieved mail to be deleted.  It may be useful if
.\"O you have specified a default of \fBkeep\fR in your
.\"O \&\fI.fetchmailrc\fR.  This option is forced on with ETRN and ODMR.
取得したメッセージをリモートのメールサーバから削除します。
このオプションを指定すると、取得したメールは削除されます。
\&\fI.fetchmailrc\fR 内 で \fBkeep\fR をデフォルト設定にしている場合には、
このオプションが役に立つかもしれません。
ETRN や ODMR を使う場合には、このオプションは必ず有効にされます。
.TP
.B \-F, --flush
.\"O POP3/IMAP only.  Delete old (previously retrieved) messages from the mailserver
.\"O before retrieving new messages. This option does not work with ETRN or
.\"O ODMR.
POP3/IMAP 専用のオプションです。
新しいメッセージを取得する前に、古い (以前に取得した)
メッセージをメールサーバから削除します。
このオプションは ETRN と ODMR では動作しません。
.\"O Warning: if your local MTA hangs and fetchmail is aborted, the next
.\"O time you run fetchmail, it will delete mail that was never delivered to you.
.\"O What you probably want is the default setting: if you don't specify `-k', then
.\"O fetchmail will automatically delete messages after successful delivery.
注意: ローカルの MTA がハングし、fetchmail が異常終了した場合、
次回に fetchmail を起動したときに配送されていないメールが消されてしまいます。
あなたが良いと思うのはたぶんデフォルトの設定です: `-k' を指定しなければ、
fetchmail は配送が成功した後に自動的にメッセージを削除します。
.\"O .SS Protocol and Query Options
.SS プロトコルと問い合わせのオプション
.TP
.B \-p, \--protocol <proto>
.\"O (Keyword: proto[col])
(キーワード: proto[col])
.\"O Specify the protocol to use when communicating with the remote 
.\"O mailserver.  If no protocol is specified, the default is AUTO.
.\"O .I proto 
.\"O may be one of the following:
リモートのメールサーバと通信するときに使うプロトコルを指定します。
プロトコルが指定されなければ、デフォルト値は AUTO です。
.I proto 
には以下のどれかを指定することができます:
.RS
.IP AUTO
.\"O Tries IMAP, POP3, and POP2 (skipping any of these for which support
.\"O has not been compiled in).
IMAP, POP3, POP2 に試します
(サポートが組み込まれていないプロトコルは飛ばします)。
.IP POP2
.\"O Post Office Protocol 2
Post Office Protocol 2
.IP POP3
.\"O Post Office Protocol 3
Post Office Protocol 3
.IP APOP
.\"O Use POP3 with old-fashioned MD5-challenge authentication.
古い形式の MD5 チャレンジ認証付きの POP3 を使います。
.IP RPOP
.\"O Use POP3 with RPOP authentication.
RPOP 認証付きの POP3 を使います。
.IP KPOP
.\"O Use POP3 with Kerberos V4 authentication on port 1109.
ポート 1109 番で Kerberos V4 認証付きの POP3 を使います。
.IP SDPS
.\"O Use POP3 with Demon Internet's SDPS extensions.
Demon Internet の SDPS 拡張付きの POP3 を使います。
.IP IMAP
.\"O IMAP2bis, IMAP4, or IMAP4rev1 (\fIfetchmail\fR autodetects their capabilities).
IMAP2bis, IMAP4, IMAP4rev1 のいずれか
(\fIfetchmail\fR はこれらの機能を自動的に検出します)。
.IP ETRN
.\"O Use the ESMTP ETRN option.
ESMTP の ETRN オプションを使います。
.IP ODMR
.\"O Use the the On-Demand Mail Relay ESMTP profile.
On-Demand Mail Relay の ESMTP プロファイルを使います。
.RE
.P
.\"O All these alternatives work in basically the same way (communicating
.\"O with standard server daemons to fetch mail already delivered to a
.\"O mailbox on the server) except ETRN and ODMR.  The ETRN mode
.\"O allows you to ask a compliant ESMTP server (such as BSD sendmail at
.\"O release 8.8.0 or higher) to immediately open a sender-SMTP connection
.\"O to your client machine and begin forwarding any items addressed to
.\"O your client machine in the server's queue of undelivered mail.   The
.\"O ODMR mode requires an ODMR-capable server and works similarly to
.\"O ETRN, except that it does not require the client machine to have
.\"O a static DNS.
ETRN と ODMR を除き、これらの選択オプションは基本的に全て同じ動作です
(標準のサーバデーモンと通信し、
サーバのメールボックスに配送されているメールを取得します)。
ETRN モードを使うと、ESMTP 準拠のサーバ
(BSD sendmail のリリース 8.8.0 以降など) に、
クラアイントマシンへの送信 SMTP 接続を即座に開かせ、
サーバの未配達メールのキューに入っている、
宛先がユーザのクライアントマシンになっている
全てのメールの転送を開始させることができます。
ODMR モードでは ODMR が可能なサーバが必要で ETRN と同様に動作します。
ただし、ODMR モードではクライアントマシンに静的 DNS が必要ありません。
.TP
.B \-U, --uidl
.\"O (Keyword: uidl)
(キーワード: uidl)
.\"O Force UIDL use (effective only with POP3).  Force client-side tracking
.\"O of `newness' of messages (UIDL stands for ``unique ID listing'' and is
.\"O described in RFC1725).  Use with `keep' to use a mailbox as a baby
.\"O news drop for a group of users.
必ず UIDL を使うようにします (POP3 の場合のみ有効です)。
メッセージの「新しさ」の確認が必ずクライアント側で行われるようになります
(UIDL は「unique ID listing (ユニークな ID の列挙)」を表します)。
`keep' と一緒に用い、メールボックスを、
あるユーザグループ用の新しいニュースを入れておく場所として使ってください。
.TP
.\"O .B \-P, --port <portnumber>
.B \-P, --port <ポート番号>
.\"O (Keyword: port)
(キーワード: port)
.\"O The port option permits you to specify a TCP/IP port to connect on. 
.\"O This option will seldom be necessary as all the supported protocols have
.\"O well-established default port numbers.
port オプションを使うと、接続する TCP/IP の
ポート番号を指定することができます。
このオプションが必要となることはほとんどないでしょう。
というのも、サポートされている全てプロトコルにはよく知られているデフォルトの
ポート番号があるからです。
.TP
.B \--principal <principal>
.\"O (Keyword: principal)
.\"O The principal option permits you to specify a service principal for
.\"O mutual authentication.  This is applicable to POP3 or IMAP with Kerberos
.\"O authentication.
(キーワード: principal)
principal オプションを使うと、
相互認証のための principal を指定することができます。
Kerberos 認証付きの POP3 と IMAP の場合に使用できます。
.TP 
.\"O .B \-t, --timeout <seconds>
.B \-t, --timeout <秒数>
.\"O (Keyword: timeout)
(キーワード: timeout)
.\"O The timeout option allows you to set a server-nonresponse
.\"O timeout in seconds.  If a mailserver does not send a greeting message
.\"O or respond to commands for the given number of seconds,
.\"O \fIfetchmail\fR will hang up on it.  Without such a timeout
.\"O \fIfetchmail\fR might hang up indefinitely trying to fetch mail from a
.\"O down host.  This would be particularly annoying for a \fIfetchmail\fR
.\"O running in background.  There is a default timeout which fetchmail -V
.\"O will report.  If a given connection receives too many timeouts in 
.\"O succession, fetchmail will consider it wedged and stop retrying,
.\"O the calkling user will be notified by email if this happens.
timeout オプションを使うと、
サーバが応答しない際のタイムアウト時間を秒単位で設定することができます。
指定された秒数の間メールサーバがグリーティングメッセージを送ってこないか
コマンドに応答しない場合、
\fIfetchmail\fR はサーバとの接続を切ります。
このようなタイムアウトを使わなければ、
\fIfetchmail\fR は落ちているホストから
いつまでもメールを取得しようとしてハングアップしてしまうかもしれません。
これは \fIfetchmail\fR がバックグラウンドで動作している時には
特にうっとうしいでしょう。
デフォルトのタイムアウト時間があり、fetchmail -V で表示することができます。
与えられた接続で何度も連続してタイムアウトを受けた場合、
fetchmail は接続が止められているものと考え、リトライを止めます。
これが起こった場合、接続を止められたユーザはメールで通知を受けます。
.TP
.\"O .B \--plugin <command>
.B \--plugin <コマンド>
.\"O (Keyword: plugin) The plugin option allows you to use an external
.\"O program to establish the TCP connection.  This is useful if you want
.\"O to use socks, SSL, ssh, or need some special firewalling setup.  The
.\"O program will be looked up in $PATH and can optionally be passed the
.\"O hostname and port as arguments using "%h" and "%p" respectively (note
.\"O that the interpolation logic is rather primitive, and these token must
.\"O be bounded by whitespace or beginning of string or end of string).
.\"O Fetchmail will write to the plugin's stdin and read from the plugin's
.\"O stdout.
(キーワード: plugin)
plugin オプションを使うと、TCP 接続を確立するための
外部プログラムを使うことができます。
これは SOCKS, SSL, ssh を使う場合や
ファイアウォール用の特殊な設定が必要なときに便利です。
プログラムは $PATH 環境変数内で検索されます。
オプションとして、"%h" と "%p" を使って、
それぞれホスト名とポート名を引き数として渡すこともできます
(補間ロジックは少し原始的で、受け取られる引き数は空白で囲まれているか、
文字列の先頭または末尾になければいけないことに注意して下さい)。
fetchmail はプラグインの標準入力に書き込みを行い、
プラグインの標準出力から読み込みを行います。
.TP
.\"O .B \--plugout <command>
.B \--plugout <コマンド>
.\"O (Keyword: plugout)
(キーワード: plugout)
.\"O Identical to the plugin option above, but this one is used for the SMTP
.\"O connections (which will probably not need it, so it has been separated
.\"O from plugin).
前の項の plugin オプションと同じですが、
このオプションは SMTP 接続に対してのみ使われます
(SMTP 接続ではたぶんプラグインは不要なので、
plugin オプションから分離されています)。
.TP
.\"O .B \-r <name>, --folder <name>
.B \-r <フォルダ名>, --folder <フォルダ名>
.\"O (Keyword: folder[s])
(キーワード: folder[s])
.\"O Causes a specified non-default mail folder on the mailserver (or
.\"O comma-separated list of folders) to be retrieved.  The syntax of the
.\"O folder name is server-dependent.  This option is not available under
.\"O POP3, ETRN, or ODMR.
メールサーバ上で、デフォルト以外の指定されたメールフォルダ
(またはコンマで区切ったフォルダのリスト) からメールを取得します。
フォルダ名の記法はサーバに依存します。
このオプションは POP3, ETRN, ODMR では使えません。
.TP
.B \--tracepolls
.\"O (Keyword: tracepolls)
(キーワード: tracepolls)
.\"O Tell fetchail to poll trace information in the form `polling %s
.\"O account %s' to the Received line it generates, where the %s parts are
.\"O replaced by the user's remote name and the poll label (the Received
.\"O header also normally includes the server's truename).  This can be
.\"O used to facilate mail filtering based on the account it is being
.\"O received from.
fetchmail が生成する Received 行に、
`polling %s account %s' という形式でトレース情報を入れるようにさせます。
%s の部分はユーザのリモート名とポーリングレベルに置き換えられます
(通常、Received ヘッダにはサーバの本当の名前も含まれます)。
これは、受信したアカウントに基づいたメールフィルタリングを
容易にするために使うことができます。
.TP
.B \--ssl
.\"O (Keyword: ssl)
(キーワード: ssl)
.\"O Causes the connection to the mail server to be encrypted via SSL.  Connect
.\"O to the server using the specified base protocol over a connection secured
.\"O by SSL.  SSL support must be present at the server.  If no port is
.\"O specified, the connection is attempted to the well known port of the SSL
.\"O version of the base protocol.  This is generally a different port than the
.\"O port used by the base protocol.  For IMAP, this is port 143 for the clear
.\"O protocol and port 993 for the SSL secured protocol.
メールサーバへの接続を SSL を使って暗号化します。サーバへの接続は、SSL 
によって守られた接続上で指定した基本プロトコルを使って行われます。
ポートが指定されていない場合は、
接続は基本プロトコルの SSL 版の既知のポートで試みられます。
これは一般的には、基本プロトコルで使われるポートとは異なります。
IMAP の場合、基本プロトコルはポート 143 であり、
SSL で守られたプロトコルの場合はポート 993 です。
.TP
.\"O .B \--sslcert <name>
.B \--sslcert <名前>
.\"O (Keyword: sslcert)
(キーワード: sslcert)
.\"O Specifies the file name of the client side public SSL certificate.  Some
.\"O SSL encrypted servers may require client side keys and certificates for
.\"O authentication.  In most cases, this is optional.  This specifies
.\"O the location of the public key certificate to be presented to the server
.\"O at the time the SSL session is established.  It is not required (but may
.\"O be provided) if the server does not require it.  Some servers may
.\"O require it, some servers may request it but not require it, and some
.\"O servers may not request it at all.  It may be the same file
.\"O as the private key (combined key and certificate file) but this is not
.\"O recommended.
クライアント側の公開 SSL 証明書のファイル名を指定します。SSL による
暗号化を行うサーバの一部には、認証のためにクライアント側の鍵と証明書を
必要とするものもあります。ほとんどの場合はこれは省略してもかまいません。
このオプションは SSL セッションを確立する時にサーバに示す公開鍵証明書
の位置を指定します。サーバが必要としなければ、これを指定する必要はあり
ません (指定してもかまいません)。これを必要とするサーバもありますし、
要求するけれど必要とはしないサーバもありますし、全く要求しないサーバも
あります。これは秘密鍵 (鍵と証明書を一緒にしたファイル) と同じファイルの
こともありますが、これはお勧めできません。
.TP
.\"O .B \--sslkey <name>
.B \--sslkey <ファイル名>
.\"O (Keyword: sslkey)
(キーワード: sslkey)
.\"O Specifies the file name of the client side private SSL key.  Some SSL
.\"O encrypted servers may require client side keys and certificates for
.\"O authentication.  In most cases, this is optional.  This specifies
.\"O the location of the private key used to sign transactions with the server
.\"O at the time the SSL session is established.  It is not required (but may
.\"O be provided) if the server does not require it.  Some servers may
.\"O require it, some servers may request it but not require it, and some
.\"O servers may not request it at all.  It may be the same file
.\"O as the public key (combined key and certificate file) but this is not
.\"O recommended.  If a password is required to unlock the key, it will be
.\"O prompted for at the time just prior to establishing the session to the
.\"O server.  This can cause some complications in daemon mode.
クライアント側の秘密 SSL 鍵のファイル名を指定します。SSL による
暗号化を行うサーバの一部には、認証のためにクライアント側の鍵と証明書を
必要とするものもあります。ほとんどの場合はこれは省略してもかまいません。
このオプションは SSL セッションを確立する時にサーバとの署名トランザクション
で用いる秘密鍵の位置を指定します。サーバが必要としなければ、これを指定
する必要はありません (指定してもかまいません)。これを必要とするサーバも
ありますし、要求するけれど必要とはしないサーバもありますし、全く要求し
ないサーバもあります。これは公開鍵 (鍵と証明書を一緒にしたファイル) と同
じファイルのこともありますが、これはお勧めできません。鍵を外すために
パスワードが必要な場合には、サーバとのセッションを確立する直前に
パスワードを聞かれます。そのため、デーモンモードで使うのは困難です。
.TP
.\"O .B \--sslproto <name>
.\"O (Keyword: sslproto)
.\"O Forces an ssl protocol. Possible values are \&`\fBssl2\fR', `\fBssl3\fR' and
.\"O `\fBtls1\fR'. Try this if the default handshake does not work for your server.
.B \--sslproto <名前>
(キーワード: sslproto)
ssl プロトコルを強制的に使用します。
指定可能な値は \&`\fBssl2\fR', `\fBssl3\fR', `\fBtls1\fR' です。
サーバとのデフォルトの接続がうまく行かなかった場合に試して下さい。
.TP
.B \--sslcertck
.\"O (Keyword: sslcertck)
.\"O Causes fetchmail to strictly check the server certificate against a set of
.\"O local trusted certificates (see the \fBsslcertpath\fR option). If the server
.\"O certificate is not signed by one of the trusted ones (directly or indirectly),
.\"O the SSL connection will fail. This checking should prevent man-in-the-middle
.\"O attacks against the SSL connection. Note that CRLs are seemingly not currently
.\"O supported by OpenSSL in certificate verification! Your system clock should
.\"O be reasonably accurate when using this option!
(キーワード: sslcertck)
fetchmail がローカルの信用できる証明書に対してサーバ証明書を
厳密にチェックするようにします
(\fBsslcertpath\fR オプションを見てください)。
サーバ証明書が信頼できる署名で (直接的または間接的に)
サインされていない場合、SSL 接続は失敗します。
このチェックにより、SSL 接続に対して
経路の途中にいる人間が行う攻撃を阻止できます。
OpenSSL による証明書確認では、
CRL は現在サポートされていないかもしれない点に注意してください。
このオプションを使うと、システムクロックがいくらか進みます。
.TP
.\"O .B \--sslcertpath <directory>
.\"O (Keyword: sslcertpath)
.\"O Sets the directory fetchmail uses to look up local certificates. The default
.\"O is your OpenSSL default one. The directory must be hashed as OpenSSL expects
.\"O it - every time you add or modify a certificate in the directory, you need
.\"O to use the \fBc_rehash\fR tool (which comes with OpenSSL in the tools/
.\"O subdirectory).
.B \--sslcertpath <ディレクトリ名>
(キーワード: sslcertpath)
fetchmail がローカルの証明書を探すディレクトリを設定します。
デフォルトは OpenSSL のデフォルトのディレクトリです。
ディレクトリは OpenSSL が期待するようにハッシュされなければなりません。
ディレクトリ内の証明書を追加・修正した場合は、
(OpenSSL の tools/ サブディレクトリに入っている)
\fBc_rehash\fR ツールを使う必要があります。
.TP
.B \--sslfingerprint
.\"O (Keyword: sslfingerprint)
.\"O Specify the fingerprint of the server key (an MD5 hash of the key) in
.\"O hexadecimal notation with colons separating groups of two digits. The letter
.\"O hex digits must be in upper case. This is the default format OpenSSL uses,
.\"O and the one fetchmail uses to report the fingerprint when an SSL connection
.\"O is established. When this is specified, fetchmail will compare the server key
.\"O fingerprint with the given one, and the connection will fail if they do not
.\"O match. This can be used to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks.
(キーワード: sslfingerprint)
コロンで区切られた 16 進数表記の 2 組の数字で書かれた
サーバ・キーの署名 (キーの MD5 ハッシュ) を指定します。
16 進数の数字は大文字でなければなりません。
これは OpenSSL が使うデフォルトの形式で、
SSL 接続が確立されると fetchmail はこの形式で署名を表示します。
このオプションが指定されると、
サーバ・キーの署名を与えられた署名と比較します。
一致しなかった場合、接続は失敗します。
これは経路の途中にいる人間が行う攻撃を阻止できます。
.\"O .SS Delivery Control Options
.SS 配送制御オプション
.TP
.\"O .B \-S <hosts>, --smtphost <hosts>
.B \-S <hosts>, --smtphost <ホスト>
.\"O (Keyword: smtp[host])
(キーワード: smtp[host])
.\"O Specify a hunt list of hosts to forward mail to (one or more
.\"O hostnames, comma-separated). Hosts are tried in list order; the first
.\"O one that is up becomes the forwarding target for the current run.
.\"O Normally, `localhost' is added to the end of the list as an invisible
.\"O default.  However, when using Kerberos authentication, the FQDN of the
.\"O machine running fetchmail is added to the end of the list as an
.\"O invisible default. Each hostname may have a port number following the
.\"O host name.  The port number is separated from the host name by a
.\"O slash; the default port is 25 (or ``smtp'' under IPv6).  If you
.\"O specify an absolute pathname (beginning with a /), it will be
.\"O interpreted as the name of a UNIX socket accepting LMTP connections
.\"O (such as is supported by the Cyrus IMAP daemon) Example:
メールを転送するホストのリスト (1 つ以上のホスト名で、コンマで区切ります)
を指定します。
ホストはリストの順に接続が試みられます。
最初の動作しているホストが、
今回の動作における転送先対象となります。
通常は `localhost' がリストの末尾に暗黙のデフォルト値として追加されています。
しかし、Kerberos 認証を使う場合には、
fetchmail を実行しているマシンの FQDN がリストの末尾に
暗黙のデフォルト値として追加されます。
それぞれのホスト名には、ホストの名前の次にポート番号が付いています。
ポート番号とホスト名はスラッシュで区切られます。
デフォルトのポート番号は 25 (IPv6 では ``smtp'') です。
(/ で始まる) 絶対パス名を指定した場合、
LMTP 接続を受け付ける UNIX ソケットの名前として解釈されます
(これは Cyrus IMAP デーモンでサポートされます)。
例:

	--smtphost server1,server2/2525,server3,/var/imap/socket/lmtp

.\"O This option can be used with ODMR, and will make fetchmail a relay
.\"O between the ODMR server and SMTP or LMTP receiver.
このオプションは ODMR モードで使用することができ、
fetchmail に ODMR サーバと SMTP, LMTP レシーバの間の
リレーをさせます。
.TP 
.\"O .B --fetchdomains <hosts>
.B --fetchdomains <ホスト>
.\"O (Keyword: fetchdomains)
(キーワード: fetchdomains)
.\"O In ETRN or ODMR mode, this option specifies the list of domains the
.\"O server should ship mail for once the connection is turned around.  The
.\"O default is the FQDN of the machine running fetchmail.
ETRN と ODMR モードにおいて、このオプションは
接続が行われた場合にサーバがメールを配送するドメインの一覧を指定します。
デフォルトは fetchmail が稼働しているマシンの FQDN です。
.TP
.\"O .B \-D <domain>, --smtpaddress <domain>
.B \-D <ドメイン>, --smtpaddress <ドメイン>
.\"O (Keyword: smtpaddress) Specify the domain to be appended to addresses
.\"O in RCPT TO lines shipped to SMTP. The name of the SMTP server (as
.\"O specified by --smtphost, or defaulted to "localhost") is used when
.\"O this is not specified.
(キーワード: smtpaddress) 
アドレスに追加されるドメインを指定します。
このアドレスは SMTP で送られる RCPT TO 行に入ります。
これが指定されなかったときは、SMTP サーバの名前
(--smtphost で指定するか、デフォルトの "localhost") が使われます。
.TP
.\"O .B --smtpname <user@domain>
.B --smtpname <ユーザ@ドメイン>
.\"O (Keyword: smtpname) 
.\"O Specify the domain and user to be put in RCPT TO lines shipped to SMTP.
.\"O The default user is the current local user.
(キーワード: smtpname) 
SMTP で送られる RCPT TO 行に入れられるドメインとユーザを指定します。
デフォルトのユーザは現在のユーザです。
.TP
.B \-Z <nnn>, --antispam <nnn[, nnn]...>
.\"O (Keyword: antispam) 
(キーワード: antispam) 
.\"O Specifies the list of numeric SMTP errors that are to be interpreted
.\"O as a spam-block response from the listener.  A value of -1 disables
.\"O this option.  For the command-line option, the list values should
.\"O be comma-separated.
SMTP 受信プログラムからのスパム防止の応答と解釈される、
数値形式の SMTPエラーのリストを指定します。
値が -1 であれば、このオプションは無効にされます。
コマンドラインオプションの場合、
リストの値はコンマで区切らなければなりません。
.TP
.\"O .B \-m <command>, \--mda <command>
.B \-m <コマンド>, \--mda <コマンド>
.\"O (Keyword: mda)
(キーワード: mda)
.\"O You can force mail to be passed to an MDA directly (rather than
.\"O forwarded to port 25) with the -mda or -m option.  
-mda あるいは -m オプションを使って、(25 番ポートに転送するのではなく)
メールを直接 MDA に渡すようにできます。
.\"O To avoid losing
.\"O mail, use this option only with MDAs like procmail or sendmail that
.\"O return a nonzero status on disk-full and other resource-exhaustion
.\"O errors; 
メールを失うのを避けるために、
このオプションは、
ディスクが溢れている場合やリソース消費エラーなどの場合に
0 以外のステータスを返す procmail や sendmail といった
MDA とともに使って下さい。
.\"O the nonzero status tells fetchmail that delivery failed and
.\"O prevents the message from being deleted off the server.  
0 以外のステータスは fetchmail に配送が失敗したことを知らせ、
メッセージがサーバから削除されるのを防止します。
.\"O If
.\"O \fIfetchmail\fR is running as root, it sets its userid to that of the
.\"O target user while delivering mail through an MDA.  
\fIfetchmail\fR を root で実行すると、
ユーザ ID は MDA 経由でメールを配送する間に対象ユーザのものに設定されます。
.\"O Some possible MDAs
.\"O are "/usr/sbin/sendmail -oem -f %F %T", "/usr/bin/deliver" and
.\"O "/usr/bin/procmail -d %T" (but the latter is usually redundant as it's
.\"O what SMTP listeners normally forward to).  
これが利用できる MDA には
"/usr/sbin/sendmail -oem -f %F %T", "/usr/bin/deliver",
"/usr/bin/procmail -d %T" があります (しかし、通常は後のものは冗長です。
なぜならこれは通常、SMTP リスナが転送を行う先だからです)。
.\"O Local delivery addresses
.\"O will be inserted into the MDA command wherever you place a %T; 
%T を置いた場所には、MDA コマンドに対してローカル配送アドレスが挿入されます。
.\"O the
.\"O mail message's From address will be inserted where you place an %F.
メールのメッセージの From アドレスは、%F を置いた場所に挿入されます。
.\"O Do \fInot\fR use an MDA invocation like "sendmail -oem -t" that
.\"O dispatches on the contents of To/Cc/Bcc, it will create mail loops and
.\"O bring the just wrath of many postmasters down upon your head.
"sendmail -oem -t" のような、To/Cc/Bcc の内容宛に
メールを発送する MDA の呼び出しを用いては\fIいけません\fR。
これをするとメールのループが発生し、
あなたが大勢の postmaster から大目玉を食らうことになります。
.TP 
.B \--lmtp
.\"O (Keyword: lmtp)
(キーワード: lmtp)
.\"O Cause delivery via LMTP (Local Mail Transfer Protocol).  A service
.\"O port \fImust\fR be explicitly specified (with a slash suffix) on each
.\"O host in the smtphost hunt list if this option is selected; the
.\"O default port 25 will (in accordance with RFC 2033) not be accepted.
LMTP (Local Mail Transfer Protocol) 経由の配送を行います。
このオプションを選択した場合には、
smtphost で対象リストに指定した各ホストに対して、
サービスのポートを (スラッシュのサフィックスを用いて)
明示的に指定しなければ\fIなりません\fR。
デフォルトポートの 25 は (RFC 2033 によって) 認められていません。
.TP
.\"O .B \--bsmtp <filename>
.B \--bsmtp <ファイル名>
.\"O (keyword: bsmtp)
(キーワード: bsmtp)
.\"O Append fetched mail to a BSMTP file.  This simply contains the SMTP
.\"O commands that would normally be generated by fetchmail when passing
.\"O mail to an SMTP listener daemon.  An argument of `-' causes the mail
.\"O to be written to standard output.  Note that fetchmail's
.\"O reconstruction of MAIL FROM and RCPT TO lines is not guaranteed
.\"O correct; the caveats discussed under THE USE AND ABUSE OF MULTIDROP
.\"O MAILBOXES below apply.
取得したメールを BSMTP ファイルに追加します。
これは単に、メールを SMTP受信デーモンに渡すときに
fetchmail が通常生成するであろう SMTP コマンドを含んでいます。
引き数に `-' を指定すると、メールは標準出力に書き込まれます。
fetchmail が付け直した MAIL FROM と RCPT TO 行が正しいことの
保証はない点に注意してください。
後述の「マルチドロップメールボックスの利用と不正使用」の
議論における注意事項が適用されます。
.\"O .SS Resource Limit Control Options
.SS リソースの制限・制御のためのオプション
.TP
.\"O .B \-l <maxbytes>, --limit <maxbytes>
.B \-l <最大バイト数>, --limit <最大バイト数>
.\"O (Keyword: limit)
(キーワード: limit)
.\"O Takes a maximum octet size argument.  Messages larger than this size
.\"O will not be fetched and will be left on the server (in foreground
.\"O sessions, the progress messages will note that they are "oversized").
.\"O If the fetch protocol permits (in particular, under IMAP or POP3
.\"O without the fetchall option) the message will not be marked seen An
.\"O explicit --limit of 0 overrides any limits set in your run control
.\"O file. This option is intended for those needing to strictly control
.\"O fetch time due to expensive and variable phone rates.  In daemon mode,
.\"O oversize notifications are mailed to the calling user (see the
.\"O --warnings option).  This option does not work with ETRN or ODMR.
サイズの最大値を 10 進数で引き数に取ります。
このサイズより大きいメッセージは取得されず、サーバ上に残されます
(フォアグラウンドのセッションでは、
進行状況メッセージで "oversized (サイズ超過)" であると知らされます)。
メールの取得に使われるプロトコル
(特に fetchall オプションを指定しない IMAP または POP3) によって
未読の印を付けることができる場合、
明示的に --limit に 0 を指定すると、
実行制御ファイルで設定した上限値を全て上書きします。
このオプションは、電話料金が高くて変化もするという理由から、
メール取得の時間を厳しく制御する必要がある人のためのものです。
デーモンモードでは、サイズ超過の通知は
呼び出しを行ったユーザに対してメールで行われます
(--warning オプションを参照)。
このオプションは ETRN と ODMR では使えません。
.TP
.\"O .B \-w <interval>, --warnings <interval>
.B \-w <間隔>, --warnings <間隔>
.\"O (Keyword: warnings)
(キーワード: warnings)
.\"O Takes an interval in seconds.  When you call
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O with a `limit' option in daemon mode, this controls the interval at
.\"O which warnings about oversized messages are mailed to the calling user
.\"O (or the user specified by the `postmaster' option).  One such
.\"O notification is always mailed at the end of the the first poll that
.\"O the oversized message is detected.  Thereafter, renotification is
.\"O suppressed until after the warning interval elapses (it will take
.\"O place at the end of the first following poll).
時間間隔を秒数で引き数に取ります。
デーモンモードで `limit' オプションを付けて
.I fetchmail
を呼び出すと、このオプションはサイズを超過しているメッセージに関する警告が
呼び出したユーザ (または `postmaster' オプションで指定したユーザ) に
メールで送られる時間間隔を制御します。
このような通知は常に、サイズを超過しているメッセージが見つかった
最初のポーリングの終了時にメールで送られます。
その後は、警告時間間隔が経過するまで再通知は止められます
(これは、後に続く最初のポーリングの終了時に行われます)。
.TP
.\"O .B -b <count>, --batchlimit <count>
.B -b <最大数>, --batchlimit <最大数>
.\"O (Keyword: batchlimit)
(キーワード: batchlimit)
.\"O Specify the maximum number of messages that will be shipped to an SMTP
.\"O listener before the connection is deliberately torn down and rebuilt
.\"O (defaults to 0, meaning no limit).  An explicit --batchlimit of 0
.\"O overrides any limits set in your run control file.  While
.\"O \fBsendmail\fR(8) normally initiates delivery of a message immediately
.\"O after receiving the message terminator, some SMTP listeners are not so
.\"O prompt.  MTAs like \fIqmail\fR(8) and \fIsmail\fR(8) may wait till the
.\"O delivery socket is shut down to deliver.  This may produce annoying
.\"O delays when \fIfetchmail\fR is processing very large batches.  Setting
.\"O the batch limit to some nonzero size will prevent these delays.  This
.\"O option does not work with ETRN or ODMR.
接続をわざと止めてから再接続するまでに
SMTP 受信プログラムに送信するメッセージの最大数を指定します
(デフォルト値は 0 で、これは無制限を表します)。
明示的に --batchlimit に 0 を指定すると、
実行制御ファイルで設定されている上限値は全て上書きされます。
\fBsendmail\fR(8) は通常、
メッセージ終端子を受信した直後にメッセージの配送を始めますが、
そんなに素早く応答しない SMTP 受信プログラムもあります。
\fIqmail\fR(8) や \fIsmail\fR(8) 等の MTA は、
配送ソケットが閉じられるまで配送を待つことがあります。
\fIfetchmail\fR が巨大なバッチ処理を行っている時には、
これはうっとうしい遅れを引き起こすかもしれません。
バッチの上限値にゼロでない値を何か設定しておくと、
このような遅れを防ぐことができます。
このオプションは ETRN と ODMR では動作しません。
.TP
.\"O .B -B <number>, --fetchlimit <number>
.B -B <上限値>, --fetchlimit <上限値>
.\"O (Keyword: fetchlimit)
(キーワード: fetchlimit)
.\"O Limit the number of messages accepted from a given server in a single
.\"O poll.  By default there is no limit. An explicit --fetchlimit of 0
.\"O overrides any limits set in your run control file.
.\"O This option does not work with ETRN or ODMR.
指定されたサーバ 1 つからの 1 度のポーリングで取得できる
メッセージ数を制限します。
デフォルトでは制限はありません。
明示的に --fetchlimit に 0 を設定すると、
実行制御ファイルで設定した上限値を全て上書きします。
このオプションは ETRN と ODMR では動作しません。
.TP
.\"O .B -e <count>, --expunge <count>
.B -e <メッセージ数>, --expunge <メッセージ数>
.\"O (keyword: expunge)
(キーワード: expunge)
.\"O Arrange for deletions to be made final after a given number of
.\"O messages.  Under POP2 or POP3, fetchmail cannot make deletions final
.\"O without sending QUIT and ending the session -- with this option on,
.\"O fetchmail will break a long mail retrieval session into multiple
.\"O subsessions, sending QUIT after each sub-session. This is a good
.\"O defense against line drops on POP3 servers that do not do the
.\"O equivalent of a QUIT on hangup.  Under IMAP,
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O normally issues an EXPUNGE command after each deletion in order to
.\"O force the deletion to be done immediately.  This is safest when your
.\"O connection to the server is flaky and expensive, as it avoids
.\"O resending duplicate mail after a line hit.  However, on large
.\"O mailboxes the overhead of re-indexing after every message can slam the
.\"O server pretty hard, so if your connection is reliable it is good to do
.\"O expunges less frequently.  If you specify this option to an integer N,
.\"O it tells
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O to only issue expunges on every Nth delete.  An argument of zero
.\"O suppresses expunges entirely (so no expunges at all will be done until
.\"O the end of run).  This option does not work with ETRN or ODMR.
指定された数のメッセージの後に削除が行われるようにします。
POP2 や POP3 の場合には、fetchmail は QUIT を送って
セッションを終わらなければ削除を行うことができません。
したがってこのオプションを on にすると、
fetchmail は長いメール取得セッションを複数のサブセッションに分割し、
各サブセッションの後に QUIT を送ります。
これは、回線が切れた時に QUIT と同等の処理を行わない
POP3 サーバで起こる行落ちに対する良い対策になります。
IMAP の場合には、
.I fetchmail
は削除を即座に行わせるために、
削除を行うたびに EXPUNGE コマンドを発行するのが普通です。
これはサーバとの通信が不安定な時や高価な時には非常に安全な方法です。
というのも、接続が切れてしまった後に
同じメールを再び受け取らなくて済むからです。
しかしメールボックスが大きい場合には、
メッセージを消すたびごとにインデックスを付け直す時のオーバーヘッドで、
サーバがかなり大変な目に遭うかもしれません。
ですから、接続の信頼性が高い場合には、
削除を行う間隔は長くしたほうが良いでしょう。
このオプションに整数 N を指定すると、
.I fetchmail
は N 回目の削除の時だけ実際の削除を行います。
引き数に 0 を指定すると、削除は全く行われなくなります
(したがって、実行終了時まで削除は全く行われません)。
このオプションは ETRN と ODMR では動作しません。
.\"O .SS Authentication Options
.SS 認証に関するオプション
.TP
.\"O .B \-u <name>, --username <name>
.B \-u <ユーザ名>, --username <ユーザ名>
.\"O (Keyword: user[name])
(キーワード: user[name])
.\"O Specifies the user identification to be used when logging in to the mailserver.
.\"O The appropriate user identification is both server and user-dependent.  
.\"O The default is your login name on the client machine that is running 
.\"O .I fetchmail.
.\"O See USER AUTHENTICATION below for a complete description.
メールサーバにログインするときに使うユーザ識別情報を指定します。
適切なユーザ識別情報はメールサーバとユーザの両方に依存します。
デフォルト値は
.I fetchmail
を実行したクライアントマシン上でのログイン名です。
.TP
.\"O .B \-I <specification>, --interface <specification>
.B \-I <インタフェース指定>, --interface <インタフェース指定>
.\"O (Keyword: interface)
(キーワード: interface)
.\"O Require that a specific interface device be up and have a specific local
.\"O or remote IP address (or range) before polling.  Frequently
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is used over a transient point-to-point TCP/IP link established directly
.\"O to a mailserver via SLIP or PPP.  That is a relatively secure channel.
ポーリングを行う前に、特定のインタフェースデバイスが動作していることと、
特定のローカルまたはリモートの IP アドレス
(またはアドレス範囲) を持つことを要求します。
.I fetchmail
は
SLIP や PPP 経由でメールサーバに対して直接確立された point-to-point の
TCP/IP リンク上で使われることがよくあります。
これは比較的安全なチャネルです。
.\"O But when other TCP/IP routes to the mailserver exist (e.g. when the link
.\"O is connected to an alternate ISP), your username and password may be
.\"O vulnerable to snooping (especially when daemon mode automatically polls
.\"O for mail, shipping a clear password over the net at predictable
.\"O intervals).  The --interface option may be used to prevent this.  When
.\"O the specified link is not up or is not connected to a matching IP
.\"O address, polling will be skipped.  The format is:
しかし、メールサーバへの他の TCP/IP 経路が存在するとき
(例: リンクが別の ISP に接続されているとき)、
あなたのユーザ名とパスワードは盗聴に対して脆弱です
(特にデーモンモードが自動的にメールをポーリングし、
平文のパスワードを予測可能な間隔でネットワーク上に流している場合)。
--interface オプションを使うと、これを防ぐことができます。
指定されたリンクが上がっていないときや、
マッチする IP アドレスに接続されていないときには、
ポーリングは飛ばされます。
フォーマットは以下です:
.sp
	interface/iii.iii.iii.iii/mmm.mmm.mmm.mmm
.sp
.\"O The field before the first slash is the interface name (i.e. sl0, ppp0
.\"O etc.).  The field before the second slash is the acceptable IP address.
.\"O The field after the second slash is a mask which specifies a range of
.\"O IP addresses to accept.  If no mask is present 255.255.255.255 is
.\"O assumed (i.e. an exact match).  This option is currently only supported
.\"O under Linux and FreeBSD. Please see the 
.\"O .B monitor 
.\"O section for below for FreeBSD specific information.
最初のスラッシュの前のフィールドはインタフェース名です
(つまり、sl0, ppp0 等)。
2 番目のスラッシュの前のフィールドは許可される IP アドレスです。
2 番目のスラッシュの後のフィールドは、許可する IP アドレスの範囲を
指定するマスク値です。
マスクがない場合には、255.255.255.255 (つまり、完全なマッチ) 
が指定されたものとして扱われます。
このオプションを現在サポートしているのは Linux と FreeBSD だけです。
FreeBSD 固有の情報については、後述の
.B monitor 
セクションをご覧ください。
.TP
.\"O .B \-M <interface>, --monitor <interface>
.B \-M <インタフェース>, --monitor <インタフェース>
.\"O (Keyword: monitor)
(キーワード: monitor)
.\"O Daemon mode can cause transient links which are automatically taken down
.\"O after a period of inactivity (e.g. PPP links) to remain up
.\"O indefinitely.  This option identifies a system TCP/IP interface to be
.\"O monitored for activity.  After each poll interval, if the link is up but
.\"O no other activity has occurred on the link, then the poll will be
.\"O skipped.  However, when fetchmail is woken up by a signal, the
.\"O monitor check is skipped and the poll goes through unconditionally.
.\"O This option is currently only supported under Linux and FreeBSD.
デーモンモードでは、アクティブでない状態が一定時間続くと、
自動的に切断される一時的なリンク (例: PPP 接続) が
いつまでも接続したままになる可能性があります。
このオプションはアクティブ状態を監視する
システムの TCP/IP インタフェースを指定します。
毎回のポーリング間隔の後、リンクが確立しているけれど
そのリンク上で他の通信がされていなければ、ポーリングは飛ばされます。
しかし、fetchmail がシグナルで起動された場合は、
監視のチェックは飛ばされ、無条件にポーリングが行われます。
このオプションは現在 Linux と FreeBSD でのみサポートされています。
.\"O For the 
.\"O .B monitor 
.\"O and 
.\"O .B interface
.\"O options to work for non root users under FreeBSD, the fetchmail binary
.\"O must be installed SGID kmem. This would be a security hole, but
.\"O fetchmail runs with the effective GID set to that of the kmem group
.\"O .I only
.\"O when interface data is being collected.
FreeBSD の場合、
.B monitor 
オプションと
.B interface
オプションを root 以外のユーザで動作させるには、SGID kmem して
fetchmail のバイナリをインストールしなければなりません。
これはセキュリティホールになるかもしれませんが、
fetchmail はインタフェースのデータを集めるとき
.I だけ
実効 GID を kmem グループに設定して動作します。
.TP
.\"O .B --auth <type>
.B --auth <タイプ>
.\"O (Keyword: auth[enticate])
(キーワード: auth[enticate])
.\"O This option permits you to specify an authentication type (see USER
.\"O AUTHENTICATION below for details).  
このオプションを使うと認証のタイプを指定することができます
(詳しくは「ユーザ認証」の項をご覧ください)。
.\"O The possible values are \fBany\fR,
.\"O \&`\fBpassword\fR', `\fBkerberos_v5\fR' and `\fBkerberos\fR' (or, for
.\"O excruciating exactness, `\fBkerberos_v4\fR'), \fRgssapi\fR,
.\"O \fIcram-md5\fR, \fIotp\fR, \fIntlm\fR, and \fBssh\fR.  
指定可能な値は、\fBany\fR, \&`\fBpassword\fR', `\fBkerberos_v5\fR', 
`\fBkerberos\fR' (非常に正確に言うと `\fBkerberos_v4\fR'), \fRgssapi\fR, 
\fIcram-md5\fR, \fIotp\fR, \fIntlm\fR, \fBssh\fR です。
.\"O When \fBany\fR (the
.\"O default) is specified, fetchmail tries first methods that don't
.\"O require a password (GSSAPI, KERBEROS_IV); then it looks for methods
.\"O that mask your password (CRAM-MD5, X-OTP, NTLM); and only if the server
.\"O doesn't support any of those will it ship your password en clair.
(デフォルトの) \fBany\fR を指定すると、
fetchmail は、まず最初にパスワードを必要としない方法
(GSSAPI, KERBEROS_IV) を試します。
次にパスワードを隠す方法 (CRAM-MD5, X-OTP, NTLM) を探します。
そして、サーバがこれらの方法のどれもサポートしていない場合にのみ、
パスワードを平文で渡します。
.\"O Other values may be used to force various authentication methods
.\"O (\fBssh\fR suppresses authentication).  
それ以外の値は、いろいろな認証方法を強制するために使われます
(\fBssh\fR は認証をさせないようにします)。
.\"O Any value other than
.\"O \fIpassword\fR, \fIcram-md5\fR, \fIntlm\fR or \fIotp\fR suppresses fetchmail's
.\"O normal inquiry for a password.  
\fIpassword\fR, \fIcram-md5\fR, \fIntlm\fR, \fIotp\fR 以外の値では、
fetchmail による通常のパスワード問い合わせをさせないようにします。
.\"O Specify \fIssh\fR when you are using
.\"O an end-to-end secure connection such as an ssh tunnel; 
ssh トンネルのような end-to-end の安全な接続を使っている場合に、
\fIssh\fR を指定して下さい。
.\"O specify
.\"O \fRgssapi\fR or \fBkerberos_v4\fR if you are using a protocol variant
.\"O that employs GSSAPI or K4.  
GSSAPI または K4 を使ったプロトコルを使っている場合は、
\fRgssapi\fR または \fBkerberos_v4\fR を指定して下さい。
.\"O Choosing KPOP protocol automatically
.\"O selects Kerberos authentication.  
KPOP プロトコルを選択すると自動的に Kerberos 認証が選択されます。
.\"O This option does not work with ETRN.
このオプションは ETRN では動作しません。
.\"O .SS Miscellaneous Options
.SS その他のオプション
.TP
.\"O .B \-f <pathname>, --fetchmailrc <pathname>
.B \-f <パス名>, --fetchmailrc <パス名>
.\"O Specify a non-default name for the 
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O run control file.  The pathname argument must be either "-" (a single
.\"O dash, meaning to read the configuration from standard input) or a
.\"O filename.  Unless the --version option is also on, a named file
.\"O argument must have permissions no more open than 0600 (u=rw,g=,o=) or
.\"O else be /dev/null.
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
実行制御ファイルとしてデフォルトでない名前を指定します。
<パス名> 引き数は "-"
(ダッシュ 1 つ、標準入力から設定を読み込むことを意味します)
またはファイル名でなければなりません。
同時に --version オプションも有効にしていない場合、
指定されたファイル引き数は
0600 (u=rw,g=,o=) 以外のパーミッションを持っているか、
そうでなければ /dev/null でなければなりません。
.TP
.\"O .B \-i <pathname>, --idfile <pathname>
.B \-i <パス名>, --idfile <パス名>
.\"O (Keyword: idfile)
(キーワード: idfile)
.\"O Specify an alternate name for the .fetchids file used to save POP3
.\"O UIDs. 
POP3 の UID を保存するために使う .fetchids ファイルに別の名前を指定します。
.TP
.B \-n, --norewrite
.\"O (Keyword: no rewrite)
(キーワード: no rewrite)
.\"O Normally,
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O edits RFC-822 address headers (To, From, Cc, Bcc, and Reply-To) in
.\"O fetched mail so that any mail IDs local to the server are expanded to
.\"O full addresses (@ and the mailserver hostname are appended).  This enables 
.\"O replies on the client to get addressed correctly (otherwise your
.\"O mailer might think they should be addressed to local users on the
.\"O client machine!).  This option disables the rewrite.  (This option is
.\"O provided to pacify people who are paranoid about having an MTA edit
.\"O mail headers and want to know they can prevent it, but it is generally
.\"O not a good idea to actually turn off rewrite.)
.\"O When using ETRN or ODMR, the rewrite option is ineffective.
通常、
.I fetchmail
は取得したメール中の RFC-822 のアドレスヘッダ
(To, From, Cc, Bcc, Reply-To) を編集し、
サーバに対してローカルなメールの ID が完全なアドレスに展開されます
(@ とメールサーバのホスト名が追加されます)。
これにより、クライアントにおけるリプライで
宛先を正しくすることが可能になります
(このようにしない場合、メーラはクライアントマシンの
ローカルユーザに送るべきだと考えるかもしれません!)。
このオプションはこの書き換えを無効にします。
(このオプションは、MTA がメールのヘッダを編集することに対して神経質で、
これを止められることを知りたい人々をなだめるために用意しています。
しかし一般的には、実際に書き換えを止めるのは良い考えではありません。)
ETRN や ODMR を使うときには、書き換えオプションは無効です。
.TP
.\"O .B -E <line>, --envelope <line>
.B -E <envelope 行>, --envelope <envelope 行>
.\"O (Keyword: envelope)
(キーワード: envelope)
.\"O This option changes the header 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O assumes will carry a copy of the mail's envelope address.  Normally
.\"O this is `X-Envelope-To' but as this header is not standard, practice
.\"O varies. See the discussion of multidrop address handling below.  As a
.\"O special case, `envelope "Received"' enables parsing of sendmail-style
.\"O Received lines.  This is the default, and it should not be necessary
.\"O unless you have globally disabled Received parsing with `no envelope'
.\"O in the \fI.fetchmailrc\fR file.
このオプションは、
.I fetchmail
がメールの envelope アドレスのコピーを運ぶと想定するヘッダを変更します。
通常これは `X-Envelope-To' ですが、これは標準ヘッダではないので、
実際には別のものになることがあります。
後述のマルチドロップアドレス処理に関する議論を参照してください。
特殊な場合として、`envelope "Received"' を設定すると
sendmail 形式の Received 行を処理することが可能になります。
このオプションはデフォルトですが、\fI.fetchmailrc\fR ファイルで
`no envelope' を使って Received の処理を動作全体で無効にしていなければ、
必ずしも必要はないはずです。
.TP
.\"O .B -Q <prefix>, --qvirtual <prefix>
.B -Q <プレフィックス>, --qvirtual <プレフィックス>
.\"O (Keyword: qvirtual)
(キーワード: qvirtual)
.\"O The string prefix assigned to this option will be removed from the user
.\"O name found in the header specified with the \fIenvelope\fR option
.\"O (\fIbefore\fR doing multidrop name mapping or localdomain checking,
.\"O if either is applicable). This option is useful if you are using  
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O to collect the mail for an entire domain and your ISP (or your mail
.\"O redirection provider) is using qmail.
.\"O One of the basic features of qmail is the
.\"O .sp
.\"O \&`Delivered-To:'
.\"O .sp
.\"O message header.  Whenever qmail delivers a message to a local mailbox
.\"O it puts the username and hostname of the envelope recipient on this
.\"O line.  The major reason for this is to prevent mail loops.  To set up
.\"O qmail to batch mail for a disconnected site the ISP-mailhost will have
.\"O normally put that site in its `Virtualhosts' control file so it will
.\"O add a prefix to all mail addresses for this site. This results in mail
.\"O .\" The \&@\& tries to stop HTML converters from making a mailto URL here.
.\"O sent to 'username\&@\&userhost.userdom.dom.com' having a
.\"O \&`Delivered-To:' line of the form:
.\"O .sp
.\"O Delivered-To: mbox-userstr-username\&@\&userhost.userdom.dom.com
.\"O .sp
.\"O The ISP can make the 'mbox-userstr-' prefix anything they choose
.\"O but a string matching the user host name is likely.
.\"O By using the option `envelope Delivered-To:' you can make fetchmail reliably
.\"O identify the original envelope recipient, but you have to strip the
.\"O `mbox-userstr-' prefix to deliver to the correct user.
.\"O This is what this option is for.
このオプションに割り当てられた文字列プレフィックスは、
\fIenvelope\fR オプションで指定されたヘッダ内で見つかった
ユーザ名から削除されます
(マルチドロップの名前マッチングか
ローカルドメインのチェックのどちらかが利用できる場合、
これらを行う\fI前\fRに削除が行われます)。
このオプションは
.I fetchmail
を使ってドメイン全体のメールを集めている場合と、
お使いの ISP (またはメール転送プロバイダ) が
qmail を使っている場合に便利です。
qmail の基本機能の 1 つに
.sp
\&`Delivered-To:'
.sp
があります。
qmail はローカルのメールボックスにメッセージを配達するときには必ず、
ユーザ名と envelope recipient のホスト名をこの行に書きます。
これは主にメールのループを防ぐために行います。
接続されていないサイトに一括でメールを送る qmail の設定を行うため、
ISP のメールホストはそのサイトを
`Virtualhosts' 制御ファイルに書いておくのが普通であり、
これによりそのサイト宛のメールアドレス全てにプレフィックスが追加されます。
.\" \&@\& は HTML コンバータが mailto URL をここに作らないようにします。
その結果、'username\&@\&userhost.userdom.dom.com' 宛に送られたメールの
\&`Delivered-To:' 行は以下のような形になります:
.sp
Delivered-To: mbox-userstr-username\&@\&userhost.userdom.dom.com
.sp
ISP は 'mbox-userstr-' プレフィックスを自由に決められますが、
よく選ばれるのはユーザのホスト名にマッチする文字列です。
オプション `envelope Delivered-To:' を使うことにより、
fetchmail に元の envelope recipient を識別させることが安全に行えますが、
正しいユーザにメールを配達するには `mbox-userstr-' プレフィックスを
取り除かなければなりません。
これがこのオプションの目的です。
.TP
.B --configdump
.\"O Parse the 
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O file, interpret any command-line options specified, and dump a
.\"O configuration report to standard output.  The configuration report is
.\"O a data structure assignment in the language Python.  This option
.\"O is meant to be used with an interactive 
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O editor like 
.\"O .IR fetchmailconf ,
.\"O written in Python.
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
を処理し、指定されたコマンドラインオプションを全て解釈し、
標準出力に設定情報を出力します。
設定情報は Python 言語のデータ構造配置になっています。
このオプションは
.I fetchmailconf
のような Python で書かれた対話的な
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
エディタと一緒に使うためのものです。

.\"O .SH USER AUTHENTICATION AND ENCRYPTION
.SH ユーザ認証と暗号化
.\"O All modes except ETRN require authentication of the client.
.\"O Normal user authentication in 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is very much like the authentication mechanism of 
.\"O .IR ftp (1).
.\"O The correct user-id and password depend upon the underlying security
.\"O system at the mailserver.  
ETRN を除く全てのモードではクライアントの認証が必要です。
.I fetchmail
における通常のユーザ認証は、
.IR ftp (1)
の認証機構によく似ています。
正しいユーザ ID とパスワードは、
メールサーバの内部的なセキュリティシステムに依存します。
.PP
.\"O If the mailserver is a Unix machine on which you have an ordinary user 
.\"O account, your regular login name and password are used with 
.\"O .I fetchmail.
メールサーバが、あなたが通常のユーザアカウントを持っている Unix マシンならば、
あなたがいつも使っているログイン名とパスワードを
.I fetchmail
でも使ってください。
.\"O If you use the same login name on both the server and the client machines,
.\"O you needn't worry about specifying a user-id with the 
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O option \-\- 
.\"O the default behavior is to use your login name on the client machine as the 
.\"O user-id on the server machine.  If you use a different login name
.\"O on the server machine, specify that login name with the
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O option.  e.g. if your login name is 'jsmith' on a machine named 'mailgrunt',
.\"O you would start 
.\"O .I fetchmail 
.\"O as follows:
サーバとクライアントの両方で同じログイン名を使っている場合、
.B \-u
オプションでわざわざユーザ ID を指定する必要はありません。
というのも、デフォルトの動作ではクライアントマシン上での
ログイン名をサーバマシンのユーザ ID として使うからです。
サーバマシンでは別のログイン名を使っている場合には、
.B \-u
オプションでログイン名を指定してください。
例えば、'mailgrunt' という名前のマシンでのログイン名が 'jsmith' である場合、
以下のようにして
.I fetchmail 
を起動することになるでしょう:
.IP
fetchmail -u jsmith mailgrunt
.PP
.\"O The default behavior of 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is to prompt you for your mailserver password before the connection is
.\"O established.  This is the safest way to use 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O and ensures that your password will not be compromised.  You may also specify
.\"O your password in your
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O file.  This is convenient when using 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O in daemon mode or with scripts.
.I fetchmail
のデフォルトの動作では、接続が確立される前に
ユーザにメールサーバのパスワードを問い合わせます。
これは最も安全に
.I fetchmail
を使う方法であり、パスワードも盗まれにくなります。
パスワードは
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
ファイルで指定することもできます。
これはデーモンモードやスクリプトで
.I fetchmail
を使う場合に便利です。
.PP
.\"O If you do not specify a password, and
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O cannot extract one from your
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O file, it will look for a 
.\"O .I ~/.netrc
.\"O file in your home directory before requesting one interactively; if an
.\"O entry matching the mailserver is found in that file, the password will
.\"O be used.  Fetchmail first looks for a match on poll name; if it finds none,
.\"O it checks for a match on via name.  See the
.\"O .IR ftp (1)
.\"O man page for details of the syntax of the
.\"O .I ~/.netrc
.\"O file.  (This feature may allow you to avoid duplicating password
.\"O information in more than one file.)
パスワードを指定されておらず、
.I fetchmail
が
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
ファイルからパスワードを展開できなかった場合、
.I fetchmail
は対話的にパスワードを聞く前にユーザのホームディレクトリの
.I ~/.netrc
ファイルを探します。
このファイル中に、ユーザのメールサーバにマッチするエントリがあった場合、
そのパスワードが使われます。
fetchmail は poll 名にマッチするものを最初に探します。
これが見つからなければ、via 名にマッチするものをチェックします。
.\"O この部分はめちゃめちゃあやしいっす(^_^;
.I ~/.netrc
ファイルの詳しい文法については、オンラインマニュアルの
.IR ftp (1)
を参照してください。
(この機能を使うと、複数のファイルにパスワード情報が
分かれることを避けることができます。)
.PP
.\"O On mailservers that do not provide ordinary user accounts, your user-id and 
.\"O password are usually assigned by the server administrator when you apply for 
.\"O a mailbox on the server.  Contact your server administrator if you don't know 
.\"O the correct user-id and password for your mailbox account.
通常のユーザアカウントを与えないメールサーバでは普通、
ユーザ ID とパスワードはサーバにメールボックスを与えるときに
サーバの管理者が割り当てます。
メールボックスのアカウント用の正しいユーザ ID とパスワードが分からなければ、
サーバの管理者に連絡しましょう。
.PP
.\"O Early versions of POP3 (RFC1081, RFC1225) supported a crude form of
.\"O independent authentication using the
.\"O .I rhosts
.\"O file on the mailserver side.  Under this RPOP variant, a fixed
.\"O per-user ID equivalent to a password was sent in clear over a link to
.\"O a reserved port, with the command RPOP rather than PASS to alert the
.\"O server that it should do special checking.  RPOP is supported
.\"O by
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O (you can specify `protocol RPOP' to have the program send `RPOP'
.\"O rather than `PASS') but its use is strongly discouraged.  This
.\"O facility was vulnerable to spoofing and was withdrawn in RFC1460.
古いバージョンの POP3 (RFC1081, RFC1225) は
メールサーバ側で
.I rhosts
を用いる大雑把な形式の独自の認証をサポートしていました。
この RPOP の変種では、パスワードと同等であるユーザごとの固定 ID は、
予約ポートとの接続上で平文のまま送信されていました。
このとき、PASS コマンドでなく RPOPコマンドを使って、
特殊なチェックが必要なことをサーバに知らせていました。
.I fetchmail
は RPOP をサポートしています
(`protocol RPOP' を指定すると、
fetchmail に `PASS' ではなく `RPOP' を送らせることができます) が、
これは使わないことを強くお勧めします。
この機能は盗聴に弱いため、RFC1460 において削除されました。
.PP
.\"O RFC1460 introduced APOP authentication.  In this variant of POP3,
.\"O you register an APOP password on your server host (the program
.\"O to do this with on the server is probably called \fIpopauth\fR(8)).  You
.\"O put the same password in your 
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O file.  Each time 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O logs in, it sends a cryptographically secure hash of your password and
.\"O the server greeting time to the server, which can verify it by
.\"O checking its authorization database. 
RFC1460 で APOP 認証が導入されました。
この POP3 の変種では、APOP パスワードをサーバホストに登録します
(サーバ上でこれを行うプログラムは、
たぶん \fIpopauth\fR(8) と呼ばれるものです)。
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
ファイルには、これと同じパスワードを書いてください。
.I fetchmail
がログインするたびに、パスワードとサーバにおけるグリーティング時刻の
暗号学的に安全なハッシュ値がサーバに送られます。
これは、認証データベースのチェックによって検査できます。
.PP
.\"O If your \fIfetchmail\fR was built with Kerberos support and you specify 
.\"O Kerberos authentication (either with --auth or the \fI.fetchmailrc\fR
.\"O option \fBauthenticate kerberos_v4\fR) it will try to get a Kerberos
.\"O ticket from the mailserver at the start of each query.  Note: if
.\"O either the pollnane or via name is `hesiod', fetchmail will try to use
.\"O Hesiod to look up the mailserver.
お使いの \fIfetchmail\fR が Kerberos のサポート付きで構築されており、
かつ Kerberos 認証を指定 (--auth か \fI.fetchmailrc\fR での
\fBauthenticate kerberos_v4\fR オプションを用います) した場合、
\fIfetchmail\fR は問い合わせ開始時に
毎回 Kerberos チケットを取得しようとします。
注意: poll 名か via 名のどちらかが `hesiod' ならば、
fetchmail はメールサーバの検索に Hesiod を使おうとします。
.PP
.\"O If you use POP3 or IMAP with GSSAPI authentication, \fIfetchmail\fR will
.\"O expect the server to have RFC1731- or RFC1734-conformant GSSAPI
.\"O capability, and will use it.  Currently this has only been tested over
.\"O Kerberos V, so you're expected to already have a ticket-granting
.\"O ticket. You may pass a username different from your principal name
.\"O using the standard \fB--user\fR command or by the \fI.fetchmailrc\fR
.\"O option \fBuser\fR.
GSSAPI 認証による POP3 や IMAP を使う場合、
\fIfetchmail\fR はサーバが RFC1731 または RFC1734 に準拠する
GSSAPI 機能を備えていると仮定して使用します。
現在、この機能は Kerberos V 上でしかテストされていないので、
既に tiket-granting チケットを持っていることを仮定します。
標準の \fB--user\fR コマンドや \fI.fetchmailrc\fR の \fBuser\fR オプションを
使って、主に使っている名前とは別のユーザ名を渡すことができます。
.\"O Kerberos 用語は全滅状態…(^_^;
.PP
.\"O If your IMAP daemon returns the PREAUTH response in its greeting line, 
.\"O fetchmail will notice this and skip the normal authentication step.
.\"O This can be useful, e.g. if you start imapd explicitly using ssh.
.\"O In this case you can declare the authentication value `ssh' on that
.\"O site entry to stop \fI.fetchmail\fR from asking you for a password
.\"O when it starts up.
お使いの IMAP デーモンがグリーティング行で
PREAUTH レスポンスを返した場合には、
fetchmail はこれを通知して、通常の認証手順を飛ばします。
これは例えば ssh を明示的に用いて imapd を起動している場合などに便利です。
この場合、\fIfetchmail\fR が起動したときに
パスワードを問い合わせるのを止めさせるために、
そのサイトでの認証の値 `ssh' を宣言できます。
.PP
.\"O If you are using POP3, and the server issues a one-time-password
.\"O challenge conforming to RFC1938, \fIfetchmail\fR will use your
.\"O password as a pass phrase to generate the required response. This
.\"O avoids sending secrets over the net unencrypted.
POP3 を使う場合には、サーバは RFC1938 準拠の
使い捨てパスワードのチャレンジ文字列を発行し、
\fIfetchmail\fR はユーザのパスワードをパスフレーズとして使って、
必要とされるレスポンス文字列を生成します。
これにより、ネットワーク上に
暗号化されていない機密情報を流すことを避けることができます。
.PP
.\"O Compuserve's RPA authentication (similar to APOP) is supported. If you
.\"O compile in the support, \fIfetchmail\fR will try to perform an RPA pass-phrase
.\"O authentication instead of sending over the password en clair if it
.\"O detects "@compuserve.com" in the hostname.
Compuserve の RPA 認証 (APOP に似ています) がサポートされています。
このサポートを組み込んでいる場合、
ホスト名の中に "@compuserve.com" が見つかると、
\fIfetchmail\fR はパスワードを平文で送らず、
RPA パスフレーズを用いた認証を実行しようとします。
.PP
.\"O If you are using IMAP, Microsoft's NTLM authentication (used by Microsoft
.\"O Exchange) is supported. If you compile in the support, \fIfetchmail\fR
.\"O will try to perform an NTLM authentication (instead of sending over the
.\"O password en clair) whenever the server returns AUTH=NTLM in its
.\"O capability response. Specify a user option value that looks like
.\"O `user@domain': the part to the left of the @ will be passed as the
.\"O username and the part to the right as the NTLM domain.
IMAP を使っている場合、
(Microsoft Exchange が使う) Microsoft の NTLM 認証 がサポートされます。
このサポートを組み込んでいる場合、サーバが機能を示す応答で
「AUTH=NTLM」を返すと、\fIfetchmail\fR は (パスワードを平文で送らないで)
NTLM 認証を実行しようとします。
「ユーザ名@ドメイン名」の形で user オプションを指定してください:
「@」の左の部分はユーザ名として渡され、
「@」の右の部分は NTLM ドメインとして渡されます。
.PP
.\"O If you are using IPsec, the -T (--netsec) option can be used to pass
.\"O an IP security request to be used when outgoing IP connections are
.\"O initialized.  You can also do this using the `netsec' server option
.\"O in the .fetchmailrc file.  In either case, the option value is a
.\"O string in the format accepted by the net_security_strtorequest() 
.\"O function of the inet6_apps library.
IPsec を使っている場合には、-T (--netsec) オプションを使うと、
外向きの IP 接続が初期化されるときに使われる
IP セキュリティリクエストを渡すことができます。
これは .fetchmailrc ファイルで `netsec' サーバオプションを
使って行うこともできます。
どちらの場合でも、オプションの値は
inet6_apps ライブラリの net_security_strtorequest() 関数が受け付ける
フォーマットの文字列です。
.PP
.\"O You can access SSL encrypted services by specifying the --ssl option.
--ssl オプションを使うと SSL で暗号化されたサービスにアクセスできます。
.\"O You can also do this using the "ssl" server option in the .fetchmailrc
.\"O file.  With SSL encryption enabled, queries are initiated over a connection
.\"O after negotiating an SSL session.  Some services, such as POP3 and IMAP,
.\"O have different well known ports defined for the SSL encrypted services.
これは .fetchmailrc ファイルで "ssl" サーバオプションを使っても行えます。
SSL による暗号化を有効にすると、
SSL セッションの調停の後に SSL 接続上で問い合わせが行われます。
POP3 や IMAP といった一部のサービスでは、
SSL による暗号化サービスのために標準プロトコルとは別に
既知のポートが定義されています。
.\"O The encrypted ports will be selected automatically when SSL is enabled and
.\"O no explicit port is specified.
SSL が有効にされており、かつ明示的にポートが指定されていなければ、
暗号化通信のポートは自動的に選択されます。
.PP
.\"O When connecting to an SSL encrypted server, the server presents a certificate
.\"O to the client for validation.  The certificate is checked to verify that
.\"O the common name in the certificate matches the name of the server being
.\"O contacted and that the effective and expiration dates in the certificate
.\"O indicate that it is currently valid.  If any of these checks fail, a warning
.\"O message is printed, but the connection continues.  The server certificate
.\"O does not need to be signed by any specific Certifying Authority and may
.\"O be a "self-signed" certificate.
SSL による暗号化を行うサーバに接続するとき、
サーバは身元確認のためにクライアントに証明書を示します。
証明書はチェックされ、接続しようとしているサーバの名前が
証明書の中の標準名と一致することと、
証明書に書かれている有効期限によると
現在証明書が有効であることが確かめられます。
どちらかのチェックが失敗すると警告メッセージが表示されますが、
接続は継続されます。
サーバの証明書は特定の認証機関 (CA, Certification Authority) によって
署名されている必要はありませんし、
「自分で署名した」証明書であってもかまいません。
.PP
.\"O Some SSL encrypted servers may request a client side certificate.  A client
.\"O side public SSL certificate and private SSL key may be specified.  If
.\"O requested by the server, the client certificate is sent to the server for
.\"O validation.  Some servers may require a valid client certificate and may
.\"O refuse connections if a certificate is not provided or if the certificate
.\"O is not valid.  Some servers may require client side certificates be signed
.\"O by a recognized Certifying Authority.  The format for the key files and
.\"O the certificate files is that required by the underlying SSL libraries
.\"O (OpenSSL in the general case).
SSL による暗号化を行うサーバによっては、
クライアント側の証明書を要求することがあります。
クライアント側の公開 SSL 証明書と秘密 SSL 鍵を指定できます。
サーバが証明書を要求したら、クライアントの証明書は
身元確認のためにサーバに送られます。
サーバによっては正当なクライアントの証明書を要求し、
証明書が送られないか正当でなければ接続を拒否するものがあります。
サーバによっては、認められている認証機関よる署名が
クライアント側の証明書になされていることが必要なものもあります。
鍵ファイルと証明書ファイルのフォーマットは、
内部的に動作している SSL ライブラリが必要とする形式
(一般的には OpenSSL) です。
.PP
.\"O Finally, a word of care about the use of SSL: While above mentioned
.\"O setup with self-signed server certificates retrieved over the wires
.\"O can protect you from a passive eavesdropper it doesn't help against an
.\"O active attacker. It's clearly an improvement over sending the
.\"O passwords in clear but you should be aware that a man-in-the-middle
.\"O attack is trivially possible (in particular with tools such as dsniff,
.\"O http://www.monkey.org/~dugsong/dsniff/).  Use of an ssh tunnel (see
.\"O below for some examples) is preferable if you care seriously about the
.\"O security of your mailbox.
最後に、SSL の使用について注意書きをします :
ネットワーク越しに自分で署名したサーバの証明書を取得するという
上で述べたような設定では、
消極的な盗み聞きをする相手からは守れますが、
積極的に攻撃してくる相手から守るための助けにはなりません。
パスワードを平文で送るのに比べれば、かなり改善されますが、
中継点にいる相手からの攻撃は
(http://www.monkey.org/~dugsong/dsniff/ にある
dsniff のようなツールを使うと特に)
簡単に可能であることを知っておかなければなりません。
自分のメールボックスのセキュリティを真剣に考えるなら、
ssh トンネル (下記の例を参照) をお勧めします。

.\"O .SH DAEMON MODE
.SH デーモンモード
.\"O The 
.\"O .B --daemon <interval>
.\"O or
.\"O .B -d <interval>
.\"O option runs 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O in daemon mode.  You must specify a numeric argument which is a
.\"O polling interval in seconds.
.B --daemon <間隔>
または
.B -d <間隔>
を使うと
.I fetchmail
をデーモンモードで実行できます。
引き数として、ポーリングの時間間隔を秒数で指定しなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O In daemon mode, 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O puts itself in background and runs forever, querying each specified
.\"O host and then sleeping for the given polling interval.
デーモンモードでは、
.I fetchmail
は自分自身をバックグラウンドでずっと動作させます。
つまり、指定された各ホストへの問い合わせと、
指定された時間のスリープを繰り返します。
.PP
.\"O Simply invoking
.\"O .IP
.\"O fetchmail -d 900
.\"O .PP
.\"O will, therefore, poll all the hosts described in your 
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O file (except those explicitly excluded with the `skip' verb) once
.\"O every fifteen minutes.
したがって、単に
.IP
fetchmail -d 900
.PP
を実行すると、
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
に記述された全てのホスト
(キーワード `skip' で明示的に除外されたホストは除きます) に対して
15 分ごとに 1 回ポーリングを行います。
.PP
.\"O It is possible to set a polling interval 
.\"O in your
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O file by saying `set daemon <interval>', where <interval> is an
.\"O integer number of seconds.  If you do this, fetchmail will always
.\"O start in daemon mode unless you override it with the command-line
.\"O option --daemon 0 or -d0.
`set daemon <interval>' を
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
ファイルに書くことでポーリング間隔を設定することが可能です。
ここで、<interval> は秒数を表す整数値です。
これを行うと、コマンドラインオプションの
--daemon 0 または -d0 で上書きしない限り、
fetchmail は必ずデーモンモードで起動します。
.PP
.\"O Only one daemon process is permitted per user; in daemon mode,
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O makes a per-user lockfile to guarantee this.
ユーザあたり 1 つのデーモンプロセスしか許されません。
デーモンモードでは、
.I fetchmail
はユーザ単位のロックファイルを作成してこれを保証します。
.PP
.\"O Normally, calling fetchmail with a daemon in the background sends a
.\"O wakeup signal to the daemon, forcing it to poll mailservers
.\"O immediately.  (The wakeup signal is SIGHUP if fetchmail is running as
.\"O root, SIGUSR1 otherwise.)  The wakeup action also clears any `wedged'
.\"O flags indicating that connections have wedged due to failed 
.\"O authentication or multiple timeouts.
通常は、バックグラウンドでデーモンを動作している時に fetchmail を呼び出すと、
デーモンに対して起動のシグナルを送信し、
即座にメールサーバにポーリングさせることができます。
(fatchmali を root で実行していれば起動シグナルは SIGHUP で、
それ以外のユーザであれば SIGUSR1 です。)
起動の動作では、認証の失敗や複数回のタイムアウトによって
接続が「刺さっている」ことを示すフラグが全てクリアされます。
.PP
.\"O The option
.\"O .B --quit
.\"O will kill a running daemon process instead of waking it up (if there
.\"O is no such process,
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O notifies you).  If the --quit option is the only command-line option,
.\"O that's all there is to it.
オプション
.B --quit
は、デーモンを起動させるのではなく、動作しているデーモンを殺します
(そのようなプロセスが無ければ
.I fetchmail
が知らせてくれます)。
--quit オプションが唯一のコマンドラインオプションならば、
この動作だけを行います。
.PP
.\"O The quit option may also be mixed with other command-line options; its
.\"O effect is to kill any running daemon before doing what the other
.\"O options specify in combination with the rc file.
quit オプションは他のコマンドラインオプションと一緒に使うこともできます。
この場合の動作としては、他のオプションと実行制御ファイルを組み合わせて
指定されていることを行う前に、動作しているデーモンを全て殺します。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B -L <filename>
.\"O or
.\"O .B --logfile <filename>
.\"O option (keyword: set logfile) allows you to redirect status messages
.\"O emitted while detached into a specified logfile (follow the
.\"O option with the logfile name).  The logfile is opened for append, so
.\"O previous messages aren't deleted.  This is primarily useful for
.\"O debugging configurations.
.B -L <ファイル名>
または
.B --logfile <ファイル名>
オプション (キーワード: set logfile) を使うと、
端末と切り離されている間に発生した状態メッセージを、
指定されたログファイル (オプションの後にログファイル名を続けてください) に
リダイレクトすることができます。
ログファイルは追加モードでオープンされるので、
以前のメッセージは削除されません。
このオプションは主にデバッグ用の設定の場合に役に立ちます。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B --syslog
.\"O option (keyword: set syslog) allows you to redirect status and error
.\"O messages emitted to the
.\"O .IR syslog (3)
.\"O system daemon if available.
.B --syslog
オプション (キーワード: set syslog) を使うと、
可能であれば、発生した状態メッセージとエラーメッセージを
.IR syslog (3)
システムデーモンに送ります。
.\"O Messages are logged with an id of \fBfetchmail\fR, the facility \fBLOG_MAIL\fR,
.\"O and priorities \fBLOG_ERR\fR, \fBLOG_ALERT\fR or \fBLOG_INFO\fR.
.\"O This option is intended for logging status and error messages which
.\"O indicate the status of the daemon and the results while fetching mail
.\"O from the server(s).
メッセージは \fBfetchmail\fR の ID, \fBLOG_MAIL\fR の機能、
\fBLOG_ERR\fR, \fBLOG_ALERT\fR, \fBLOG_INFO\fR
いずれかの優先度と一緒に記録されます。
このオプションは、サーバからメールを取得している間のデーモンの状態と
結果を示す状態メッセージとエラーメッセージを記録するためのものです。
.\"O Error messages for command line options and parsing the \fI.fetchmailrc\fR
.\"O file are still written to stderr, or to the specified log file.
この場合でも、コマンドラインオプションと \fI.fetchmailrc\fR の処理に対する
エラーメッセージは標準エラー出力か指定されたログファイルに書かれます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B --nosyslog
.\"O option turns off use of 
.\"O .IR syslog (3),
.\"O assuming it's turned on in the 
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc  
.\"O file, or that the
.\"O .B -L
.\"O or
.\"O .B --logfile <file>
.\"O option was used.
.B --nosyslog
オプションは、これが
.I ~/.fetchmailrc 
内で有効にされているか、
.B -L <ファイル名>
または
.B --logfile <ファイル名>
オプションが使われているものとして
.IR syslog (3)
の使用を無効にします。
.PP
.\"O The 
.\"O .B \-N
.\"O or --nodetach option suppresses backgrounding and detachment of the
.\"O daemon process from its control terminal.  This is primarily useful
.\"O for debugging.  Note that this also causes the logfile option to be
.\"O ignored (though perhaps it shouldn't).
.B \-N
または
--nodetach
オプションは、デーモンプロセスの制御端末からの
バックグラウンド化や切り離しを止めます。
これは主にデバッグ時に有効です。
このオプションは logfile オプションも無効にしてしまう点に注意してください
(たぶんこれではいけないのですが)。
.PP
.\"O Note that while running in daemon mode polling a POP2 or IMAP2bis server,
.\"O transient errors (such as DNS failures or sendmail delivery refusals)
.\"O may force the fetchall option on for the duration of the next polling
.\"O cycle.  This is a robustness feature.  It means that if a message is
.\"O fetched (and thus marked seen by the mailserver) but not delivered
.\"O locally due to some transient error, it will be re-fetched during the
.\"O next poll cycle.  (The IMAP logic doesn't delete messages until
.\"O they're delivered, so this problem does not arise.)
デーモンモードで動作して POP2 や IMAP2bis サーバに対して
ポーリングしている時には、
一時的エラー (DNS 参照失敗や sendmail の配送拒否など) が起こると
次のポーリング周期の間には fetchall オプションが有効となります。
これは頑健さを実現する機能です。
つまり、メッセージを取得できた
(そしてメールサーバでは既読の印が付けられた) けれど、
一時的エラーのためにローカルでは配送されなかった場合、
そのメールは次のポーリング周期のときに再び取得されます。
(IMAP の仕組みではメッセージは配達されるまで消去されません。
したがって、このような問題は起こりません。)
.PP
.\"O If you touch or change the 
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc 
.\"O file while fetchmail is running in daemon mode, this will be detected 
.\"O at the beginning of the next poll cycle.  When a changed
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc  
.\"O is detected, fetchmail rereads it and restarts from scratch (using
.\"O exec(2); no state information is retained in the new instance).  Note also
.\"O that if you break the
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc  
.\"O file's syntax, the new instance will softly and silently vanish away
.\"O on startup.
fetchmail がデーモンモードで動作している時に
.I ~/.fetchmailrc 
ファイルを touch したり変更すると、これは次回のポーリングが始まる時に
検出されます。
.I ~/.fetchmailrc 
の変更が検出されると、fetchmail はこのファイルを読み込み直し、
自分自身を最初から起動し直します
(exec(2) を使います。
新しく動作する fetchmail には、状態に関するそれまでの情報は一切残りません)。
.I ~/.fetchmailrc 
ファイルの文法に違反していると、
新しい fetchmail は起動時に黙って静かに消えてしまうでしょう。

.\"O .SH ADMINISTRATIVE OPTIONS
.SH 管理用オプション
.PP
.\"O The 
.\"O .B --postmaster <name>
.\"O option (keyword: set postmaster) specifies the last-resort username to
.\"O which multidrop mail is to be forwarded if no matching local recipient
.\"O can be found.  Normally this is just the user who invoked fetchmail.
.\"O If the invoking user is root, then the default of this option is
.\"O the user `postmaster'.  Setting postmaster to the empty string causes
.\"O such mail to be discarded.
.B --postmaster <ユーザ名>
オプション (キーワード: set postmaster) は、
ローカルでメールを受け取る適切なユーザが見つからなかった場合に、
マルチドロップメールが転送される最終地点になるユーザ名を指定します。
通常、これは単に fetchmail を起動したユーザです。
起動したユーザが root であれば、
このオプションのデフォルト値はユーザ `postmaster' になります。
postmaster のユーザ名を空の文字列に設定すると、このようなメールは破棄されます。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B --nobounce
.\"O option suppresses the normal action of bouncing errors back to the 
.\"O sender in an RFC1894-conformant error message.  If nobounce is on, the
.\"O message will go to the postmaster instead.
.B --nobounce
オプションは、RFC1894 準拠のエラーメッセージのうち、
送信者に戻される差戻しエラー (bouncing error) の通常の動作を止めます。
nobounce が有効な場合、メッセージは送信者ではなく postmaster に送られます。
.PP
.\"O The 
.\"O .B --invisible
.\"O option (keyword: set invisible) tries to make fetchmail invisible.
.\"O Normally, fetchmail behaves like any other MTA would -- it generates a
.\"O Received header into each message describing its place in the chain of
.\"O transmission, and tells the MTA it forwards to that the mail came from
.\"O the machine fetchmail itself is running on.  If the invisible option
.\"O is on, the Received header is suppressed and fetchmail tries to spoof
.\"O the MTA it forwards to into thinking it came directly from the
.\"O mailserver host.
.B --invisible
オプション (キーワード: set invisible) は fetchmail を見えなくしようとします。
通常、fetchmail は他の MTA と同じように振舞います。
つまり、送信の経路が記述されている Received ヘッダをメッセージ全てに書き込み、
転送先の MTA に、fetchmail そのものが実行されているマシンから
メールが来たことを知らせます。
invisible オプションが有効である場合は、
Received ヘッダは付けられず、fetchmail は転送先の MTA をだまして、
メールがメールサーバのホストから直接届いたと思わせようとします。
.PP
.\"O The 
.\"O .B --showdots
.\"O option (keyword: set showdots) forces fetchmail to show progress dots
.\"O even if the current tty is not stdout (for example logfiles).
.\"O Starting with fetchmail version 5.3.0, 
.\"O progress dots are only shown on stdout by default.
.B --showdots
オプション (キーワード: set showdots) は、
たとえ現在の端末 (tty) が標準出力でない場合
(例えばログファイルの場合) でも、進捗状況を表すドットを表示する。
fetchmail バージョン 5.3.0 を起動した場合、
デフォルトでは進捗状況を表すドットは標準出力にしか表示されません。
.PP
.\"O By specifying the
.\"O .B --tracepolls
.\"O option, you can ask fetchmail to add information to the Received
.\"O header on the form "polling {label} account {user}", where {label} is
.\"O the account label (from the specified rcfile, normally ~/.fetchmailrc)
.\"O and {user} is the username which is used to log on to the mail
.\"O server. This header can be used to make filtering email where no
.\"O useful header information is available and you want mail from
.\"O different accounts sorted into different mailboxes (this could, for
.\"O example, occur if you have an account on the same server running a
.\"O mailing list, and are subscribed to the list using that account). The
.\"O default is not adding any such header.  In
.\"O .IR .fetchmailrc , 
.\"O this is called `tracepolls'.
.B --tracepolls
オプションを指定することにより、fetchmail に対して
"polling {label} account {user}" という形式の情報を
Received ヘッダに加えるように指示することができます。
ここで、{label} は (指定された設定ファイル、
通常は ~/.fetchmailrc での) アカウントラベルです。
また、{user} はメールサーバにログオンするためのユーザ名です。
このヘッダは、役立つヘッダ情報のない E メールをフィルタリングしたり、
アカウント毎のメールを別々のメールボックスに
ソートして入れるのに使うことができます
(例えば、メーリングリストが運営されているサーバにアカウントがあり、
そのアカウントを使ってメーリングリストを購読している場合に
使うことができます)。
デフォルトでは、このようなヘッダは追加されません。
これは
.I .fetchmailrc
では `tracepolls' というキーワードになります。

.\"O .SH RETRIEVAL FAILURE MODES
.SH 取得失敗モード
.\"O The protocols \fIfetchmail\fR uses to talk to mailservers are next to
.\"O bulletproof.  In normal operation forwarding to port 25, no message is
.\"O ever deleted (or even marked for deletion) on the host until the SMTP
.\"O listener on the client side has acknowledged to \fIfetchmail\fR that
.\"O the message has been either accepted for delivery or rejected due to a
.\"O spam block.
\fIfetchmail\fR がメールサーバと対話する際に使うプロトコルは、かなり安全です。
25 番ポートへの転送を行う通常の操作では、
クライアント上の SMTP 受信プログラムが \fIfetchmail\fR に対して
配送するメッセージを受け取ったことを知らせたり、
スパム防御のために拒否したりするまでは、
(削除の印が付いていたとしても) ホスト上のいかなるメッセージも消されません。
.PP
.\"O When forwarding to an MDA, however, there is more possibility
.\"O of error.  Some MDAs are `safe' and reliably return a nonzero status
.\"O on any delivery error, even one due to temporary resource limits.
しかし、MDA に転送する時には、エラーの可能性はずっと高くなります
MDA のなかには「安全」なものもあり、
配送エラーの場合や一時的なリソース資源を使い果たした場合にも、
0 以外のステータスを必ず返してくれます。
.\"O The well-known
.\"O .IR procmail (1)
.\"O program is like this; so are most programs designed as mail transport
.\"O agents, such as 
.\"O .IR sendmail (1),
.\"O and
.\"O .IR exim (1).
有名な
.IR procmail (1)
プログラムは、このような動作をします。
.IR sendmail (1)
や
.IR exim (1)
のようなメール転送エージェントとしてデザインされた大部分のプログラムも、
このような動作をします。
.\"O These programs give back a reliable positive acknowledgement and
.\"O can be used with the mda option with no risk of mail loss.  Unsafe
.\"O MDAs, though, may return 0 even on delivery failure.  If this
.\"O happens, you will lose mail.
これらのプログラムは信頼できる積極的な返答を返してくれるので、
メールを失うリスクを負うことなく、
mda オプションをつけて使うことができます。
しかし安全でない MDA では、配送が失敗した場合でも 0 を返します。
このような事が起これば、メールがなくなるでしょう。
.PP
.\"O The normal mode of \fIfetchmail\fR is to try to download only `new'
.\"O messages, leaving untouched (and undeleted) messages you have already
.\"O read directly on the server (or fetched with a previous \fIfetchmail
.\"O --keep\fR).  But you may find that messages you've already read on the
.\"O server are being fetched (and deleted) even when you don't specify
.\"O --all.  There are several reasons this can happen.
\fIfetchmail\fR の通常モードは、
「新しい」メッセージだけをダウンロードしようとし、
サーバから既に直接読み出した
(あるいは、以前に \fIfetchmail --keep\fR を使って受け取った)
メールには関与しません (削除もしません)。
しかし、--all を指定していない場合でさえ、サーバ上にある
既読のメールが取得される (そして削除される) ことがあることに
お気づきになるでしょう。
このようなことが起こる理由はいくつかあります。
.PP
.\"O One could be that you're using POP2.  The POP2 protocol includes no
.\"O representation of `new' or `old' state in messages, so \fIfetchmail\fR
.\"O must treat all messages as new all the time.  But POP2 is obsolete, so
.\"O this is unlikely.
まず POP2 を使っている場合が考えられます。
POP2 プロトコルには、メッセージの「新規」や「既読」の状態を
表現する方法がありません。
したがって、\fIfetchmail\fR は必ず全てのメッセージを
新しいものとして扱わなければなりません。
しかし、POP2 は古くて使われなくなっているので、
これが原因のことはあまりないでしょう。
.PP
.\"O Under POP3, blame RFC1725.  That version of the POP3 protocol
.\"O specification removed the LAST command, and some POP servers follow it
.\"O (you can verify this by invoking \fIfetchmail -v\fR to the mailserver
.\"O and watching the response to LAST early in the query).  The
.\"O \fIfetchmail\fR code tries to compensate by using POP3's UID feature,
.\"O storing the identifiers of messages seen in each session until the
.\"O next session, in the \fI.fetchids\fR file.  But this doesn't track
.\"O messages seen with other clients, or read directly with a mailer on
.\"O the host but not deleted afterward.  A better solution would be to
.\"O switch to IMAP.
POP3 の場合には、RFC1725 を恨んでください。
このバージョンの POP3 プロトコルの仕様では
LAST コマンドが無くなっているのですが、
一部の POP サーバがこれに準拠しているのです
(これを調べるには、メールサーバに対して \fIfetchmail -v\fR を実行して、
問い合わせの最初の方で行われる LAST コマンドへの応答を見てください)。
\fIfetchmail\fR のコードでは
POP3 の UID 機能を使って埋め合わせをしようとしています。
これは、それぞれのセッションで見たメッセージの識別子を、
次のセッションまで \fI.fetchids\fR に保存しておくという方法です。
しかしこの方法では、他のクライアントで見たメッセージや、
ホスト上のメーラで直接読まれたけれど
その後で消されていないメッセージまでは追いかけられません。
IMAP に乗り換える方がいいでしょう。
.PP
.\"O Another potential POP3 problem might be servers that insert messages
.\"O in the middle of mailboxes (some VMS implementations of mail are
.\"O rumored to do this).  The \fIfetchmail\fR code assumes that new
.\"O messages are appended to the end of the mailbox; when this is not true
.\"O it may treat some old messages as new and vice versa.  The only 
.\"O real fix for this problem is to  switch to IMAP.
他に起こる可能性がある POP3 の問題として、
メールボックスの途中にメッセージを挿入するサーバが考えられます
(VMS のメールの実装の一部に、このようなものがあると言われています)。
\fIfetchmail\fR のコードでは、
新しいメールはメールボックスの最後に追加されることを想定しています。
これが成り立っていなければ、
古いメッセージの一部が新しいものとして扱われることがありますし、
その逆も起こります。
この問題を真っ当に解決する唯一の方法は、IMAP に乗り換えることです。
.PP
.\"O Yet another POP3 problem is that if they can't make tempfiles in the
.\"O user's home directory, some POP3 servers will hand back an
.\"O undocumented response that causes fetchmail to spuriously report "No
.\"O mail".
POP3 の別の問題として、
ユーザのホームディレクトリに一時ファイルが作成できない場合に、
一部の POP3 サーバは文書化されていない応答を返すため、
fetchmail が間違って「No mail」と報告してしまうことがあります。
.PP
.\"O The IMAP code uses the presence or absence of the server flag \eSeen
.\"O to decide whether or not a message is new.  Under Unix, it counts on
.\"O your IMAP server to notice the BSD-style Status flags set by mail user
.\"O agents and set the \eSeen flag from them when appropriate.  All Unix
.\"O IMAP servers we know of do this, though it's not specified by the IMAP
.\"O RFCs.  If you ever trip over a server that doesn't, the symptom will
.\"O be that messages you have already read on your host will look new to
.\"O the server.  In this (unlikely) case, only messages you fetched with
.\"O \fIfetchmail --keep\fR will be both undeleted and marked old.
IMAP のコードでは、サーバ上の \eSeen の有無を使って
メッセージが新しいかどうかを決めています。
Unix の場合、fetchmail は IMAP サーバがメールユーザエージェントが設定した
BSD 形式の Status フラグに注目し、
適当な時にこれらを使って \eSeen フラグを設定することを期待します。
これは IMAP の RFC の仕様にはありませんが、
我々が知る限りの Unix 用 IMAP サーバは全てこれを行います。
これを行わないサーバでつまずいたときには、
ホスト上の既読のメッセージが
サーバには新しく見えると言った症状が現われるでしょう。
この場合 (あまり起こりませんが) には、\fIfetchmail --keep\fR で
取得したメッセージだけが消されず、かつ既読の印が付けられます。
.PP
.\"O In ETRN and ODMR modes, \fIfetchmail\fR does not actually retrieve messages;
.\"O instead, it asks the server's SMTP listener to start a queue flush
.\"O to the client via SMTP.  Therefore it sends only undelivered messages.
ETRN と ODMR モードでは、\fIfetchmail\fR は実際にはメールを取得しません。
その代わりに、サーバの SMTP リスナに対して、
クライアントに SMTP 経由のキューのフラッシュを開始するように指示します。
したがって、未配送のメッセージしか送りません。

.\"O .SH SPAM FILTERING
.SH スパムフィルタリング
.\"O Many SMTP listeners allow administrators to set up `spam filters' that
.\"O block unsolicited email from specified domains.  A MAIL FROM or DATA line that
.\"O triggers this feature will elicit an SMTP response which
.\"O (unfortunately) varies according to the listener.
SMTP リスナの多くでは、指定したドメインから送られてくる不要なメールを
ブロックする「スパムフィルタ (spam filter)」を管理者が設定できます。
この機能を呼び出す MAIL FROM あるいは DATA 行は、
(残念なことに) リスナによって異なる SMTP の応答を引き出します。
.PP
.\"O Newer versions of 
.\"O .I sendmail
.\"O return an error code of 571.  This return value
.\"O is blessed by RFC1893 as "Delivery not authorized, message refused".
最近のバージョンの
.I sendmail
はエラーコード 571 を返します。
この返し値は RFC1893 によって "Delivery not authorized, message refused"
として与えられています。
.PP
.\"O According to current drafts of the replacement for RFC821, the correct
.\"O thing to return in this situation is 550 "Requested action not taken:
.\"O mailbox unavailable" (the draft adds "[E.g., mailbox not found, no
.\"O access, or command rejected for policy reasons].").
RFC821 から置き換えられた現在のドラフトによると、
このような状況で返すべき正しい値は、
550 "Requested action not taken: mailbox unavailable" 
とされています
(このドラフトでは "[E.g., mailbox not found, no access, or
command rejected for policy reasons]." を追加しています)。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I exim
.\"O MTA returns 501 "Syntax error in parameters or arguments", but will
.\"O move to 550 soon.
.I exim
という MTA は 501 "Syntax error in parameters or arguments" を返しますが、
これはもうすぐ 550 に変更されます。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I postfix
.\"O MTA runs 554 as an antispam response.
.I postfix
という MTA はスパム拒否の応答として 554 を返します。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O code recognizes and discards the message on any of a list of responses
.\"O that defaults to [571, 550, 501, 554] but can be set with the `antispam'
.\"O option.  This is one of the
.\"O .I only
.\"O three circumstance under which fetchmail ever discards mail (the others
.\"O are the 552 and 553 errors described below, and the suppression of
.\"O multidropped messages with a message-ID already seen).
fetchmail のコードは応答のリストのいずれかに該当するメッセージを
認識・破棄します。
このリストはデフォルトでは [571, 550, 501, 554] ですが、
`antispam' オプションを使って設定することができます。
fetchmail がメールを破棄してしまう状況は
.I 3 つしか
ありませんが、これはそのうちの 1 つです
(残りは後述の 552, 553 エラーの場合と、
マルチドロップされたメッセージで
既に処理されているメッセージ ID を持つものを破棄する場合です)。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is fetching from an IMAP server, the antispam response will be detected and
.\"O the message rejected immediately after the headers have been fetched,
.\"O without reading the message body.  Thus, you won't pay for downloading 
.\"O spam message bodies.
.I fetchmail
が IMAP サーバからメールを取得する場合に antispam の応答が検出されると、
antispam ヘッダを取得した後、メッセージ本体を読むことなく
即座にメッセージを拒否します。
したがって、spam メッセージの本体をダウンロードする分の
課金を支払うことはありません。
.PP
.\"O If the \fIspambounce\fR option is on, mail that is spam-blocked
.\"O triggers an RFC1892 bounce message informing the originator that we do
.\"O not accept mail from it.
\fIspambounce\fR オプションが有効になっている場合に、
メールがスパム防御を受けると、差出人にメールを受け取らなかったことを知らせる
RFC1892 の差戻しメッセージが送られます。

.\"O .SH SMTP/ESMTP ERROR HANDLING
.SH SMTP/ESMTP のエラー処理
.\"O Besides the spam-blocking described above, fetchmail takes special
.\"O actions on the following SMTP/ESMTP error responses
先程説明したスパム防御以外にも、
fetchmail は以下の SMTP/ESMTP のエラー応答に対して特殊な動作を行います:
.TP 5
.\"O 452 (insufficient system storage)
.\"O Leave the message in the server mailbox for later retrieval.
452 (システムのディスクが不十分です)
後で取得できるようにサーバのメールボックスにメッセージを残します。
.TP 5
.\"O 552 (message exceeds fixed maximum message size)
.\"O Delete the message from the server.  Send bounce-mail to the
.\"O originator.
552 (メッセージが固定の最大メッセージサイズを越えました)
サーバからメッセージを削除します。差出人に差戻しメールを送ります。
.TP 5
.\"O 553 (invalid sending domain)
.\"O Delete the message from the server.  Send bounce-mail to the originator.
553 (送信ドメインが不正です)
サーバからメッセージを削除します。差出人に差戻しメールを送ります。
.PP
.\"O Other errors trigger bounce mail back to the originator.
他のエラーでは、差出人に差戻しメールが送られます。

.\"O .SH THE RUN CONTROL FILE
.SH 実行制御ファイル
.\"O The preferred way to set up fetchmail is to write a
.\"O \&\fI.fetchmailrc\fR file in your home directory (you may do this
.\"O directly, with a text editor, or indirectly via \fIfetchmailconf\fR).
.\"O When there is a conflict between the command-line arguments and the
.\"O arguments in this file, the command-line arguments take precedence.
fetchmail を設定する好ましい方法は、
\&\fI.fetchmailrc\fR をホームディレクトリに作成することです
(これはテキストエディタで直接行なうこともできますし、
\fIfetchmailconf\fR を使って対話的に行なうこともできます)。
コマンドライン引き数と、このファイル中の引き数が重なっている場合には、
コマンドライン引き数の方が優先されます。
.PP
.\"O To protect the security of your passwords, when --version is not on
.\"O your \fI~/.fetchmailrc\fR may not have more than 0600 (u=rw,g=,o=) permissions;
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O will complain and exit otherwise.
パスワードの機密を守るため、--version オプションが有効でない場合には、
\fI~/.fetchmailrc\fR のパーミッションは
600 (u=rw,g=,o=) でなければなりません。
600 以外の場合には、
.I fetchmail
は、エラー出力を行って終了します。
.PP
.\"O You may read the \fI.fetchmailrc\fR file as a list of commands to 
.\"O be executed when 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is called with no arguments.
.I fetchmail
が引き数なしで実行される場合、\fI.fetchmailrc\fR ファイルは実行される
コマンドのリストとして読むことができます。
.\"O .SS Run Control Syntax
.SS 実行制御の記法
.PP
.\"O Comments begin with a '#' and extend through the end of the line.
.\"O Otherwise the file consists of a series of server entries or global
.\"O option statements in a free-format, token-oriented syntax.
コメントは '#' で始まり、その行の最後まで続きます。
そうでない場合、このファイルは
フリーフォーマットかつトークン指向の文法で書かれた、
一連のサーバエントリか動作全体のオプションの記述で構成されます。
.PP
.\"O There are four kinds of tokens: grammar keywords, numbers
.\"O (i.e. decimal digit sequences), unquoted strings, and quoted strings.
.\"O A quoted string is bounded by double quotes and may contain
.\"O whitespace (and quoted digits are treated as a string).  An unquoted
.\"O string is any whitespace-delimited token that is neither numeric, string
.\"O quoted nor contains the special characters `,', `;', `:', or `='.
トークンには 4 種類あります: 
すなわち、文法キーワード、数字 (つまり10進数を並べたもの)、
クォートされていない文字列、クォートされた文字列です。
クォートされた文字列はダブルクォートで囲まれ、空白文字を含むことができます
(クォートされた数値は文字列として扱われます)。
クォートされていない文字列は、空白で区切られる任意のトークンであり、
数値やクォートされた文字列でなく、
特殊文字 `,', `;', `:', `=' も含まないものです。
.PP
.\"O Any amount of whitespace separates tokens in server entries, but is
.\"O otherwise ignored. You may use standard C-style escapes (\en, \et,
.\"O \eb, octal, and hex) to embed non-printable characters or string
.\"O delimiters in strings.
任意の数の空白文字はサーバエントリ中のトークンを区切りますが、
それ以外には無視されます。
標準の C 言語形式のエスケープ文字 (\en, \et, \eb, 8進数, 16進数) を用いて
表示不可能な文字列や文字列の区切り文字を文字列中に埋め込むことができます。
.PP
.\"O Each server entry consists of one of the keywords `poll' or `skip',
.\"O followed by a server name, followed by server options, followed by any
.\"O number of user descriptions.  Note: the most common cause of syntax
.\"O errors is mixing up user and server options.
各サーバエントリは、キーワード `poll' または `skip'、
これに続くサーバ名、その後に続くサーバオプション、
さらにその後に続く任意の数のユーザ記述から構成されます。
注意: 一番起こしやすい文法エラーの原因は、
ユーザオプションとサーバオプションを混ぜてしまうことです。
.PP
.\"O For backward compatibility, the word `server' is a synonym for `poll'.
後方互換性のため、キーワード `server' は `poll' と同義になります。
.PP 
.\"O You can use the noise keywords `and', `with',
.\"O \&`has', `wants', and `options' anywhere in an entry to make
.\"O it resemble English.  They're ignored, but but can make entries much
.\"O easier to read at a glance.  The punctuation characters ':', ';' and
.\"O \&',' are also ignored.
英語に似せるため、ノイズワード `and', `with', `has', `wants', `options' を
エントリ中の任意の場所で使うことができます。
これらは無視されますが、エントリがずっと読みやすくなります。
区切り文字 ':', ';', ',' も同じく無視されます。
.PP
.\"O .SS Poll vs. Skip
.SS poll 対 skip
.\"O The `poll' verb tells fetchmail to query this host when it is run with
.\"O no arguments.  The `skip' verb tells
.\"O .I fetchmail 
.\"O not to poll this host unless it is explicitly named on the command
.\"O line.  (The `skip' verb allows you to experiment with test entries
.\"O safely, or easily disable entries for hosts that are temporarily down.)
`poll' を指定すると、fetchmail が引き数なしで実行した時、
このホストへの問い合わせが行われます。
`skip' を指定すると、コマンドラインで明示的に指定しない限り
.I fetchmail 
はこのホストにポーリングを行いません。
(`skip' を使うと、テスト用エントリで安全に実験を行なうことや、
一時的に落ちているホスト用のエントリを簡単に無効にすることができます。)
.PP
.\"O .SS Keyword/Option Summary
.SS キーワード/オプションのまとめ
.\"O Here are the legal options.  Keyword suffixes enclosed in
.\"O square brackets are optional.  Those corresponding to command-line
.\"O options are followed by `-' and the appropriate option letter.
以下は正式なオプションです。
大括弧 ([]) で括られているキーワードサフィックスは省略可能です。
コマンドラインオプションに対応するものの後には、
`-' と適切なオプション文字があります。

.\"O Here are the legal global options:
正式な動作全体のオプションを以下に示します:

.TS
l l lw34.
.\"O Keyword  	Opt	Function
キーワード  	オプション	機能
_
set daemon  	\&	T{
.\"O Set a background poll interval in seconds
バックグラウンドでのポーリング間隔を秒数で設定します。
T}
set postmaster  	\&	T{
.\"O Give the name of the last-resort mail recipient
最終的なメール受取人の名前を指定します。
T}
set no bouncemail	\&	T{
.\"O Direct error mail to postmaster rather than sender
送信者ではなく、postmaster にエラーメールを送ります。
T}
set no spambounce	\&	T{
.\"O Send spam bounces
スパム防御を受けたときに差戻しメールを送ります。
T}
set logfile  	\&	T{
.\"O Name of a file to dump error and status messages to
エラーメッセージと状態メッセージを書き込むファイル名
T}
set idfile  	\&	T{
.\"O Name of the file to store UID lists in
UID リストを格納するファイル名。
T}
set syslog  	\&	T{
.\"O Do error logging through syslog(3).
syslog(3) を使ったエラーのログ取得を行います。
T}
set nosyslog  	\&	T{
.\"O Turn off error logging through syslog(3).
syslog(3) を使ったエラーのログ取得を止めます。
T}
set properties 	\&	T{
.\"O String value is ignored by fetchmail (may be used by extension scripts)
fetchmail が無視する文字列の値 (拡張スクリプトが使うことがあります)。
T}
.TE

.\"O Here are the legal server options:
以下の正式なサーバオプションを示します:

.TS
l l lw34.
.\"O Keyword  	Opt	Function
キーワード  	オプション	機能
_
via      	\&	T{
.\"O Specify DNS name of mailserver, overriding poll name
メールサーバの DNS 名を指定します。
これは poll 名を上書きします。
T}
proto[col]	-p	T{
.\"O Specify protocol (case insensitive):
プロトコルを指定します (大文字・小文字は関係ありません):
POP2, POP3, IMAP, APOP, KPOP。
T}
local[domains]	\&	T{
.\"O Specify domain(s) to be regarded as local
ローカルとして扱うドメインを指定します。
T}
port    	-P	T{
.\"O Specify TCP/IP service port
TCP/IP のサービスポートを指定します。
T}
auth[enticate]	\&	T{
.\"O Set authentication type (default `password')
認証のタイプを設定します (デフォルト値は `password')。
T}
timeout  	-t	T{
.\"O Server inactivity timeout in seconds (default 300)
サーバが動作していない時のタイムアウト値を秒数で指定します
(デフォルト値は 300)。
T}
envelope	-E	T{
.\"O Specify envelope-address header name
エンベロープアドレスのヘッダ名を指定します。
T}
no envelope	\&	T{
.\"O Disable looking for envelope address
エンベロープアドレスの検索を無効にします。
T}
qvirtual	-Q	T{
.\"O Qmail virtual domain prefix to remove from user name
ユーザ名から取り除く、qmail のバーチャルドメインのプレフィックス。
T}
aka      	\&	T{
.\"O Specify alternate DNS names of mailserver
メールサーバの別の DNS 名
T}
interface	-I	T{
.\"O specify IP interface(s) that must be up for server poll to take place
サーバへのポーリングを行うためには立ち上がっていなければならない
IP インタフェースを指定します。
T}
monitor   	-M	T{
.\"O Specify IP address to monitor for activity
動作を監視する IP アドレスを指定します。
T}
plugin   	\&	T{
.\"O Specify command through which to make server connections.
サーバ接続を確立するためのコマンドを指定します。
T}
plugout   	\&	T{
.\"O Specify command through which to make listener connections.
リスナ接続を確立するためのコマンドを指定します。
T}
dns     	\&	T{
.\"O Enable DNS lookup for multidrop (default)
マルチドロップ用の DNS 参照を有効にします (デフォルト)。
T}
no dns   	\&	T{
.\"O Disable DNS lookup for multidrop
マルチドロップ用の DNS 参照を無効にします。
T}
checkalias	\&	T{
.\"O Do comparison by IP address for multidrop
マルチドロップのために IP アドレスによる比較を行います。
T}
no checkalias	\&	T{
.\"O Do comparison by name for multidrop (default)
マルチドロップのために名前による比較を行います (デフォルト)。
T}
uidl    	-U	T{
.\"O Force POP3 to use client-side UIDLs
POP3 で必ずクライアント側で UIDL を使うようにします。
T}
no uidl   	\&	T{
.\"O Turn off POP3 use of client-side UIDLs (default)
POP3 での UIDL の使用を止めます (デフォルト)。
T}
interval   	\&	T{
.\"O Only check this site every N poll cycles; N is a numeric argument.
このサイトだけを N ポーリングサイクル毎にチェックします。
N は数値の引き数です。
T}
netsec   	\&	T{
.\"O Pass in IPsec security option request.
IPsec セキュリティオプション要求を渡します。
T}
principal   	\&	T{
.\"O Set Kerberos principal (only useful with imap and kerberos)
Kerberos 認証の principal を設定します
(imap と kerberos の場合にのみ有効です)。
T}
.TE

.\"O Here are the legal user options:
正式なユーザオプションを以下に示します:

.TS
l l lw34.
.\"O Keyword  	Opt	Function
キーワード  	オプション	機能
_
user[name]	-u	T{
.\"O Set remote user name 
.\"O (local user name if name followed by `here') 
リモートのユーザ名を設定します
(name の後に `here' があると、ローカルのユーザ名です)。
T}
is      	\&	T{
.\"O Connect local and remote user names
ローカルとリモートのユーザ名を繋ぎます。
T}
to      	\&	T{
.\"O Connect local and remote user names
ローカルとリモートのユーザ名を繋ぎます。
T}
pass[word]	\&	T{
.\"O Specify remote account password
リモートアカウントのパスワードを指定します。
T}
ssl    		T{
.\"O Connect to server over the specified base protocol using SSL encryption
SSL による暗号化を使い、
指定された基本プロトコルを使ってサーバと接続します。
T}
sslcert    		T{
.\"O Specify file for client side public SSL certificate
クライアント側の公開 SSL 証明書を指定します。
T}
sslkey    		T{
.\"O Specify file for client side private SSL key
クライアント側の秘密 SSL 鍵を指定します。
T}
sslproto   		T{
.\"O Force ssl protocol for connection
接続のために ssl プロトコルを使わせます。
T}
folder  	-r	T{
.\"O Specify remote folder to query
問い合わせをするリモートのフォルダを指定します。
T}
smtphost	-S	T{
.\"O Specify smtp host(s) to forward to
転送先の SMTP ホスト (群) を指定します。
T}
fetchdomains	\&	T{
.\"O Specify domains for which mail should be fetched
メールを取得するドメインを指定します。
T}
smtpaddress	-D	T{
.\"O Specify the domain to be put in RCPT TO lines
RCPT TO 行に書くドメインを指定します。
T}
smtpname		T{
.\"O Specify the user and domain to be put in RCPT TO lines
RCPT TO 行に書くユーザとドメインを指定します。
T}
antispam	-Z	T{
.\"O Specify what SMTP returns are interpreted as spam-policy blocks
スパム防御と解釈される SMTP の返し値を指定します。
T}
mda     	-m	T{
.\"O Specify MDA for local delivery
ローカルの配送に使う MDA を指定します。
T}
bsmtp   	-o	T{
.\"O Specify BSMTP batch file to append to
追加する BSMTP バッチファイルを指定します。
T}
preconnect	\&	T{
.\"O Command to be executed before each connection
それぞれの接続の前に実行するコマンド。
T}
postconnect	\&	T{
.\"O Command to be executed after each connection
それぞれの接続の後に実行するコマンド。
T}
keep     	-k	T{
.\"O Don't delete seen messages from server
既読のメッセージをサーバから削除しません。
T}
flush   	-F	T{
.\"O Flush all seen messages before querying
問い合わせの前に既読のメッセージを全てフラッシュします。
T}
fetchall	-a	T{
.\"O Fetch all messages whether seen or not
既読・未読にかかわらず全てのメッセージを取得します。
T}
rewrite    	\&	T{
.\"O Rewrite destination addresses for reply (default)
リプライのために目的アドレスを書き換えます (デフォルト)。
T}
stripcr  	\&	T{
.\"O Strip carriage returns from ends of lines
行末からキャリッジリターン文字を取り除きます。
T}
forcecr  	\&	T{
.\"O Force carriage returns at ends of lines
行末にキャリッジリターン文字を強制します。
T}
pass8bits	\&	T{
.\"O Force BODY=8BITMIME to ESMTP listener
ESMTP リスナに対し、BODY=8BITMIME を強制します。
T}
dropstatus	\&	T{
.\"O Strip Status and X-Mozilla-Status lines out of incoming mail
やってくるメールから Status 行と X-Mozilla-Status 行を取り除きます。
T}
dropdelivered	\&	T{
.\"O Strip Delivered-To lines out of incoming mail
やってくるメールから Delivered-To 行を取り除きます。
T}
mimedecode	\&	T{
.\"O Convert quoted-printable to 8-bit in MIME messages
quoted-printable を 8ビットの MIME 形式のメッセージに変換します。
T}
idle     	\&	T{
.\"O Idle waiting for new messages after each poll (IMAP only)
各ポーリングの後、新しいメッセージを待つアイドル時間 (IMAP 専用)。
T}
no keep  	-K	T{
.\"O Delete seen messages from server (default)
既読のメッセージをサーバから削除します (デフォルト)。
T}
no flush	\&	T{
.\"O Don't flush all seen messages before querying (default)
問い合わせの前に既読メッセージ全てはフラッシュしません (デフォルト)。
T}
no fetchall	\&	T{
.\"O Retrieve only new messages (default)
新規メッセージだけを取得します (デフォルト)。
T}
no rewrite	\&	T{
.\"O Don't rewrite headers
ヘッダを書き換えません。
T}
no stripcr	\&	T{
.\"O Don't strip carriage returns (default)
キャリッジリターン文字を取り除きません (デフォルト)。
T}
no forcecr	\&	T{
.\"O Don't force carriage returns at EOL (default)
行末にはキャリッジリターン文字を強制しません (デフォルト)。
T}
no pass8bits	\&	T{
.\"O Don't force BODY=8BITMIME to ESMTP listener (default)
ESMTP リスナに BODY=8BITMIME を強制しません (デフォルト)。
T}
no dropstatus	\&	T{
.\"O Don't drop Status headers (default)
Status ヘッダを捨てません (デフォルト)。
T}
no mimedecode	\&	T{
.\"O Don't convert quoted-printable to 8-bit in MIME messages (default)
quoted-printable を 8 ビット MIME 形式の
メッセージには変換しません (デフォルト)。
T}
limit   	-l	T{
.\"O Set message size limit
メッセージのサイズの上限を設定します。
T}
warnings   	-w	T{
.\"O Set message size warning interval
メッセージサイズに関する警告の時間間隔を設定します。
T}
batchlimit	-b	T{
.\"O Max # messages to forward in single connect
1 回の接続で転送するする最大メッセージ数。
T}
fetchlimit	-B	T{
.\"O Max # messages to fetch in single connect
1 回の接続で取得する最大メッセージ数。
T}
expunge 	-e	T{
.\"O Perform an expunge on every #th message (IMAP and POP3 only)
何回目のメッセージごとに削除を実行するかを指定します (IMAP と POP3 専用)。
T}
tracepolls	\&	T{
.\"O Add poll tracing information to the Received header
ポーリングトレース情報を Received ヘッダに追加します。
T}
properties  	\&	T{
.\"O String value is ignored by fetchmail (may be used by extension scripts)
fetchmail が無視する文字列値 (拡張スクリプトで使うことができます)。
T}
.TE
.PP
.\"O Remember that all user options must \fIfollow\fR all server options.
ユーザオプションは全てサーバオプションより\fI後でなければいけません\fR。
.PP
.\"O In the .fetchmailrc file, the `envelope' string argument may be
.\"O preceded by a whitespace-separated number.  This number, if specified,
.\"O is the number of such headers to skip (that is, an argument of 1
.\"O selects the second header of the given type).  This is sometime useful
.\"O for ignoring bogus Received headers created by an ISP's local delivery
.\"O agent.
 .fetchmailrc においては、`envelope' 文字列引き数の前に、
(空白で区切って) 数値を置くことができます。
この数字が指定された場合、この値はこのようなヘッダを飛ばす数です
(つまり、この引き数に 1 を指定すると、
与えられたタイプの 2 番目のヘッダが選択されます)。
これは、ISP のローカルの配送エージェントが付けた
偽の Received ヘッダを無視する時に便利です。
.\"O .SS Keywords Not Corresponding To Option Switches
.SS オプションスイッチに対応しないキーワード
.PP
.\"O The `folder' and `smtphost' options (unlike their command-line
.\"O equivalents) can take a space- or comma-separated list of names
.\"O following them.
`folder' と `smtphost' オプションには
(同等のコマンドラインオプションとは異なり)、
空白区切りまたはコンマ区切りの名前のリストを続けることができます。
.PP
.\"O All options correspond to the obvious command-line arguments, except
.\"O the following: `via', `interval', `aka', `is', `to', `dns'/`no dns',
.\"O `checkalias'/`no checkalias', `password', `preconnect', `postconnect',
.\"O `localdomains', `stripcr'/`no stripcr', `forcecr'/`no forcecr',
.\"O `pass8bits'/`no pass8bits' `dropstatus/no dropstatus',
.\"O `dropdelivered/no dropdelivered', `mimedecode/no mimedecode', `idle/no
.\"O idle', and `no envelope'.
全てのオプションは、見た通りのコマンドライン引き数に対応しますが、
以下のものはこれに該当しません: 
`via', `interval', `aka', `is', `to', `dns'/`no dns',
`checkalias'/`no checkalias', `password', `preconnect', `postconnect',
`localdomains', `stripcr'/`no stripcr', `forcecr'/`no forcecr',
`pass8bits'/`no pass8bits' `dropstatus/no dropstatus',
`dropdelivered/no dropdelivered', `mimedecode/no mimedecode',
`idle/no idle', `no envelope'.
.PP
.\"O The `via' option is for if you want to have more
.\"O than one configuration pointing at the same site.  If it is present,
.\"O the string argument will be taken as the actual DNS name of the 
.\"O mailserver host to query.
.\"O This will override the argument of poll, which can then simply be a
.\"O distinct label for the configuration (e.g. what you would give on the
.\"O command line to explicitly query this host).
`via' オプションは
同じサイトを指す複数の設定を使うためのものです。
これがある場合、文字列引き数は問い合わせ先の
メールサーバの実際の DNS 名として扱われます。
これは poll 引き数を上書きし、これを設定を区別する単なるラベル
(例えば、このホストを明示的に指定する時にコマンドラインで指定するもの)
にすることができます。
.PP
.\"O The `interval' option (which takes a numeric argument) allows you to poll a
.\"O server less frequently than the basic poll interval.  If you say
.\"O \&`interval N' the server this option is attached to will only be
.\"O queried every N poll intervals. 
`interval' オプション (数値の引き数を取ります) を使うと、
基本的なポーリング間隔より少ない頻度で
サーバにポーリングを行わせることができます。
\&`interval N' を指定すると、このオプションが割り当てられた
サーバに対する問い合わせは N 回ごとのポーリング間隔でしか行われません。
.PP
.\"O The `is' or `to' keywords associate the following local (client)
.\"O name(s) (or server-name to client-name mappings separated by =) with
.\"O the mailserver user name in the entry.  If an is/to list has `*' as
.\"O its last name, unrecognized names are simply passed through.
`is' または `to' キーワードは、その後に続くローカル (クライアント) 名
(または、= で区切られるサーバ名からクライアント名へのマッピング) を
エントリ中のメールサーバのユーザ名と関連付けます。
is/to のリストの最後の名前に `*' があれば、認識されない名前もそのまま通します。
.PP
.\"O A single local name can be used to support redirecting your mail when
.\"O your username on the client machine is different from your name on the
.\"O mailserver.  When there is only a single local name, mail is forwarded
.\"O to that local username regardless of the message's Received, To, Cc,
.\"O and Bcc headers.  In this case 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O never does DNS lookups.
1 つのローカル名を使って、クライアントマシンでのユーザ名が
メールサーバ上の名前と異なる時に、
メールのリダイレクトをサポートすることができます。
ローカル名が一つしかないときは、
メッセージの Received, To, Cc, Bcc ヘッダに関らず、
メールはローカルのユーザ名宛に転送されます。
この場合には、
.I fetchmail
は DNS の参照を行いません。
.PP
.\"O When there is more than one local name (or name mapping) the
.\"O \fIfetchmail\fR code does look at the Received, To, Cc, and Bcc
.\"O headers of retrieved mail (this is `multidrop mode').  It looks for
.\"O addresses with hostname parts that match your poll name or your `via',
.\"O `aka' or `localdomains' options, and usually also for hostname parts
.\"O which DNS tells it are aliases of the mailserver.  See the discussion
.\"O of `dns', `checkalias', `localdomains', and `aka' for details on how
.\"O matching addresses are handled.
ローカル名 (または名前マッピング) が複数ある時には、
\fIfetchmail\fR のコードは取得したメールの
Received, To, Cc, Bcc ヘッダを参照します
(これが「マルチドロップモード (multidrop mode)」です)。
\fIfetchmail\fR は poll 名、`via', `aka', `localdomains' オプションの
いずれかにマッチする、ホスト部分を持つアドレスを探し、
また DNS で調べるとメールサーバのエイリアスであるホスト名部分も通常は探します。
アドレスのマッチングの処理方法の詳しい内容については、
`dns', `checkalias', `localdomains', `aka' の説明を参照してください。
.PP
.\"O If \fIfetchmail\fR cannot match any mailserver usernames or
.\"O localdomain addresses, the mail will be bounced.
.\"O Normally it will be bounced to the sender, but if `nobounce' is on
.\"O it will go to the postmaster (which in turn defaults to being the
.\"O calling user).
\fIfetchmail\fR がメールサーバのユーザ名にも
ローカルドメインにもマッチさせられない場合には、メールは差し戻されます。
このメールは通常、差出人に戻されますが、
`nobounce' オプションが有効ならば、これは postmaster に送られます
(次に、これはデフォルトで \fIfetchmail\fR を呼び出したユーザになります)。
.PP
.\"O The `dns' option (normally on) controls the way addresses from
.\"O multidrop mailboxes are checked.  On, it enables logic to check each
.\"O host address that doesn't match an `aka' or `localdomains' declaration
.\"O by looking it up with DNS.  When a mailserver username is recognized
.\"O attached to a matching hostname part, its local mapping is added to
.\"O the list of local recipients.
`dns' オプション (通常は有効) は、マルチドロップメールボックスから取り出した
アドレスをチェックする方法を制御します。
このオプションが有効の時には、DNS を使った参照を行なうことにより、
`aka' または `localdomains' の宣言にマッチしないホストそれぞれのアドレスを
チェックするロジックが有効になります。
メールサーバのユーザ名が、
マッチするホスト名部分に割り当てられていることが認識された時、
そのローカルマッピングがローカルの受信者のリストに追加されます。
.PP
.\"O The `checkalias' option (normally off) extends the lookups performed
.\"O by the `dns' keyword in multidrop mode, providing a way to cope with
.\"O remote MTAs that identify themselves using their canonical name, while
.\"O they're polled using an alias.
`checkalias' オプション (通常は無効) は、
マルチドロップモードの `dns' キーワードが実行した検出結果を拡張し、
エイリアスを使ってポーリングされるものの、
自分自身を識別するにはカノニカルな名前 (canonical name) を用いる
リモートの MTA をうまく扱う方法を提供します。
.\"O When such a server is polled, checks to extract the envelope address
.\"O fail, and
.\"O .IR fetchmail 
.\"O reverts to delivery using the To/Cc/Bcc headers (See below 
.\"O `Header vs. Envelope addresses'). 
このようなサーバがポーリングされたときは、
envelope アドレスが展開されたことのチェックは失敗し、
.IR fetchmail 
は To/Cc/Bcc ヘッダを使った配送に戻ります
(後述の「ヘッダ対 envelope アドレス」を参照してください)。
.\"O Specifying this option instructs
.\"O .IR fetchmail 
.\"O to retrieve all the IP addresses associated with both the poll name
.\"O and the name used by the remote MTA and to do a comparison of the IP
.\"O addresses.  This comes in handy in situations where the remote server
.\"O undergoes frequent canonical name changes, that would otherwise
.\"O require modifications to the rcfile.  `checkalias' has no effect if
.\"O `no dns' is specified in the rcfile.
このオプションを指定すると、
.IR fetchmail 
に対する、
poll 名とリモートの MTA が使う名前の両方に関係する全ての IP アドレスを取得し、
これらの IP アドレスの比較を行うことの指示になります。
これは、リモートサーバのカノニカルな名前が頻繁に変わる状況で役に立ちます。
これを使わなければ、実行制御ファイルを変更する必要があります。
実行制御ファイルで `no dns' が指定された場合は、`checkalias' は無効です。
.PP
.\"O The `aka' option is for use with multidrop mailboxes.  It allows you
.\"O to pre-declare a list of DNS aliases for a server.  This is an
.\"O optimization hack that allows you to trade space for speed.  When
.\"O .IR fetchmail ,
.\"O while processing a multidrop mailbox, grovels through message headers
.\"O looking for names of the mailserver, pre-declaring common ones can
.\"O save it from having to do DNS lookups.  Note: the names you give
.\"O as arguments to `aka' are matched as suffixes -- if you specify 
.\"O (say) `aka netaxs.com', this will match not just a hostnamed
.\"O netaxs.com, but any hostname that ends with `.netaxs.com'; such as 
.\"O (say) pop3.netaxs.com and mail.netaxs.com.
`aka' オプションはマルチドロップメールボックスと一緒に使うためのものです。
このオプションを使うと、サーバの DNS 的な別名のリストを
予め宣言しておくことができます。
これは、速度と容量のトレードオフを可能にする、最適化のためのハックです。
マルチドロップメールボックスを処理している間に、
.IR fetchmail
がメッセージのヘッダを使ったメールサーバの名前の検索をあきらめた時、
予め宣言してある共通の名前を使うと、DNS を参照するはめにならないで済みます。
`aka' の引き数として与えた名前は、
拡張子としてマッチされる点に注意してください --
例えば `aka netaxs.com' を指定した場合、
単に netaxs.com という名前のホストにはマッチしませんが、
pop3.netaxs.com や mail.netaxs.com といった
`.netaxs.com' で終る任意のホスト名にマッチします。
.PP
.\"O The `localdomains' option allows you to declare a list of domains
.\"O which fetchmail should consider local.  When fetchmail is parsing
.\"O address lines in multidrop modes, and a trailing segment of a host
.\"O name matches a declared local domain, that address is passed through
.\"O to the listener or MDA unaltered (local-name mappings are \fInot\fR
.\"O applied).
`localdomains' オプションを使うと、ローカルであると fetchmail が判断する
ドメインのリストを宣言することができます。
fetchmail がマルチドロップモードでアドレス行を展開し、
かつ後に続くホスト名の部分が宣言されたローカルドメインにマッチする時、
そのアドレスは変更されずにリスナまたは MDA に渡されます
(ローカル名マッピングは適用\fIされません\fR)。
.PP
.\"O If you are using `localdomains', you may also need to specify \&`no
.\"O envelope', which disables \fIfetchmail\fR's normal attempt to deduce
.\"O an envelope address from the Received line or X-Envelope-To header or
.\"O whatever header has been previously set by `envelope'.  If you set `no
.\"O envelope' in the defaults entry it is possible to undo that in
.\"O individual entries by using `envelope <string>'.  As a special case,
.\"O \&`envelope "Received"' restores the default parsing of
.\"O Received lines.
`localdomains' を使っている場合には、
\&`no envelope' も指定する必要があるかもしれません。
このオプションは、\fIfetchmail\fR の通常の、
Received 行や X-Envelope-To ヘッダ、
あるいは以前に `envelope' で設定されたヘッダの
いずれかから envelope アドレスを推定しようとする動作を無効にします。
デフォルトのエントリ中で `no envelope' を設定した場合、
`envelope <string>' を用いて個別エントリ中でこれを取り消すことが可能です。
特別な場合として、\&`envelope "Received"' で Received 行の展開の
デフォルトの動作が復元されます。
.PP
.\"O The \fBpassword\fR option requires a string argument, which is the password
.\"O to be used with the entry's server.
\fBpassword\fR オプションは文字列の引き数を必要とします。
この文字列はエントリのサーバで使うパスワードです。
.PP
.\"O The `preconnect' keyword allows you to specify a shell command to be
.\"O executed just before each time
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O establishes a mailserver connection.  This may be useful if you are 
.\"O attempting to set up secure POP connections with the aid of
.\"O .IR ssh (1).
.\"O If the command returns a nonzero status, the poll of that mailserver
.\"O will be aborted.
`preconnect' キーワードを使うと、
.I fetchmail
がメールサーバへの接続を確立する直前に毎回実行する
シェルコマンドを指定することができます。
これは、
.IR ssh (1)
に補助させて安全な POP 接続の設定をしようとする時に役に立つかもしれません。
コマンドがゼロでないステータスを返した場合、
そのメールサーバへのポーリングは異常終了します。
.PP
.\"O Similarly, the `postconnect' keyword similarly allows you to specify a
.\"O shell command to be executed just after each time a mailserver
.\"O connection is taken down.
同様に、`postconnect' キーワードを使うと、メールサーバへの接続が切れた
直後に毎回実行するシェルコマンドを指定することができます。
.PP
.\"O The `forcecr' option controls whether lines terminated by LF only are
.\"O given CRLF termination before forwarding.  Strictly speaking RFC821
.\"O requires this, but few MTAs enforce the requirement it so this option
.\"O is normally off (only one such MTA, qmail, is in significant use at
.\"O time of writing).  
`forcecr' オプションは、LF だけで終わる行を転送の前に
CRLF で終わるようにするかどうかを制御します。
厳密に言うと RFC821 はこれを要求しているのですが、
これを必須としている MTA はほとんどないので、
このオプションは通常は無効になっています 
(このような MTA で特に使われているのは qmail だけで、
書き込み時にこれを行います)。
.PP
.\"O The `stripcr' option controls whether carriage returns are stripped
.\"O out of retrieved mail before it is forwarded.  It is normally not
.\"O necessary to set this, because it defaults to `on' (CR stripping
.\"O enabled) when there is an MDA declared but `off' (CR stripping
.\"O disabled) when forwarding is via SMTP.  If `stripcr' and `forcecr' are
.\"O both on, `stripcr' will override.
`stripcr' オプションは、取得したメールを転送する前に
キャリッジリターン文字を取り除くかどうかを制御します。
通常はこれをセットする必要はありません。
なぜなら、MDA が宣言されているときには、
これはデフォルトで「オン」(CR 削除が有効) となり、
SMTP 経由で転送されるときには「オフ」(CR 削除が無効) となるからです。
`stripcr' と `forcecr' が両方ともオンならば、`stripcr' が優先されます。
.PP
.\"O The `pass8bits' option exists to cope with Microsoft mail programs that
.\"O stupidly slap a "Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit" on everything.  With
.\"O this option off (the default) and such a header present, 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O declares BODY=7BIT to an ESMTP-capable listener; this causes problems for
.\"O messages actually using 8-bit ISO or KOI-8 character sets, which will
.\"O be garbled by having the high bits of all characters stripped.  If
.\"O \&`pass8bits' is on, 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is forced to declare BODY=8BITMIME to any ESMTP-capable listener.  If
.\"O the listener is 8-bit-clean (as all the major ones now are) the right
.\"O thing will probably result.

`pass8bits' は、何にでも "Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit" を付けてくる
馬鹿な Microsoft のメーラをうまく扱うために存在します。
このオプションが無効 (デフォルト) で、かつこのヘッダが存在すると、
.I fetchmail
は ESMTP 機能を持つリスナに対して BODY=7BIT を宣言します。
実際には
8-bit ISO や KOI-8 の文字集合を使っているメッセージの場合、
これは問題を起こします。
これらの文字は上位ビットが全て落とされてしまうため、
文字化けしてしまいます。
\&`pass8bits' がオンであれば、
.I fetchmail
は ESMTP 機能を持つリスナ全てに対して必ず BODY=8BITMIME を宣言します。
リスナが 8 ビットクリーンであれば (最近のめぼしいものは全部そうです)、
たぶんうまくいくでしょう。
.PP
.\"O The `dropstatus' option controls whether nonempty Status and
.\"O X-Mozilla-Status lines are retained in fetched mail (the default) or
.\"O discarded.  Retaining them allows your MUA to see what messages (if
.\"O any) were marked seen on the server.  On the other hand, it can
.\"O confuse some new-mail notifiers, which assume that anything with a
.\"O Status line in it has been seen.  (Note: the empty Status lines
.\"O inserted by some buggy POP servers are unconditionally discarded.)
`dropstatus' オプションは、取得したメール中の空でない Status 行と
X-Mozilla-Status 行を残す (デフォルト) か破棄するかを制御します。
これらを残すと、お使いの MUA で (もしあれば)
どのメッセージがサーバ上で既読の印が付けられているかを知ることができます。
一方、この動作は新着メール通知プログラムの一部を混乱させることがあります。
これらのプログラムは、
Status 行が付いているものは全て既読と想定するのです。
(注意: 一部のバグっぽい POP サーバが付ける
空の Status 行は無条件に削除されます。)
.PP
.\"O The `dropdelivered' option controls wether Delivered-To headers will
.\"O be kept in fetched mail (the default) or discarded. These headers are 
.\"O added by Qmail and Postfix mailservers in order to avoid mail loops but
.\"O may get in your way if you try to "mirror" a mailserver within the same
.\"O domain. Use with caution.
`dropdelivered' オプションは、取得したメール中の
Delivered-To ヘッダを残す (デフォルト) か破棄するかを制御します。
このヘッダは、メールサーバ Qmail と Postfix が
ループを防止するために使用していますが、
同じドメイン内でメールサーバを「ミラー」しようとする場合は邪魔になります。
このオプションは、注意して使用して下さい。
.PP
.\"O The `mimedecode' option controls whether MIME messages using the
.\"O quoted-printable encoding are automatically converted into pure 8-bit
.\"O data. If you are delivering mail to an ESMTP-capable, 8-bit-clean
.\"O listener (that includes all of the major MTAs like sendmail), then
.\"O this will automatically convert quoted-printable message headers and
.\"O data into 8-bit data, making it easier to understand when reading
.\"O mail. If your e-mail programs know how to deal with MIME messages,
.\"O then this option is not needed.  The mimedecode option is off by
.\"O default, because doing RFC2047 conversion on headers throws away
.\"O character-set information and can lead to bad results if the encoding
.\"O of the headers differs from the body encoding.
`mimedecode' オプションは、quoted-printable エンコーディングを用いている
MIME メッセージを純粋な 8 ビットデータに自動的に変換するかどうかを制御します。
ESMTP 機能を持ち、8 ビットクリーンなリスナ
(これには sendmail などの有名な MTA の大部分が含まれます) に
メールを配送する場合には、
このオプションを使うと quoted-printable で書かれた
メッセージヘッダとデータは自動的に 8 ビットデータに変換され、
メールを読むときに理解しやすくなります。
お使いの電子メールプログラムが MIME メッセージを扱えるならば、
このオプションは必要ありません。
mimedecode オプションはデフォルトで無効になっています。
なぜなら、ヘッダに対して RFC2047 の変換を行うと文字集合の情報が消えてしまい、
ヘッダのエンコーディングが本文のエンコーディングと異なる場合に
好ましくない結果になるからです。
.PP
.\"O The `idle' option is usable only with IMAP servers supporting the
.\"O RFC2177 IDLE command extension.  If it is enabled, and fetchmail
.\"O detects that IDLE is supported, an IDLE will be issued at the end
.\"O of each poll.  This will tell the IMAP server to hold the connection
.\"O open and notify the client when new mail is available.  If you need to
.\"O poll a link frequently, IDLE can save bandwidth by eliminating TCP/IP
.\"O connects and LOGIN/LOGOUT sequences. On the other hand, an IDLE 
.\"O connection will eat almost all of your fetchmail's time, because it
.\"O will never drop the connection and allow other pools to occur unless
.\"O the server times out the IDLE.  It also doesn't work with multiple 
.\"O folders; only the first folder will ever be polled.
`idle' オプションは IMAP サーバが RFC2177 IDLE コマンド拡張を
サポートしている場合にのみ使用できます。
このオプションが設定されていて、
かつ IDLE コマンドをサポートしていることを fetchmail が検知した場合、
ポーリングの終了毎に IDLE コマンドが発行されます。
このコマンドを使うことで、
IMAP サーバに接続をオープンに保持させ、
新しいメールが来たことをクライアントに通知させます。
頻繁にポーリングを行う必要がある場合、
IDLE コマンドは、TCP/IP 接続とログイン/ログアウトシーケンスをなくすことで、
バンド幅を押えることができます。
一方で、IDLE 接続は fetchmail のほとんどの時間を占めてしまいます。
なぜなら、IDLE コマンドは接続を切らず、
サーバが IDLE をタイムアウトしない限り
別のプールが起こることを許可してしまうためです。
複数のフォルダがある場合も動作せず、
最初のフォルダのみがポーリングされます。
.PP
.\"O The `properties' option is an extension mechanism.  It takes a string
.\"O argument, which is ignored by fetchmail itself.  The string argument may be
.\"O used to store configuration information for scripts which require it.
.\"O In particular, the output of `--configdump' option will make properties
.\"O associated with a user entry readily available to a Python script.
`properties' オプションは拡張のための機構です。
これは文字列の引き数を取りますが、fetchmail 自身はこれを無視します。
この文字列引き数を使って、
設定情報を必要とするスクリプトのための情報を保持することができます。
特に、`--configdump'  オプションの出力は、
そのまま Python スクリプトとして利用できる、
ユーザエントリに関連するプロパティとなります。
.PP
.\"O .SS Miscellaneous Run Control Options
.SS その他の実行制御オプション
.\"O The words `here' and `there' have useful English-like
.\"O significance.  Normally `user eric is esr' would mean that 
.\"O mail for the remote user `eric' is to be delivered to `esr',
.\"O but you can make this clearer by saying `user eric there is esr here',
.\"O or reverse it by saying `user esr here is eric there'
`here' と `there' は、英語と同じような意味で使える便利な単語です。
通常 `user eric is esr' は、リモートユーザ `eric' 宛のメールが
`esr' 宛に配達されるという意味です。
しかし、`user eric there is esr here' と書くことでもっと分かりやすくしたり、
`user esr here is eric there' と書いて意味を反対にすることができます。
.PP
.\"O Legal protocol identifiers for use with the `protocol' keyword are:
`protocol' キーワードで使用できる有効なプロトコル識別子を以下に示します:

.\"O     auto (or AUTO)
.\"O     pop2 (or POP2)
.\"O     pop3 (or POP3)
.\"O     sdps (or SDPS)
.\"O     imap (or IMAP)
.\"O     apop (or APOP)
.\"O     kpop (or KPOP)
    auto (または AUTO)
    pop2 (または POP2)
    pop3 (または POP3)
    sdps (または SDPS)
    imap (または IMAP)
    apop (または APOP)
    kpop (または KPOP)

.PP
.\"O Legal authentication types are `any', `password', `kerberos', 'kereberos_v5' 
.\"O and `gssapi', `cram-md5', `otp', `ntlm', `ssh`.
.\"O The `password' type specifies authentication by normal transmission of a
.\"O password (the password may be plaintext or subject to
.\"O protocol-specific encryption as in APOP); `kerberos' tells
.\"O \fIfetchmail\fR to try to get a Kerberos ticket at the start of each
.\"O query instead, and send an arbitrary string as the password; and
.\"O `gssapi' tells fetchmail to use GSSAPI authentication.  See the description
.\"O of the `auth' keyword for more.
有効な認証のタイプは `any', `password', `kerberos', 'kerberos_v5', 
`gssapi', `cram-md5', `otp', `ntlm', `ssh` です。
`password' タイプは普通のパスワード送信による認証を指定します
(パスワードはプレーンテキストのこともあれば、
APOP のようにプロトコル固有の暗号化がされていることもあります)。
`kerberos' を指定するとパスワード認証は行われず、
\fIfetchmail\fR はそれぞれの問い合わせの開始時に Kerberos のチケットを取得し、
パスワードとして任意の文字列を送信しようとします。
`gssapi' を指定すると fetchmail は GSSAPI 認証を使います。
さらに詳しい情報については `auth' キーワードの説明を参照してください。
.PP
.\"O Specifying `kpop' sets POP3 protocol over port 1109 with Kerberos V4
.\"O authentication.  These defaults may be overridden by later options.
`kpop' を指定すると、1109 番ポート上で
Kerberos V4 認証を使う POP3 プロトコルが設定されます。
これらのデフォルト値は、後に現われるオプションによって上書きされます。
.PP
.\"O There are currently four global option statements; `set logfile'
.\"O followed by a string sets the same global specified by --logfile.  A
.\"O command-line --logfile option will override this.  Also, `set daemon'
.\"O sets the poll interval as --daemon does.  This can be overridden by a
.\"O command-line --daemon option; in particular --daemon 0 can be used to
.\"O force foreground operation. The `set postmaster' statement sets the
.\"O address to which multidrop mail defaults if there are no local
.\"O matches.  Finally, `set syslog' sends log messages to syslogd(8).
グローバルオプションを指定する文は現在 4 つあります。
`set logfile' の後に文字列を記述したものは、
--logfile オプションの指定と同じグローバルな設定を行います。
コマンドラインの --logfile はこれを上書きします。
また `set daemon' は、--daemon オプションと同じように
ポーリング間隔を設定します。
これはコマンドラインの --daemon オプションで上書きすることができます。
特例として、--daemon 0 を使って、
強制的にフォアグラウンド動作をさせることができます。
`set postmater' 文は、ローカルで一致するものがない場合に
マルチドロップメールがデフォルトで送られるアドレスを設定します。
最後に、`set syslog' を指定するとログメッセージが syslogd(8) に
送られるようになります。

.\"O .SH INTERACTION WITH RFC 822
.SH RFC 822 との相互作用
.\"O When trying to determine the originating address of a message,
.\"O fetchmail looks through headers in the following order: 
メッセージの送信アドレスを決めようとするとき、
fetchmail は以下の順でヘッダを参照して行きます:

        Return-Path:
.\"O         Resent-Sender: (ignored if it doesn't contain an @ or !)
.\"O         Sender: (ignored if it doesn't contain an @ or !)
        Resent-Sender: (@ または ! を含んでいない場合は無視される)
        Sender: (@ または ! を含んでいない場合は無視される)
        Resent-From:
        From:
        Reply-To:
        Apparently-From:

.\"O The originating address is used for logging, and to set the MAIL FROM
.\"O address when forwarding to SMTP.  This order is intended to cope
.\"O gracefully with receiving mailing list messages in multidrop mode. The
.\"O intent is that if a local address doesn't exist, the bounce message
.\"O won't be returned blindly to the author or to the list itself, but
.\"O rather to the list manager (which is less annoying).
送信アドレスはログの記録と、
SMTP に転送する時の MAIL FROM アドレスの設定のために使われます。
この順序はマルチドロップモードでメーリングリストの受信を
うまく処理するためのものです。
その目的は、ローカルアドレスが存在しない場合に、
差し戻しメッセージがメールを出した人やメーリングリスト本体にむやみに返されず、
メーリングリストの管理者に届くようにすることです
(こちらの方がまだマシです)。

.\"O In multidrop mode, destination headers are processed as follows:
.\"O First, fetchmail looks for the Received: header (or whichever one is
.\"O specified by the `envelope' option) to determine the local
.\"O recipient address. If the mail is addressed to more than one recipient,
.\"O the Received line won't contain any information regarding recipient addresses.
マルチドロップモードでは、宛先のヘッダは以下のように処理されます: 
最初に、fetchmail は Received: ヘッダ
(あるいは、`envelope' で指定した任意のヘッダ) を探し、
ローカルの受信者アドレスを決めます。
もしメールが複数の受信者に宛てたものであれば、
Received は受信者のアドレスという点では全く情報を持っていないでしょう。

.\"O Then fetchmail looks for the Resent-To:, Resent-Cc:, and Resent-Bcc:
.\"O lines.  If they exists, they should contain the final recipients and
.\"O have precedence over their To:/Cc:/Bcc: counterparts.  If the Resent-*
.\"O lines doesn't exist, the To:, Cc:, Bcc: and Apparently-To: lines are
.\"O looked for. (The presence of a Resent-To: is taken to imply that the
.\"O person referred by the To: address has already received the original
.\"O copy of the mail).
次に、fetchmail は Resent-To:, Resent-Cc:, Resent-Bcc: 行を探します。
これらのヘッダが存在する場合、これらには最終的な受信者が書かれており、
対になっている To:/Cc:/Bcc: よりも優先されます。
もし Resent-* 行が存在しなければ、
To:, Cc:, Bcc:, Apparently-To: 行が探されます。
(Resent-To: があると、To: アドレスが指している人物は
既にそのメールのコピーを受け取っているものと考えられます。)

.\"O .SH CONFIGURATION EXAMPLES
.SH 設定例
.\"O Note that although there are password declarations in a good many
.\"O of the examples below, this is mainly for illustrative purposes.
.\"O We recommend stashing account/password pairs in your $HOME/.netrc
.\"O file, where they can be used not just by fetchmail but by ftp(1) and
.\"O other programs.
以下の多くの例では、password 宣言があるが、
これは主に例示のためのものです。
アカウント/パスワードのペアを $HOME/.netrc ファイルに
隠しておくことをお勧めします。
このファイルは fetchmail だけでなく ftp(1) やその他のプログラムでも
使うことができます。

.\"O Basic format is:
基本フォーマットを以下に示します:

.nf
  poll SERVERNAME protocol PROTOCOL username NAME password PASSWORD 
.fi
.PP
.\"O Example:
例:

.nf
  poll pop.provider.net protocol pop3 username "jsmith" password "secret1"
.fi
.PP
.\"O Or, using some abbreviations:
省略形を使えるものもあります:

.nf
  poll pop.provider.net proto pop3 user "jsmith" password "secret1"
.fi
.PP
.\"O Multiple servers may be listed:
複数のサーバを並べることができます:

.nf
  poll pop.provider.net proto pop3 user "jsmith" pass "secret1"
  poll other.provider.net proto pop2 user "John.Smith" pass "My^Hat"
.fi

.\"O Here's a version of those two with more whitespace and some noise words: 
上記の 2 つの例について、空白文字とノイズワードをいくつか増やしたもの
を示します:

.nf
  poll pop.provider.net proto pop3
      user "jsmith", with password secret1, is "jsmith" here;
  poll other.provider.net proto pop2:
      user "John.Smith", with password "My^Hat", is "John.Smith" here;
.fi

.\"O This version is much easier to read and doesn't cost significantly
.\"O more (parsing is done only once, at startup time).
こう書いた方がずっと読みやすいですが、処理の手間はそんなにかかりません
(起動時に一度行われるだけです)。

.PP
.\"O If you need to include whitespace in a parameter string, enclose the
.\"O string in double quotes.  Thus:
パラメータ文字列に空白文字を含める必要がある場合には、
文字列をダブルクォートで囲みましょう。
以下のような形です:

.nf
  poll mail.provider.net with proto pop3:
        user "jsmith" there has password "u can't krak this"
                    is jws here and wants mda "/bin/mail"
.fi

.\"O You may have an initial server description headed by the keyword
.\"O `defaults' instead of `poll' followed by a name.  Such a record
.\"O is interpreted as defaults for all queries to use. It may be overwritten
.\"O by individual server descriptions.  So, you could write:
最初のサーバ記述では、名前の前にキーワード `poll' ではなく、
キーワード`defaults' を置くことができます。
このようなレコードは、
全ての問い合わせで使われるデフォルト値として解釈されます。
これは個別のサーバ記述で上書きすることができます。
つまり、以下のように書くことができます:

.nf
  defaults proto pop3
        user "jsmith"
  poll pop.provider.net
        pass "secret1"
  poll mail.provider.net
        user "jjsmith" there has password "secret2"
.fi

.\"O It's possible to specify more than one user per server (this is only
.\"O likely to be useful when running fetchmail in daemon mode as root).
.\"O The `user' keyword leads off a user description, and every user specification
.\"O in a multi-user entry must include it.  Here's an example:
サーバごとに複数のユーザを指定することもできます
(これが役に立つのは多分、
root がデーモンモードで fetchmail を実行するときだけでしょう)。
1 人のユーザ記述は `user' キーワードで始まり、
ユーザエントリが複数ある場合には、
このキーワードがユーザ指定それぞれに含まれていなければなりません。
以下に例を示します:

.nf
  poll pop.provider.net proto pop3 port 3111
        user "jsmith" with pass "secret1" is "smith" here
        user jones with pass "secret2" is "jjones" here keep
.fi

.\"O This associates the local username `smith' with the pop.provider.net
.\"O username `jsmith' and the local username `jjones' with the
.\"O pop.provider.net username `jones'.  Mail for `jones' is kept on the
.\"O server after download.
これは、ローカルのユーザ名 `smith' を
the pop.provider.net のユーザ名 `jsmith' に対応させ、
ローカルのユーザ名 `jjones' を
pop.provider.net のユーザ名 `jones' に対応させます。
`jones' のメールはダウンロード後もサーバーに残されます。
.PP
.\"O Here's what a simple retrieval configuration for a multi-drop mailbox
.\"O looks like:
マルチドロップメールボックス用の取得を行う簡単な設定がどんな感じかを
以下に示します:

.nf
  poll pop.provider.net:
        user maildrop with pass secret1 to golux 'hurkle'='happy' snark here
.fi

.\"O This says that the mailbox of account `maildrop' on the server is a
.\"O multi-drop box, and that messages in it should be parsed for the
.\"O server user names `golux', `hurkle', and `snark'.  It further
.\"O specifies that `golux' and `snark' have the same name on the
.\"O client as on the server, but mail for server user `hurkle' should be
.\"O delivered to client user `happy'.
これは、サーバ上のアカウント `maildrop' がマルチドロップボックスであり、
その中のメッセージはサーバのユーザ名 `golux', `hurkle', `snark' に対して
展開するという指定です。
これはさらに、`golux' と `snark' はクライアントでも
サーバと同じ名前を持つけれど、
サーバのユーザ `hurkle' 宛のメールは
クライアントのユーザ `happy' に配送することも指定します。
.PP
.\"O Here's an example of another kind of multidrop connection:
別の種類のマルチドロップ接続の例を示します:

.nf
  poll pop.provider.net localdomains loonytoons.org toons.org:
        user maildrop with pass secret1 to * here
.fi

.\"O This also says that the mailbox of account `maildrop' on the server is
.\"O a multi-drop box.  It tells fetchmail that any address in the
.\"O loonytoons.org or toons.org domains (including subdomain addresses like
.\"O `joe@daffy.loonytoons.org') should be passed through to the local SMTP
.\"O listener without modification.  Be careful of mail loops if you do this!
これも、サーバ上のアカウント `maildrop' が
マルチドロップボックスであることを指定します。
これは fetchmail に対し、
loonytoons.org や toons.org ドメイン内のアドレス全て
(`joe@daffy.loonytoons.org' のようなサブドメインのアドレスも含みます) は
変更せずにローカルの SMTP リスナへ渡すことを指示します。
これを行うときにはメールのループには注意してください!
.PP
.\"O Here's an example configuration using ssh and the plugin option.  The
.\"O queries are made directly on the stdin and stdout of imapd via ssh.
.\"O Note that in this setup, IMAP authentication can be skipped.
ssh と plugin オプションを用いた一つの設定例を示します。
問い合わせは、ssh を経由して、imapd の標準入力と標準出力で直接行われます。
この設定では IMAP 認証が飛ばされることに注意して下さい。

.nf
poll mailhost.net with proto imap:
        plugin "ssh %h /usr/sbin/imapd" auth ssh;
	user esr is esr here
.fi

.\"O .SH THE USE AND ABUSE OF MULTIDROP MAILBOXES
.SH マルチドロップメールボックスの良い使い方と良くない使い方
.\"O Use the multiple-local-recipients feature with caution -- it can bite.
.\"O All multidrop features are ineffective in ETRN and ODMR modes.
ローカルの受信者を複数持つ機能は注意して使ってください。
痛い目を見るかもしれません。
ETRN と ODMR モードではマルチドロップ機能は全く使えない点に注意してください。

.\"O Also, note that in multidrop mode duplicate mails are suppressed.  A
.\"O piece of mail is considered duplicate if it has the same message-ID as
.\"O the message immediately preceding and more than one addressee.  Such
.\"O runs of messages may be generated when copies of a message addressed
.\"O to multiple users are delivered to a multidrop box.
また、マルチドロップモードでは複製されたメールは
消される点にも注意してください。
あるメールが複製されていると判断されるのは、
直前のメッセージと同じメッセージ ID が付いていて、
複数のアドレスが指定されている場合です。
このようにメッセージが連続することは、
複数のユーザ宛の 1 通のメールのコピーが
1 つのマルチドロップメールボックスに配送された時に起こります。

.\"O .SS Header vs. Envelope addresses 
.SS ヘッダ対 envelope アドレス
.\"O The fundamental problem is that by having your mailserver toss several
.\"O peoples' mail in a single maildrop box, you may have thrown away
.\"O potentially vital information about who each piece of mail was
.\"O actually addressed to (the `envelope address', as opposed to the
.\"O header addresses in the RFC822 To/Cc/Bcc headers).  This `envelope
.\"O address' is the address you need in order to reroute mail properly.
基本的な問題は、メールサーバに複数のユーザのメールを
1 つのメールドロップへ投げさせることにより、
それぞれのメールが実際に届けられていたユーザに関する、
もしかすると非常に重要かもしれない情報
(`envelope アドレス', RFC822 の To/Cc/Bcc ヘッダとは対立するものです) を
捨ててしまう可能性があることです。
この `envelope アドレス' は、
メールを適切に振り分けるために必要なアドレスです。
.PP
.\"O Sometimes 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O can deduce the envelope address.  If the mailserver MTA is
.\"O .I sendmail
.\"O and the item of mail had just one recipient, the MTA will have written
.\"O a `by/for' clause that gives the envelope addressee into its Received
.\"O header. But this doesn't work reliably for other MTAs, nor if there is
.\"O more than one recipient.  By default, \fIfetchmail\fR looks for
.\"O envelope addresses in these lines; you can restore this default with
.\"O -E "Received" or \&`envelope Received'.
.I fetchmail
が envelope アドレスを推定できることも時々あります。
メールサーバの MTA が
.I sendmail
であり、メールの受信者が 1 人しかいない場合、MTA は envelope アドレスを
Received ヘッダに与える `by/for' の項を書いているでしょう。
しかし、これは他の MTA でも確実に動作するとは言えませんし、
複数の受信者がいる場合にも動作しません。
デフォルトでは、\fIfetchmail\fR はこれらの行で envelope アドレスを探します。
-E "Received" または \&`envelope Received' を指定すると
動作をこのデフォルトに戻すことができます。
.PP
.\"O Alternatively, some SMTP listeners and/or mail servers insert a header
.\"O in each message containing a copy of the envelope addresses.  This
.\"O header (when it exists) is often `X-Envelope-To'.  Fetchmail's
.\"O assumption about this can be changed with the -E or `envelope' option.
.\"O Note that writing an envelope header of this kind exposes the names of
.\"O recipients (including blind-copy recipients) to all receivers of the
.\"O messages; it is therefore regarded by some administrators as a
.\"O security/privacy problem.
これを行う代わりに、一部の SMTP リスナやメールサーバは、
envelope アドレスのコピーを持つヘッダを各メッセージに挿入します。
このヘッダは (存在するならば) `X-Envelope-To' のことがよくあります。
-E オプションまたは `envelope' オプションを用いると、
fetchmail が想定するヘッダを変更することができます。
この種類の envelope ヘッダを書くと、(ブラインドコピーの受信者も含めた)
全ての受信者の名前がメッセージ受信者に明らかになってしまいます。
したがって、これをセキュリティ/プライバシーの問題であると
考えるシステム管理者もいます。
.PP
.\"O A slight variation of the `X-Envelope-To' header is the `Delivered-To' put
.\"O by qmail to avoid mail loops. It will probably prefix the user name with a
.\"O string that normally matches the user's domain. To remove this prefix you
.\"O can use the -Q or `qvirtual' option.
`X-Envelope-To' を少し変えたものが、
qmail がメールのループを避けるために追加する `Delivered-To' ヘッダです。
これは、通常はユーザのドメインに
マッチする文字列の前に、ユーザ名を置いたものであることが多いです。
このプレフィックスを取り除くには、
-Q または `qvirtual' オプションを使います。
.PP
.\"O Sometimes, unfortunately, neither of these methods works.  When they
.\"O all fail, fetchmail must fall back on the contents of To/Cc/Bcc
.\"O headers to try to determine recipient addressees -- and these are not
.\"O reliable.  In particular, mailing-list software often ships mail with
.\"O only the list broadcast address in the To header.
残念ながら、これらが両方ともうまく動作しないこともあります。
これらが全て失敗した場合、fetchmail は To/Cc/Bcc ヘッダから出直して、
受信者のアドレスを決めなければなりませんが、これらのヘッダは信頼できません。
特に、メーリングリストのソフトウェアが
リスト全体のアドレスしか To ヘッダに付けないでメールを送ることがよくあります。
.PP
.\"O When
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O cannot deduce a recipient address that is local, and the intended
.\"O recipient address was anyone other than fetchmail's invoking user,
.\"O mail will get lost.  This is what makes the multidrop feature risky.
.I fetchmail
がローカルの受信者アドレスを推定できず、
かつ本来の受信者のアドレスが fetchmail を実行したユーザ以外である場合、
メールは無くなってしまうでしょう。
これがマルチドロップ機能を危険にしている要因です。
.PP
.\"O A related problem is that when you blind-copy a mail message, the Bcc
.\"O information is carried \fIonly\fR as envelope address (it's not put
.\"O in the headers fetchmail can see unless there is an X-Envelope
.\"O header).  Thus, blind-copying to someone who gets mail over a
.\"O fetchmail link will fail unless the the mailserver host routinely
.\"O writes X-Envelope or an equivalent header into messages in your maildrop.
これに関連する問題は、メールのメッセージをブラインドコピーするとき、
Bcc 情報は envelope アドレスとして\fIのみ\fR伝えられるということです
(X-Envelope ヘッダがなければ、fetchmail が読めるヘッダには書かれません)。
したがって、メールサーバのホストが常に X-Envelope ヘッダあるいはこれと
同等のヘッダをメールドロップに入れるメッセージに書くようになっていなければ、
fetchmail 経由でメールを取得するユーザ宛のブラインドコピーは失敗します。

.\"O .SS Good Ways To Use Multidrop Mailboxes
.SS マルチドロップメールボックスの良い使い方
.\"O Multiple local names can be used to administer a mailing list from the
.\"O client side of a \fIfetchmail\fR collection.  Suppose your name is
.\"O \&`esr', and you want to both pick up your own mail and maintain a mailing
.\"O list called (say) "fetchmail-friends", and you want to keep the alias
.\"O list on your client machine.
ローカル名を複数使うことにより、\fIfetchmail\fR のクライアント側から
メーリングリストを管理することができます。
あなたのユーザ名が \&`esr' であり、自分宛のメールを受け取ることと
(例えば) "fetchmail-friends" という
名前のメーリングリストの管理を両方やりたいとします。
それから、あなたのクライアントマシンで
エイリアスのリストも管理したいものとします。
.PP
.\"O On your server, you can alias \&`fetchmail-friends' to `esr'; then, in
.\"O your \fI.fetchmailrc\fR, declare \&`to esr fetchmail-friends here'.
.\"O Then, when mail including `fetchmail-friends' as a local address
.\"O gets fetched, the list name will be appended to the list of
.\"O recipients your SMTP listener sees.  Therefore it will undergo alias
.\"O expansion locally.  Be sure to include `esr' in the local alias
.\"O expansion of fetchmail-friends, or you'll never see mail sent only to
.\"O the list.  Also be sure that your listener has the "me-too" option set
.\"O (sendmail's -oXm command-line option or OXm declaration) so your name
.\"O isn't removed from alias expansions in messages you send.
サーバでは、\&`fetchmail-friends' を `esr' に
エイリアス設定することができます。
それから、\fI.fetchmailrc\fR では
\&`to esr fetchmail-friends here'を宣言します。
すると、`fetchmail-friends' をローカルアドレスとして含んでいる
メールが取得されたとき、
メーリングリストの名前が SMTP リスナが見ている受信者のリストに追加されます。
したがって、エイリアスの展開はローカルで行われます。
必ず、`esr' を fetchmail-friends のローカルのエイリアス展開に含めてください。
さもないと、このメーリングリストだけが宛先になっている
メールを絶対に見ることができません。
また、リスナの「自分にも」というオプションを必ずセットして
(sendmail では -oXm コマンドラインオプションか、OXm 宣言です)、
あなたが送ったメッセージのエイリアス展開から
あなたの名前が削除されないようにしてください。
.PP
.\"O This trick is not without its problems, however.  You'll begin to see
.\"O this when a message comes in that is addressed only to a mailing list
.\"O you do \fInot\fR have declared as a local name.  Each such message
.\"O will feature an `X-Fetchmail-Warning' header which is generated
.\"O because fetchmail cannot find a valid local name in the recipient
.\"O addresses.  Such messages default (as was described above) to being
.\"O sent to the local user running
.\"O .IR fetchmail ,
.\"O but the program has no way to know that that's actually the right thing.
しかし、このトリックに問題がないわけではありません。
あなたがローカル名として宣言して
\fIいない\fRメーリングリストだけが宛先になっているメールが来ると、
その問題が明らかになるでしょう。
このようなメッセージのそれぞれには、
`X-Fetchmail-Warning' ヘッダが付いています。
このヘッダは、fetchmail が受信者アドレス中で
有効なローカル名を見つけられなかったために生成されるものです。
このようなメッセージは、デフォルトで (既に述べたように)
.IR fetchmail
を実行しているローカルユーザに送られますが、
それが本当に正しい処置なのかをプログラム側から知る方法はありません。

.\"O .SS Bad Ways To Abuse Multidrop Mailboxes
.SS マルチドロップメールボックスの良くない使い方
.\"O Multidrop mailboxes and 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O serving multiple users in daemon mode do not mix.  The problem, again, is
.\"O mail from mailing lists, which typically does not have an individual
.\"O recipient address on it.   Unless 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O can deduce an envelope address, such mail will only go to the account
.\"O running fetchmail (probably root).  Also, blind-copied users are very
.\"O likely never to see their mail at all.
マルチドロップメールボックスと、デーモンモードで複数のユーザにサービスを行う
.I fetchmail
を同時に使ってはいけません。
繰り返しますが、メーリングリストからのメールで問題が起こります。
このようなメールには通常、受信者個人のアドレスが書かれていないのです。
.I fetchmail
が envelope アドレスを推定できなければ、このようなメールは fetchmail
を実行したユーザ (root であることが多いでしょう) にしか届きません。
また、ブラインドコピーの宛先になっているユーザはきっと、
このようなメールが全く読めないでしょう。
.PP
.\"O If you're tempted to use 
.\"O .I fetchmail 
.\"O to retrieve mail for multiple users from a single mail drop via POP or
.\"O IMAP, think again (and reread the section on header and envelope
.\"O addresses above).  It would be smarter to just let the mail sit in the
.\"O mailserver's queue and use fetchmail's ETRN or ODMR modes to trigger
.\"O SMTP sends periodically (of course, this means you have to poll more
.\"O frequently than the mailserver's expiry period).  If you can't arrange
.\"O this, try setting up a UUCP feed.
もし、
.I fetchmail 
を使って 1 つのメールドロップから POP や IMAP 経由で
複数ユーザ宛のメールを取得しようと考えているならば、考え直してください
(そして、前述のヘッダと envelope アドレスに関する
セクションを読み直してください)。
メールは単にメールサーバのキューに入れておき、
fetchmail の ETRN や ODMR モードを使って定期的に
SMTP での送信を行わせる方が賢いやりかたでしょう
(この場合はもちろん、メールサーバでのメールの有効期限よりも短い間隔で
ポーリングをしなければならないことになります)。
このような設定ができないのならば、UUCP による配送を設定してみてください。
.PP
.\"O If you absolutely \fImust\fR use multidrop for this purpose, make sure
.\"O your mailserver writes an envelope-address header that fetchmail can
.\"O see.  Otherwise you \fIwill\fR lose mail and it \fIwill\fR come back
.\"O to haunt you.
どうしてもこの目的でマルチドロップを\fI使わなければならない\fRのであれば、
fetchmail が参照できる envelope アドレスヘッダを
メールサーバが書き込むように必ずしてください。
さもなくば、メールはきっと無くなってしまい、
あなたを呪うために帰ってくることになるでしょう。

.\"O .SS Speeding Up Multidrop Checking
.SS マルチドロップのチェックの高速化
.\"O Normally, when multiple users are declared 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O extracts recipient addresses as described above and checks each host
.\"O part with DNS to see if it's an alias of the mailserver.  If so, the
.\"O name mappings described in the to ... here declaration are done and
.\"O the mail locally delivered.
通常は、複数のユーザが宣言されているとき、
.I fetchmail
は受信者アドレスを先程説明したように展開し、
それぞれのホスト部分を DNSでチェックし、
これがメールサーバのエイリアスかどうかを調べます。
そうであれば、「to ... here」宣言で記述された名前のマッピングが実行され、
メールがローカルに配送されます。
.PP
.\"O This is the safest but also slowest method.  To speed it up,
.\"O pre-declare mailserver aliases with `aka'; these are checked before
.\"O DNS lookups are done.  If you're certain your aka list contains
.\"O .B all
.\"O DNS aliases of the mailserver (and all MX names pointing at it) 
.\"O you can declare `no dns' to suppress DNS lookups entirely and
.\"O \fIonly\fR match against the aka list.
これはとても安全ですが、非常に遅い方法です。
これを高速化するためには、
`aka' を使ってメールサーバのエイリアスを予め宣言してください。
これらは DNS の参照を行う前にチェックされます。
aka のリストがメールサーバの DNS エイリアス
(および、これを指す全ての MX 名) を
.B 全て
含んでいることが確かであれば、`no dns' を宣言して DNS 参照を完全に止め、
aka リストに対して\fIのみ\fRマッチングを行わせることができます。

.\"O .SH EXIT CODES
.SH 終了コード
.\"O To facilitate the use of 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O in shell scripts, an exit code is returned to give an indication
.\"O of what occurred during a given connection.
シェルスクリプト内で
.I fetchmail
をうまく使えるように、与えられた接続の間に起きたことを伝えるための
終了コードが返されるようになっています。
.PP
.\"O The exit codes returned by 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O are as follows:
.I fetchmail
が返す終了コードを以下に示します:
.IP 0
.\"O One or more messages were successfully retrieved (or, if the -c option
.\"O was selected, were found waiting but not retrieved).
1 つ以上のメッセージがうまく取得できた場合
(-c オプションを指定している時は、
取得待ちのメールを見つけ、取得を行わなかった場合)。
.IP 1
.\"O There was no mail awaiting retrieval.  (There may have been old mail still
.\"O on the server but not selected for retrieval.)
取得待ちのメールが無かった場合。
(サーバ上に古いメールがまだあるけれど、
取得されるものとして選ばれていなかった場合もあります。)
.IP 2
.\"O An error was encountered when attempting to open a socket to retrieve
.\"O mail.  If you don't know what a socket is, don't worry about it --
.\"O just treat this as an 'unrecoverable error'.  This error can also be
.\"O because a protocol fetchmail wants to use is not listed in /etc/services.
メール取得のためにソケットをオープンしようとしたときにエラーに出会った場合。
ソケットが何かを知らなくても、心配には及びません。
これは単に「どうしようもないエラー」として扱ってください。
このエラーは fetchmail が使おうとしたプロトコルが
/etc/services にリストされていない場合にも起こります。
.IP 3
.\"O The user authentication step failed.  This usually means that a bad 
.\"O user-id, password, or APOP id was specified.  Or it may mean that you 
.\"O tried to run fetchmail under circumstances where it did not have
.\"O standard input attached to a terminal and could not prompt for a
.\"O missing password.
ユーザ認証のステップで失敗した場合。
これは通常、ユーザ ID、パスワード、
APOP ID の指定が間違っていることを意味します。
これ以外の場合では、標準入力が端末に接続されていない状況で
fetchmail を実行しようとしていて、
入力できなかったパスワードを入力するためのプロンプトが
出せないことを意味しています。
.IP 4
.\"O Some sort of fatal protocol error was detected.
何らかの種類の致命的なプロトコルエラーが検出された場合。
.IP 5
.\"O There was a syntax error in the arguments to 
.\"O .I fetchmail.
.I fetchmail
に与えた引き数に文法エラーがある場合。
.IP 6
.\"O The run control file had bad permissions.
実行制御ファイルのパーミッションが正しくない場合。
.IP 7
.\"O There was an error condition reported by the server.  Can also
.\"O fire if
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O timed out while waiting for the server.
サーバからエラー状態が報告された場合。
サーバへの接続待ちで
.I fetchmail
がタイムアウトを起こした時にもこうなります。
.IP 8
.\"O Client-side exclusion error.  This means 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O either found another copy of itself already running, or failed in such
.\"O a way that it isn't sure whether another copy is running.
クライアント側の排他エラーの場合。これは
.I fetchmail
が既に動作している別の
.I fetchmail
を検出したか、検出に失敗したため
.I fetchmail
が動作しているかどうかはっきりしないことを意味します。
.IP 9
.\"O The user authentication step failed because the server responded "lock
.\"O busy".  Try again after a brief pause!  This error is not implemented
.\"O for all protocols, nor for all servers.  If not implemented for your
.\"O server, "3" will be returned instead, see above.  May be returned when
.\"O talking to qpopper or other servers that can respond with "lock busy"
.\"O or some similar text containing the word "lock".
サーバが応答で "lock busy" を返したために、
ユーザ認証ステップが失敗した場合。
ちょっと待ってから再挑戦してください!
このエラーはプロトコル全てに実装されているわけではないですし、
サーバ全てに実装されているわけでもありません。
このエラーがサーバに実装されていない場合には、
このコードではなく "2" が返されます (前の項目を参照してください)。
"lock busy" やこれに似たテキストで "lock" という語を含むものを応答として返す、
qpopper や他のサーバと通信したときにこのコードが返されることがあります。
.IP 10
.\"O The 
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O run failed while trying to do an SMTP port open or transaction.
SMTP ポートのオープンやトランザクションを行おうとしている時に
.I fetchmail
の動作が失敗した場合。
.IP 11
.\"O Fatal DNS error.  Fetchmail encountered an error while performing
.\"O a DNS lookup at startup and could not proceed.
致命的な DNS のエラー。fetchmail が起動時に DNS の参照に失敗し、
その先を実行できなかったときに起こります。
.IP 12
.\"O BSMTP batch file could not be opened.
BSMTP のバッチファイルをオープンできなかった場合。
.IP 13
.\"O Poll terminated by a fetch limit (see the --fetchlimit option).
取得の制限によりポーリングが終了した (--fetchlimit オプションを参照)。
.IP 14
.\"O Server busy indication.
サーバがビジーであることを示します。
.IP 23
.\"O Internal error.  You should see a message on standard error with
.\"O details.
内部エラーの場合。標準エラー出力に出るメッセージを詳しく見てください。
.PP
.\"O When
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O queries more than one host, return status is 0 if \fIany\fR query
.\"O successfully retrieved mail. Otherwise the returned error status is
.\"O that of the last host queried.
.I fetchmail
が複数のホストに問い合わせを行う場合、
\fIいずれか\fRの問い合わせでメールをうまく取得できれば、
ステータス 0 が返されます。
そうでないに返されるエラーステータスは、
最後に問い合わせを行ったホストのステータスとなります。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP 5
~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O default run control file
デフォルトの実行制御ファイル
.TP 5
~/.fetchids
.\"O default location of file associating hosts with last message IDs seen
.\"O (used only with newer RFC1725-compliant POP3 servers supporting the
.\"O UIDL command).
ホストと前回の読んだメールのメッセージ ID を対応づける
ファイルのデフォルトの位置
(UIDL コマンドをサポートしている、
RFC1725 準拠の最近の POP3 サーバでしか使うことができません)。
.TP 5
~/.fetchmail.pid
.\"O lock file to help prevent concurrent runs (non-root mode).
多重実行を防ぐためのロックファイル (非 root モードの場合)。
.TP 5
~/.netrc 
.\"O your FTP run control file, which (if present) will be searched for
.\"O passwords as a last resort before prompting for one interactively.
FTP の実行制御ファイル。(もしあるならば) 対話的にパスワードを求める前に、
最終的にパスワードが検索されるファイルです。
.TP 5
/var/run/fetchmail.pid
.\"O lock file to help prevent concurrent runs (root mode, Linux systems).
多重実行を防ぐためのロックファイル (root モード、Linux の場合)。
.TP 5
/etc/fetchmail.pid
.\"O lock file to help prevent concurrent runs (root mode, systems without /var/run).
多重実行を防ぐためのロックファイル
(root モード、/var/run が無いシステムの場合)。

.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O If the FETCHMAILUSER variable is set, it is used as the name of the
.\"O calling user (default local name) for purposes such as mailing error
.\"O notifications.  Otherwise, if either the LOGNAME or USER variable is
.\"O correctly set (e.g. the corresponding UID matches the session user ID)
.\"O then that name is used as the default local name.  Otherwise
.\"O \fBgetpwuid\fR(3) must be able to retrieve a password entry for the
.\"O session ID (this elaborate logic is designed to handle the case of
.\"O multiple names per userid gracefully).
環境変数 FETCHMAILUSER が設定されている場合、
エラー通知をメールで知らせるためのユーザ名として使われます
(デフォルトではローカル名が使われます)。
この環境変数が設定されていない場合、
環境変数 LOGNAME か USER の値が正しく設定されていれば 
(例えば、この値に対応する UID がセッションのユーザ ID に一致する)、
その名前がデフォルトのローカル名として使われます。
これらの環境変数も設定されていない場合、
\fBgetpwuid\fR(3) がセッション ID に対する
パスワードエントリを取得できなければいけません
(このような手の込んだロジックは、
1 つのユーザ ID に複数のユーザ名が対応する場合を
うまく扱うために用意されています)。

.\"O If the environment variable FETCHMAILHOME is set to a valid and
.\"O existing directory name, the .fetchmailrc and .fetchids and
.\"O \&.fetchmail.pid files are put there instead of in the invoking user's
.\"O home directory (and lose the leading dots on theirt names).  The
.\"O \&.netrc file is looked for in the the invoking user's home directory
.\"O regardless of FETCHMAILHOME's setting.
環境変数 FETCHMAILHOME が
実際に存在する正しいディレクトリ名に設定されている場合、
ファイル .fetchmailrc, .fetchids, .fetchmail.pid は、
起動したユーザのホームディレクトリではなく、
この環境変数で指定したディレクトリに置かれます
(ファイル名の先頭にあるドットは取り除かれます)。
\&.netrc ファイルは、FETCHMAILHOME の設定に関係なく、
起動したユーザのホームディレクトリでロックされます。

.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O If a
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O daemon is running as root, SIGHUP wakes it up from its sleep phase and
.\"O forces a poll of all non-skipped servers (this is in accordance with
.\"O the usual conventions for system daemons).
.I fetchmail
デーモンが root 権限で動作している場合には、
SIGHUP によりスリープ状態から覚め、
skip 指定でないサーバ全てに対してポーリングを行います
(これはシステムデーモンの普通の伝統に従うものです)。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O is running in daemon mode as non-root, use SIGUSR1 to wake it (this is
.\"O so SIGHUP due to logout can retain the default action of killing it).
デーモンモード
.I fetchmail
が root 権限以外で動作している場合、
デーモンを起こすには SIGUSR1 を使います
(logout による SIGHUP がデフォルトの動作をそのまま持ち、
fetchmail を kill するかもしれないためです)。
.PP
.\"O Running
.\"O .I fetchmail
.\"O in foreground while a background fetchmail is running will do
.\"O whichever of these is appropriate to wake it up.
バックグラウンドで
.I fetchmail
が動作しているときに、フォアグラウンドで
.I fetchmail
を実行すると、上記のうち適切なデーモンが起こされます。

.\"O .SH BUGS AND KNOWN PROBLEMS
.SH バグと既知の問題
.\"O The mda and plugin options interact badly.  In order to collect error
.\"O status from the MDA, fetchmail has to change its normal signal
.\"O handling so that dead plugin processes don't get reaped until the end
.\"O of the poll cycle.  This can cause resource starvation if too many
.\"O zombies accumulate.  So either don't deliver to a MDA using plugins or
.\"O risk being overrun by an army of undead.
mda オプションと plugin オプションは相性が良くありません。
MDA からエラー状態を取得するためには、
fetchmail は通常のシグナル処理を変更する必要があります。
このようにすると、ポーリングサイクルが終るまで
死んだプラグインプロセスが破棄されません。
そして、ゾンビプロセスが非常にたくさんできた場合は
リソースの枯渇が起こってしまいます。
プラグインを使った MDA への配送を行わないか、
大量のゾンビプロセスで溢れるかもしれないリスクを負うかのどちらかになります。
.PP
.\"O The RFC822 address parser used in multidrop mode chokes on some
.\"O @-addresses that are technically legal but bizarre.  Strange uses of
.\"O quoting and embedded comments are likely to confuse it.
マルチドロップモードで使われている RFC822 アドレスのパーザは、
技術的には正しいけれどおかしな @-アドレスで詰まってしまうことがあります。
また、クォートと埋め込みコメントの使い方がおかしいと、
パーザの動作がおかしくなりやすいです。
.PP
.\"O In a message with multiple envelope headers, only the last one
.\"O processed will be visible to fetchmail.  To get around this, use a
.\"O mailserver-side filter that consolidates the contents of all envelope
.\"O headers into a single one (procmail, mailagent, or maildrop can be
.\"O programmed to do this fairly easily).
メッセージに複数の envelope ヘッダがある場合、
fetchmail には最後に処理されたヘッダしか見えません。
これを回避するには、
envelope ヘッダの内容全てを 1 つのヘッダにまとめるフィルタ
(procmail, mailagent, maildrop に手順を指示すれば、
これはかなり簡単に行えます) をメールサーバ側で使ってください。
.PP
.\"O Use of some of these protocols requires that the program send
.\"O unencrypted passwords over the TCP/IP connection to the mailserver.
プロトコルのうちのいくつかを使う場合には、
プログラムが暗号化されていないパスワードを
メールサーバまで TCP/IP 接続上で送る必要があります。
.\"O This creates a risk that name/password pairs might be snaffled with a
.\"O packet sniffer or more sophisticated monitoring software.  Under Linux
.\"O and FreeBSD, the --interface option can be used to restrict polling to
.\"O availability of a specific interface device with a specific local or
.\"O remote IP address, but snooping is still possible if (a) either host
.\"O has a network device that can be opened in promiscuous mode, or (b)
.\"O the intervening network link can be tapped.  
これは、パケットスニファ (packet sniffer) や
もっと高機能な監視ソフトウェアによって
名前とパスワードの組を盗まれる危険性の元となります。
Linux と FreeBSD の場合、--interface オプションを使うと、
特定のローカルまたはリモートの IP アドレスを持つ
特定のインタフェースデバイスに対してのみ
ポーリングが可能であるように制限できますが、
その場合でも (a) どちらかのホストが
無差別モード (promiscuous mode) でオープンできる
ネットワークデバイスを持っているか、
(b) 間にあるネットワーク接続が盗聴可能であれば盗聴は可能です。
.\"O We recommend the use of
.\"O .IR ssh (1)
.\"O tunnelling to not only shroud your passwords but encrypt the entire
.\"O conversation.
パスワードを暗号化するだけでなく、全ての通信を暗号化するためにも、
.IR ssh (1)
トンネリングの使用をお勧めします。
.PP
.\"O Use of the %F or %T escapes in an mda option could open a security
.\"O hole, because they pass text manipulable by an attacker to a shell
.\"O command.  Potential shell characters are replaced by `_' before
.\"O execution.  The hole is further reduced by the fact that fetchmail
.\"O temporarily discards any suid privileges it may have while running the
.\"O MDA.  For maximum safety, however, don't use an mda command containing
.\"O %F or %T when fetchmail is run from the root account itself.
mda オプションで %F, %T エスケープを使うとセキュリティホールができます。
なぜなら、これらのエスケープは攻撃者が操作できるテキストを
シェルコマンドに渡すからです。
シェル文字になる可能性があるものは、実行の前に `_' に置換されます。
fetchmail は MDA を実行している間、
SUID により得ることができた権限を一時的に全て破棄するので、
このセキュリティホールはかなり小さくなっています。
しかし、できるだけ安全にするために、
fetchmail をroot のアカウントから実行するときには、
%F, %T を含むmda コマンドを使ってはいけません。
.PP
.\"O Fetchmail's method of sending bouncemail and spam bounces requires that
.\"O port 25 of localhost be available for sending mail via SMTP.
fetchmail における bouncemail と spambounce の出し方では、
ローカルホストの 25 番ポートで SMTP 経由のメールが送れなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O If you modify a
.\"O .I ~/.fetchmailrc
.\"O while a background instance is running and break the syntax, the
.\"O background instance will die silently.  Unfortunately, it can't 
.\"O die noisily because we don't yet know whether syslog should be enabled.
このプロセスをバックグラウンドで実行している時に
.I ~/.fetchmailrc
を修正し、文法を間違ってしまうと、
バックグラウンドのプロセスは何も言わずに終了してしまいます。
悪いことに、このプログラムは何かを書き出して終了することができません。
なぜなら、syslog を有効にすべき否かが、まだ分からないからです。
.PP
.\"O The -f - option (reading a configuration from stdin) is incompatible
.\"O with the plugin option.
(設定を標準入力から読み込む) -f - オプションは、
プラグインオプションとは互換性がありません。
.PP
.\"O The UIDL code is generally flaky and tends to lose its state on errors
.\"O and line drops (so that old messages are re-seen).  If this happens to
.\"O you, switch to IMAP4.
UIDL コードは一般的にあまり当てにならないもので、
行を飛ばした場合やエラーの場合に、コードの状態を失いやすい傾向があります
(そのため、古いメッセージが再度閲覧されてしまいます)。
このような場合は、IMAP4 に乗り換えて下さい。
.PP
.\"O The `principal' option only handles Kerberos IV, not V.
`principal' オプションは Kerberos IV しか扱わず、
Kerberos V は扱いません。
.PP
.\"O Send comments, bug reports, gripes, and the like to the
.\"O fetchmail-friends list <fetchmail-friends@lists.ccil.org>.  An HTML FAQ is
.\"O available at the fetchmail home page; surf to
.\"O http://www.tuxedo.org/~esr/fetchmail or do a WWW search for pages with
.\"O `fetchmail' in their titles.
コメント、バグ報告、苦情の類は、fetchmail-friends メーリングリスト
<fetchmail-friends@lists.ccil.org> に送ってください。
HTML 版の FAQ が fetchmail のホームページにあります。
http://www.tuxedo.org/~esr/fetchmail へ行くか、
`fetchmail' 関連のページを WWW で検索してください。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Eric S. Raymond <esr@snark.thyrsus.com>.  Too many other people to
.\"O name here have contributed code and patches. 
.\"O This program is descended from and replaces 
.\"O .IR popclient , 
.\"O by Carl Harris <ceharris@mal.com>; the internals have become quite different, 
.\"O but some of its interface design is directly traceable to that
.\"O ancestral program.
Eric S. Raymond <esr@snark.thyrsus.com>。
ここでは挙げられないほど多くの方々がコードやパッチを提供してくださいました。
このプログラムは Carl Harris <ceharris@mal.com> さん作の
.IR popclient
を基にしており、これを置き換えるものです。
内部的にはまったく異なるものになりましたが、
インタフェース設計の一部については、
このご先祖様のものをそのまま引き継いでいます。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
mutt(1), elm(1), mail(1), sendmail(8), popd(8), imapd(8), netrc(5)
.\"O .SH APPLICABLE STANDARDS
.SH 準拠している標準規約
.TP 5
SMTP/ESMTP:
RFC 821, RFC2821, RFC 1869, RFC 1652, RFC 1870, RFC1983, RFC 1985
.TP 5
mail:
RFC 822, RFC2822, RFC 1123, RFC 1892, RFC 1894
.TP 5
POP2:
RFC 937
.TP 5
POP3:
RFC 1081, RFC 1225, RFC 1460, RFC 1725, RFC1734, RFC 1939, RFC 1957,
RFC2195, RFC 2449
.TP 5
APOP:
RFC 1460, RFC 1725, RFC 1939
.TP 5
RPOP:
RFC 1081, RFC 1225
.TP 5
IMAP2/IMAP2BIS:
RFC 1176, RFC 1732
.TP 5
IMAP4/IMAP4rev1:
RFC 1730, RFC 1731, RFC 1732, RFC 2060, RFC 2061, RFC 2195, RFC 2177,
RFC 2683
.TP 5
ETRN:
RFC 1985
.TP 5
ODMR/ATRN:
RFC 2645
.TP 5
OTP:
RFC 1938
.TP 5
LMTP:
RFC 2033
.TP 5
GSSAPI:
RFC 1508
