.\"
.\" This manual page is a part of pstree-19
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon May 29 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Aug 26 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH KILLALL 1 "March 25, 2001" "Linux" "User Commands"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O killall \- kill processes by name
killall \- プロセスを名前で指定して kill する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.ad l
.B killall
.RB [ \-e , --exact ]
.RB [ \-g , \-\-process-group ]
.RB [ \-i , \-\-interactive ]
.RB [ \-q , \-\-quiet ]
.RB [ \-v , \-\-verbose ]
.RB [ \-w , \-\-wait ]
.RB [ \-V, \-\-version ]
.RB [ \-s , \-\-signal
.IR signal ]
.RB [ \-\- ]
.I name ...
.br
.B killall
.RB \-l
.br
.B killall
.RB \-V, \-\-version
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B killall
.\"O sends a signal to all processes running any of the specified commands. If no
.\"O signal name is specified, SIGTERM is sent.
.B killall
は指定したコマンドを実行している全てのプロセスにシグナルを送る。
シグナルの指定がなければ SIGTERM を送る。
.PP
.\"O Signals can be specified either by name (e.g. \fB\-HUP\fP) or by number
.\"O (e.g. \fB\-1\fP).
シグナルは名前 (例: \fB\-HUP\fP) ででも番号 (例: \fB\-1\fP) ででも指定できる。
.PP
.\"O If the command name contains a slash (\fB/\fP), processes executing that
.\"O particular file will be selected for killing, independent of their name.
コマンド名がスラッシュ (\fB/\fP) を含む場合は、
その指定したファイルを実行しているプロセスが
(実行時の名前が違っていても)
選択される。
.PP
.\"O \fBkillall\fP returns a non-zero return code if no process has been killed
.\"O for any of the listed commands. If at least one process has been killed for
.\"O each command, \fBkillall\fP returns zero.
指定したコマンドのプロセスがひとつも kill されなければ
.B killall
は 0 以外のリターンコードを返す。
各コマンドに対応するプロセスがひとつでも kill されれば  
.B killall
はゼロを返す。
.PP
.\"O A \fBkillall\fP process never kills itself (but may kill other \fBkillall\fP
.\"O processes).
.B killall
プロセスは、決して自分自身を kill しない
(しかし他の
.B killall
プロセスを kill するかもしれない)。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.IP "\fB\-e\fP, \fB\-\-exact\fP"
.\"O Require an exact match for very long names. If a command name is longer
.\"O than 15 characters, the full name may be unavailable (i.e. it is swapped
.\"O out). In this case, \fBkillall\fP will kill everything that matches within
.\"O the first 15 characters. With \fB\-e\fP, such entries are skipped.
.\"O \fBkillall\fP prints a message for each skipped entry 
.\"O if \fB\-v\fP is specified in addition to \fB\-e\fP,
とても長い名前に対して完全一致を要求する。
コマンド名が 15 文字よりも長いと、そのフルネームが利用できない
(スワップアウトされている) ことがあるかもしれない。
この場合
.B killall
は先頭 15 文字まで一致するもの全てを kill する .
\fB\-e\fP オプションを付けると、そのような項目は黙ってスキップされる。
.BR \-e " といっしょに " \-v
オプションが指定されていると、
.B killall
はスキップされた各エントリを表示する。
.IP "\fB\-g\fP, \fB\-\-process-group\fP"
.\"O Kill the process group to which the process belongs. The kill signal is only
.\"O sent once per group, even if multiple processes belonging to the same process
.\"O group were found.
指定したプロセスが所属しているプロセスグループにシグナルを送る。
そのプロセスグループに複数のプロセスが参加している場合でも、
kill シグナルはグループあたり 1 つだけ送られる。
.IP "\fB\-i\fP, \fB\-\-interactive\fP"
.\"O Interactively ask for confirmation before killing.
kill する前に対話的に確認を求める。
.IP "\fB\-l\fP, \fB\-\-list\fP"
.\"O List all known signal names.
知っているシグナル名をすべて表示する。
.IP "\fB\-q\fP, \fB\-\-quiet\fP"
.\"O Do not complain if no processes were killed.
kill するプロセスがなかった場合も表示を行わない。
.IP "\fB\-v\fP, \fB\-\-verbose\fP"
.\"O Report if the signal was successfully sent.
シグナルの送信に成功したら報告する。
.IP "\fB\-V\fP, \fB\-\-version\fP"
.\"O Display version information.
バージョン情報を表示する。
.IP "\fB\-w\fP, \fB\-\-wait\fP"
.\"O Wait for all killed processes to die. \fBkillall\fP checks once per second if
.\"O any of the killed processes still exist and only returns if none are left.
.\"O Note that \fBkillall\fP may wait forever if the signal was ignored, had no
.\"O effect, or if the process stays in zombie state.
kill されたプロセスが終了するのを待つ。
.B killall
は kill されたプロセスが残っているかどうかを 1 秒に一回チェックし、
すべてなくなるまでリターンしない。
シグナルが無視されたり、効果がなかったり、
プロセスがゾンビ状態に留まってしまったりした場合には、
.B killall
は永遠に待ちつづけることになるかもしれない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.nf
.\"O /proc	location of the proc file system
/proc	proc ファイルシステムの場所
.fi
.\"O .SH "KNOWN BUGS"
.SH 既知のバグ
.\"O Killing by file only works for executables that are kept open during
.\"O execution, i.e. impure executables can't be killed this way.
ファイルによる kill は、
実行ファイルがその実行中にオープン状態に置かれる場合にのみ有効である。
すなわち impure な実行ファイルをこの方法で選択することはできない。
.PP
.\"O Be warned that typing \fBkillall\fP \fIname\fP may not have the desired
.\"O effect on non-Linux systems, especially when done by a privileged
.\"O user.
Linux 以外のシステムでは \fBkillall\fP \fIname\fP
が望んだ動作をするとは限らないことに注意せよ。
特権ユーザでは特に注意すること。
.PP
.\"O \fBkillall \-w\fP doesn't detect if a process disappears and is replaced by
.\"O a new process with the same PID between scans.
.B killall \-w
は、スキャンとスキャンの間にプロセスが消え、
同じ PID の 別プロセスで置き換えられていても、
これを検知できない。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O Werner Almesberger <Werner.Almesberger@epfl.ch> wrote the original version
.\"O of psmisc.  Since version 20 Craig Small <csmall@small.dropbear.id.au> 
.\"O can be blamed.
Werner Almesberger <Werner.Almesberger@epfl.ch> が psmisc の
オリジナルのバージョンを書いた。
バージョン 20 からは、Craig Small <csmall@small.dropbear.id.au> が
責任者である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O kill(1), fuser(1), pgrep(1), pidof(1), ps(1), kill(2)
.BR kill (1),
.BR fuser (1),
.BR pgrep (1),
.BR pidof (1),
.BR ps (1),
.BR kill (2)
.\"{{{}}}
