.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998-2000 Atsushi Ito & NAKANO Takeo
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Sep 11 16:08:39 JST 1998
.\"         by Atsushi Ito <ati@rd.masc-ngo.co.jp>
.\" Proofed, Updated & Modified Mon 29 May 2000
.\"         by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: return code     リターンコード
.\"WORD: non-zero        非ゼロ
.TH PIDOF 1 "May 6, 1998" "Linux" "User Commands"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pidof \- finds processes by name and lists their PIDs
pidof \- 名前でプロセスを見つけ、それらの PID を一覧表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.ad l
.B pidof
.RB [ \-eg ]
.I name ...
.br
.B pidof
.RB \-V
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B pidof
.\"O lists the PIDs of all processes running any of the specified commands.
.B pidof
は、指定されたいずれかのコマンドを実行しているプロセス全ての
PID を一覧表示する。
.PP
.\"O If the command name contains a slash (\fB/\fP), processes executing that
.\"O particular file will be selected, independent of their name.
コマンド名がスラッシュ (\fB/\fP) を含む場合は、
その指定したファイルを実行しているプロセスが
(実行時の名前が違っていても)
選択される。
.PP
.\"O \fBpidof\fP returns a non-zero return code if no process has been found 
.\"O for any of the listed commands. If at least one process has been found for
.\"O each command, \fBpidof\fP returns zero.
指定したコマンドのプロセスがひとつも見つからなければ、
.B pidof
は 0 以外のリターンコードを返す。
各コマンドに対応するプロセスがひとつでも見つかれば、  
.B pidof
はゼロを返す。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.IP \fB\-e\fP
.\"O Require an exact match for very long names. If a command name is longer
.\"O than 15 characters, the full name may be unavailable (i.e. it is swapped
.\"O out). In this case, \fBpidof\fP will list everything that matches within
.\"O the first 15 characters. With \fB\-e\fP, such entries are silently skipped.
とても長い名前に対して完全一致を要求する。
コマンド名が 15 文字よりも長いと、そのフルネームが利用できない
(スワップアウトされている) ことがあるかもしれない。
この場合 \fBpidof\fP は先頭 15 文字まで一致するもの全てを一覧表示する。  
\fB\-e\fP オプションを付けると、そのような項目は黙ってスキップされる。
.IP \fB\-g\fP
.\"O Show process group IDs instead of process IDs. If multiple processes with
.\"O the same process group ID were found, only the first process is shown.
プロセス ID の代わりにプロセスグループの ID を表示する。
同じプロセスグループ ID を持つプロセスが複数見つかった場合は、
最初のプロセスだけを表示する。
.IP \fB\-V\fP
.\"O Display version information.
バージョン情報を表示する。
.SH ファイル
.nf
.\"O /proc	location of the proc file system
/proc	proc ファイルシステムの場所
.\"O .fi
.\"O .SH "KNOWN BUGS"
.SH 既知のバグ
.\"O Selection by file only works for executables that are kept open during
.\"O execution, i.e. impure executables can't be selected this way.
ファイルによるプロセスの選択は、
実行ファイルがその実行中にオープン状態に置かれる場合にのみ有効である。
すなわち impure な実行ファイルをこの方法で選択することはできない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Werner Almesberger <Werner.Almesberger@epfl.ch>
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O killall(1), fuser(1), ps(1)
.BR killall (1),
.BR fuser (1),
.BR ps (1)
.\"{{{}}}
