.\"
.\" This manual page is a part of pstree-19
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998-2000 Shinji Orito & NAKANO Takeo
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 4 Jul 1998 by Shinji Orito <shinji@os.gulf.or.jp>
.\" Proofed, Updated & Modified Mon 29 May 2000
.\"         by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PSTREE 1 "May 6, 1998" "Linux" "User Commands"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pstree \- display a tree of processes
pstree \- プロセスのツリーを表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.ad l
.B pstree
.RB [ \-a ]
.RB [ \-c ]
.RB [ \-h | \-H \fIpid\fB ]
.RB [ \-l ]
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-p ]
.RB [ \-u ]
.RB [ \-G | \-U ]
.RB [ \fIpid\fB | \fIuser\fB]
.br
.B pstree
.RB \-V
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B pstree
.\"O shows running processes as a tree. The tree is rooted at either
.\"O \fIpid\fP or \fBinit\fP if \fIpid\fP is omitted. If a user name is specified,
.\"O all process trees rooted at processes owned by that user are shown.
.B pstree
は実行中のプロセスをツリー形式で表示する。
ツリーは \fIpid\fP を起点とする。
\fIpid\fP が省略されると \fBinit\fP を起点とする。
ユーザー名が指定されると、
そのユーザーのプロセスを起点とする全てのプロセスツリーを表示する。
.PP
.\"O \fBpstree\fP visually merges identical branches by putting them in square
.\"O brackets and prefixing them with the repetition count, e.g.
同じ内容の分岐があると、
.B pstree
はそれらを [] で括り、繰り返し数を前に付けてまとめる。
例えば
.nf
.sp
    init\-+\-getty
         |\-getty
         |\-getty
         `-getty
.sp
.fi
.\"O becomes
は
.nf
.sp
    init\-\-\-4*[getty]
.sp
.fi
となる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.IP \fB\-a\fP
.\"O Show command line arguments. If the command line of a process is swapped out,
.\"O that process is shown in parentheses. \fB\-a\fP implicitly disables compaction.
コマンドラインの引数を表示する。
プロセスのコマンドラインがスワップアウトされているときは、
そのプロセスを括弧で括って表示する。
\fB\-a\fP は暗黙の内に [] によるまとめ表示を無効にする。
.IP \fB\-c\fP
.\"O Disable compaction of identical subtrees. By default, subtrees are compacted
.\"O whenever possible.
同じ内容のサブツリーをまとめない。
デフォルトでは、可能な限り常に同内容のサブツリーをまとめる。
.IP \fB\-G\fP
.\"O Use VT100 line drawing characters.
VT100 の 罫線文字 (line drawing character) を使う。
.IP \fB\-h\fP
.\"O Highlight the current process and its ancestors. This is a no-op if the
.\"O terminal doesn't support highlighting or if neither the current process
.\"O nor any of its ancestors are in the subtree being shown.
カレントプロセスとその先祖のプロセスを強調表示する。
ターミナルが強調表示をサポートしていなかったり、
カレントプロセスとその上位グループのいずれもが
ツリーに属していなければ、この指定は単に無効となる。
.IP \fB\-H\fP
.\"O Like \fB\-h\fP, but highlight the specified process instead. Unlike with
.\"O \fB\-h\fP, \fBpstree\fP fails when using \fB\-H\fP if highlighting is not
.\"O available.
\fB\-h\fP と似ているが、指定したプロセスを強調表示する。
\fB\-h\fP とは違い、
.B pstree
は \fB\-H\fP の強調表示ができない場合には失敗する。
.IP \fB\-l\fP
.\"O Display long lines. By default, lines are truncated to the display width or
.\"O 132 if output is sent to a non-tty or if the display width is unknown.
長い行を表示する。
デフォルトでは、長い行はディスプレイの幅で打ち切られる。
出力が tty 以外に送られる場合や、
ディスプレイの幅が分からない場合は 132 桁で打ち切られる。
.IP \fB\-n\fP
.\"O Sort processes with the same ancestor by PID instead of by name. (Numeric
.\"O sort.)
同じ親を持つプロセスどうしを、名前でなく PID でソートする。(数値ソート) 
.IP \fB\-p\fP
.\"O Show PIDs. PIDs are shown as decimal numbers in parentheses after each
.\"O process name. \fB\-p\fP implicitly disables compaction.
PID を表示する。PID は10進数でプロセス名の後に括弧付で表示される。
\fB\-p\fP を付けると、ツリーのまとめ表示は行わない。
.IP \fB\-u\fP
.\"O Show uid transitions. Whenever the uid of a process differs from the uid of
.\"O its parent, the new uid is shown in parentheses after the process name.
uid の遷移を表示する。
プロセスの uid が親の uid と異なる時は、
常にその新しい uid がプロセス名の後に括弧付で表示される。
.IP \fB\-U\fP
.\"O Use UTF-8 (Unicode) line drawing characters. Under Linux 1.1-54 and above,
.\"O UTF-8 mode is entered on the console with \fBecho -e '\\033%8'\fP and left
.\"O with \fBecho -e '\\033%@'\fP
UTF-8 (Unicode) の罫線文字 (line drawing character) を使う。
Linux 1.1-54 以降においては、コンソールは
\fBecho -e '\\033%8'\fP で UTF-8 モードに入り、
\fBecho -e '\\033%@'\fP で終了する。
.IP \fB\-V\fP
.\"O Display version information.
バーション情報を表示する。
.SH ファイル
.nf
.\"O /proc	location of the proc file system
/proc	proc ファイルシステムの場所
.\"O .fi
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Werner Almesberger <Werner.Almesberger@epfl.ch>
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O ps(1), top(1)
.BR ps (1),
.BR top (1)
.\"{{{}}}
