'\" t
.\" @(#)lilo.conf.5 1.0 950728 aeb
.\" This page is based on the lilo docs, which carry the following
.\" COPYING condition:
.\"
.\" LILO program code, documentation and auxiliary programs are
.\" Copyright 1992-1998 Werner Almesberger.
.\" Extensions to LILO, documentation and auxiliary programs are
.\" Copyright 1999-2001 John Coffman.
.\" All rights reserved by the respective copyright holders.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms of parts of or the
.\" whole original or derived work are permitted provided that the
.\" original work is properly attributed to the author. The name of the
.\" author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\" this software without specific prior written permission. This work
.\" is provided "as is" and without any express or implied warranties.
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 UEYAMA Rui,TACHIBANA Akira
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Jul 27 22:54:48 JST 1996
.\"         by UEYAMA Rui <ueyama@campusnet.or.jp>
.\"            TACHIBANA Akira <tati@tky.threewebnet.or.jp>
.\" Modified Sat May  3 12:31:22 JST 1997
.\"	by SUGIURA Yoshiki <yox@in.aix.or.jp>
.\" Modified Thu May  6 01:57:32 JST 1999
.\"	by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@tky.3web.ne.jp>
.\" Proofed and Modified Fri Aug 20 1999
.\"     by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Aug 14 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Oct 15 09:39:50 JST 2001
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	boot loader		ブートローダ
.\"WORD:	boot sector		ブートセクター
.\"WORD:	chain loader		チェーンローダ
.\"WORD:	verbose			詳細
.\"
.TH LILO.CONF 5 "31 Oct 2001"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O lilo.conf \- configuration file for lilo
lilo.conf \- lilo の設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.LP
.\"O This file, by default
.\"O .IR /etc/lilo.conf ,
.\"O is read by the boot loader installer 'lilo' (see lilo(8)).
このファイル (デフォルトでは
.IR /etc/lilo.conf )
は、ブートローダのインストーラである 'lilo' が読み込む
.RB ( lilo (8)
を参照)。
.LP
.\"O It might look as follows:
内容は例えば以下のようになっている:
.IP
.nf
# lilo.conf
#
#  global options:
boot=/dev/hda
prompt
timeout=150
lba32
compact
vga=normal
root=/dev/hda1
read-only
menu-title=" John's Computer "
#
#  bootable kernel images:
image=/boot/zImage-1.5.99
     label=try
image=/boot/zImage-1.0.9
     label=1.0.9
image=/tamu/vmlinuz
     label=tamu
     root=/dev/hdb2
     vga=ask
#
#  other operating systems:
other=/dev/hda3
     label=dos
other=/dev/hdb5
     label=os2
     loader=/boot/os2_d.b
     table=E:
.fi
.LP
.\"O This configuration file specifies that lilo uses the Master
.\"O Boot Record on /dev/hda. (For a discussion of the various ways
.\"O to use lilo, and the interaction with other operating systems,
.\"O see user.tex from the lilo documentation.)
この設定ファイルでは、
lilo が /dev/hda の Master Boot Record を 
用いるように記述してある。
(色々な lilo の使い方や、他のオペレーティングシステムとの関係
に関する詳細は、 lilo のドキュメントにある user.tex を
読むこと。)
.LP
.\"O When booting, the boot loader will issue its 
.\"O .I "boot:"
.\"O prompt and wait for you to enter the label of the kernel (and any options)
.\"O which you wish to boot. At any time you may hit [Tab] to see
.\"O a list of kernel/other labels.
ブートローダはブート時に、
.I "boot:"
というプロンプトを出して、ユーザーが希望するカーネルのラベル
(とオプション) が入力されるのを待つ。
[Tab] を入力すれば、いつでもカーネルとラベルの一覧を見ることができる。
.\"O Alternately, if the \fBboot-menu.b\fP boot loader is installed,
.\"O a menu of boot options will be presented for your selection.
.\"O The title of this menu is overridden with the menu
.\"O title specification in this configuration file.
\fBboot-menu.b\fP ブートローダがインストールされている場合、
選んだカーネルのブートオプションのメニューが表示される。
.\"O If you enter nothing,
.\"O then the default kernel image, the first mentioned, (/boot/zImage-1.5.99)
.\"O will be booted after a timeout of 15 seconds (150 deciseconds).
.\"O There can be up to 16 images mentioned in lilo.conf.
何も入力しない場合、15 秒 (15 × 1/10 秒) のタイムアウトの後、
初めに記述されているデフォルトのカーネルイメージ
(/boot/zImage-1.5.99) がブートされる。
lilo.conf には最大 16 個のイメージを記述することができる。
.LP
.\"O As can be seen above, a configuration file starts with a number
.\"O of global options (the top 9 lines in the example),
.\"O followed by descriptions of the options for the various images.
.\"O An option in an image description will override a global option.
上記のように、設定ファイルはいくつかのグローバルオプション
(例では最初の 9 行) で始まり、種々の image セクションがそれに続く。
image セクションに書かれているオプションは、
グローバルオプションを上書きする。
.LP
.\"O Comment lines may appear anywhere, and begin with the "#" character.
コメント行はどこに書いても構わず、"#" 文字で始まる。

.\"O .SH "GLOBAL OPTIONS"
.SH グローバルオプション
.\"O There are many possible keywords. The description below is
.\"O almost literally from user.tex (just slightly abbreviated).
多くのキーワードがある。以下の説明はほとんど
user.tex と同じである (ちょっとだけ短い)。
.TP
.BI "backup=" <backup-file>
.\"O Copy the original boot sector to
.\"O .I backup-file
.\"O (which may also be a device, e.g.
.\"O .IR /dev/null )
.\"O instead of
.\"O .IR /boot/boot.NNNN .
元の ブートセクタを
.IR /boot/boot.NNNN
ではなく、
.I backup-file
にコピーする
.RI ( /dev/null
などのデバイスファイルを指定することも可能である)。
.TP
.BI "bitmap=" <bitmap-file>
.\"O Specifies use of a 640x480x16 bitmap file as the background on which a boot
.\"O menu is displayed.  May not be used if 'message=' is specified.  Requires
.\"O that 'install=' specify a boot-loader which is capable of displaying the
.\"O bitmap; i.e., 
.\"O .IR boot-bmp.b "."
ブートメニューを表示するときの背景に使う
640x480x16 のビットマップファイルを指定する。
\&'message=' が指定されている場合には使ってはならない。
ビットマップを表示できるブートローダ (例えば
.IR boot-bmp.b )
を 'install=' を使って指定する必要がある。
.TP
.BI "bmp-colors=" <fg>,<bg>,<sh>,<hfg>,<hbg>,<hsh>
.\"O Specifies the decimal values of the colors to be used for the menu display
.\"O on a 'bitmap=' background.  The list consists of 6 entries, 3 for normal
.\"O text followed by 3 for highlighted text.  The order of each triple is:
.\"O foreground color, background color, shadow color.  If background color is
.\"O not specified, "transparent" is assumed.  If shadow color is not specified,
.\"O then "none" is assumed.  The list entries are separated by commas, with no
.\"O spaces.
\&'bitmap=' で指定した背景上でメニューを表示する際に使われる色を
10 進数で指定する。
このリストは 6 つのエントリから構成され、
始めの 3 つは標準時の文字色であり、
その後の 3 つはハイライト時の文字色である。
3 色組は前景色・背景色・陰影色という順番になっている。
背景色が指定されていない場合は、「透明 (transparent)」であると仮定する。
陰影色が指定されていない場合は、「なし (none)」であると仮定する。
リストのエントリは、スペースを入れずにコンマで区切られる。
.TP
.BI "bmp-table=" <x>,<y>,<ncol>,<nrow>,<xsep>
.\"O Specifies the location and layout of the menu table.  <x>,<y> specify the
.\"O starting x- and y-position of the upper left corner of the table in
.\"O character coordinates: x in [1..80], y in [1..25]. <ncol> is the number of
.\"O columns in the menu (1..3); and <nrow> is the number of rows in each column.
メニューテーブルの位置と配置を指定する。
<x>,<y> は、文字座標おけるテーブルの左上の x 座標と y 座標を指定し、
x は [1..80], y は [1..25] の範囲である。
<ncol> はメニューの列数で (1..3) の範囲である。
<nrow> は各列の行数である。
.\"O If more than one column is specified, then <xsep> is the number of character
.\"O columns between the leftmost characters in each column: (18..40). If pixel
.\"O addressing is used, instead of character addressing, then any of <x>, <y>,
.\"O or <xsep> may be specified with a 'p' suffix on the decimal value.
列数を 2 以上に指定した場合、
<xsep> は各列の左端の文字の間の文字数を指定し、(18..40) の範囲である。
文字数ではなくピクセル値で位置を指定する場合は、
10 進数の値の後ろに 'p' を付けて <x>, <y>, <xsep> を指定する。
.TP
.BI "bmp-timer=" <x>,<y>,<fg>,<bg>,<sh>
.\"O Optional specification of the 'timeout=' countdown timer.  <x>,<y>
.\"O specifies the character (or pixel) coordinate of the location of the timer,
.\"O as for 'bmp-table=' above;
.\"O and the color triple specifes the character color attributes, as for
.\"O 'bmp-colors=' above, with the exception that the background
.\"O .I must
.\"O be specified.
カウントダウンタイマー 'timeout=' のオプション指定。
<x>,<y> は、前述の 'bmp-table=' と同様に、
タイマーの位置を文字列 (またはピクセル) 座標で指定する。
また 3 色の組は、前述の 'bmp-colors=' と同様に、文字の色属性を指定する。
ただし、背景色を指定しなければ\fIならない\fR。
.TP
.BI "boot=" <boot-device>
.\"O Sets the name of the device (e.g. a hard disk partition) that contains
.\"O the boot sector. If this keyword is omitted, the boot sector is read
.\"O from (and possibly written to) the device that is currently mounted as root.
ブートセクターを含むデバイス (例えばハードディスクのパーティション) の
デバイスファイル名を設定する。このキーワードが省略された場合、
ブートセクターは現在ルートとしてマウントされているデバイスから
読み込み (およびおそらく書き出し) を行う。
.\"O A raid installation is initiated by specifying a RAID1 device as the boot
.\"O device; e.g., "boot=/dev/md0".  Note that LILO version 22.0 and later
.\"O operate diffenently from earlier versions with respect to the actual
.\"O location of the boot records.
raid 装置は、たとえば "boot=/dev/md0" というように、
RAID1 デバイスをブートデバイスに指定して初期化される。
LILO のバージョン 22.0 以降では、
ブートレコードの実際の位置が以前のものと異なる。
.TP
.BI "change-rules"
.\"O Defines boot-time changes to partition type numbers (`hiding').
パーティションのタイプ番号のブート時変更 (パーティションを隠すかどうか)
を定義する。
.IP
.nf
change-rules
   reset
   type=DOS12
      normal=1
      hidden=0x11
   type=DOS16_small
      normal=4
      hidden=0x14
   type=DOS16_big
      normal=0x06
      hidden=0x16
.fi
.IP
.\"O The above excerpt from a configuration file specifies that all default
.\"O .I change-rules
.\"O are removed ("reset"), and the change-rules for three partition types
.\"O are specified.  Without the \fIreset\fP, the three types specified would
.\"O have been added to the existing default change-rules.  Normally, the default
.\"O rules are sufficient.  
上に示した設定ファイルからの抜粋では、
全てのデフォルト
.I change-rules
が ("reset" で) 削除されてから、
3 つのパーティションタイプについての change-rules が指定されている。
\fIreset\fP を指定しないと、指定された 3 つのタイプが
既存のデフォルト change-rules に追加される。
通常は、デフォルトのルールで充分である。
.\"O The strings which define the partition types
.\"O are used in a
.\"O .I change
.\"O section (see below), with the suffixes "_normal" or "_hidden" appended.
.\"O See section "Partition type change rules" of user.tex for more details.
パーティションタイプを定義する文字列は、
サフィックス "_normal" または "_hidden" を後ろにつけて
.I change
セクションで使われる (下記参照)。
詳細は user.tex の中の "Partition type change rules" セクションを参照すること。
.TP
.BI "compact"
.\"O Tries to merge read requests for adjacent sectors into a single 
.\"O read request. This drastically reduces load time and keeps the map 
.\"O smaller. Using `compact' is especially recommended when booting from a 
.\"O floppy disk. 
ブートセクター付近への readリクエストを、1 回にまとめられるか試行する。
マップを小さく保ったままで、ロード時間を非常に短縮できる。
特にフロッピィディスクからのブートを行う場合は `compact' を使うことを
薦める。
.TP
.BI "default=" <name>
.\"O Uses the specified image as the default boot image. If `default' is omitted,
.\"O the image appearing first in the configuration file is used.
指定されたカーネルイメージをデフォルトのブートイメージとする。
`default' が省略された場合、設定ファイルの最初に
記述が現れたカーネルイメージがデフォルトとなる。
.TP
.BI "delay=" <tsecs>
.\"O Specifies the number of tenths of a second the boot loader should 
.\"O wait before automatically booting a locked command line,
.\"O a command line pre-stored by
.\"O "lilo -R", or the default `image=' or `other='.
ブートローダが自動的にブートするまでの待ち時間を 0.1 秒単位で指定する。
現在ロックされているコマンドライン、
または "lilo -R" で前もって設定されたコマンドライン、
またはデフォルトの `image=' や `other=' で指定された
コマンドラインを使ってブートされる。
.\"O When `delay' is non-zero, the boot loader will wait for an interrupt for the 
.\"O specified interval. If an interrupt is received, or
.\"O is already waiting, the \fBboot:\fP
.\"O prompt will be be issued, and no automatic boot will take place. The setting
.\"O of CAPS LOCK or SCROLL LOCK, or any of the
.\"O keys ALT, CTRL, or SHIFT, when held down, are taken as interrupts.
`delay' が 0 でない場合、ブートローダは指定された秒数の間だけ
割り込みが行われるのを待つ。
割り込みを受け取った場合、または割り込みを待っている間は、
プロンプト \fBboot:\fP を表示して、自動ブートを行わない。
CAPS LOCK や SCROLL LOCK が ON になっている場合、
または ALT, CTRL, SHIFT のどれかが押された場合、
割り込みとして解釈される。

.\"O This action is modified by specifying `prompt' (see below).
この動作は `prompt' を指定することで変更できる (下記参照)。
.TP
.BI "disk=" <device-name>
.\"O Defines non-standard parameters for the specified disk.
.\"O See section "Disk geometry" of user.tex for details.
.\"O Especially useful is the `bios=' parameter.
指定されたディスク対する非標準的なパラメータを定義する。
詳細は user.tex の中の "Disk geometry" セクションを参照すること。
特に `bios=' パラメータは便利である。
.\"O The BIOS numbers your disks 0x80, 0x81, etc. and it is impossible
.\"O to decide which Linux disk corresponds to which BIOS disk
.\"O (since this depends on the BIOS setup, and on the type of BIOS),
BIOS はディスクを 0x80, 0x81 という風に番号づけするため、Linux カーネルでの
ディスクの認識と BIOS でのディスクの認識の間で不整合が生ずる場合がある
(これは BIOS の種類と設定に依存する)。
.\"O so if you have an unusual setup you need to state the correspondence
.\"O between Linux disks and BIOS disks.
.\"O For example,
よって、もし Linux カーネルと BIOS でのディスクの認識を通常と
異なる設定にしたい場合は、このパラメータによって対応を記述する必要がある。
次に例を挙げる。
.sp
.nf
       disk=/dev/sda
            bios=0x80
       disk=/dev/hda
            bios=0x81
.fi
.sp
.\"O would say that your SCSI disk is the first BIOS disk,
.\"O and your (primary master) IDE disk is the second BIOS disk.
上の記述では、SCSI ディスクを BIOS が認識する 1 番目のディスクとし、
(プライマリマスタにつながっている) IDE のディスクを BIOS が認識する
2 番目のディスクとする。
.TP
.BI "disktab=" <disktab-file>
.\"O Specifies the name of the disk parameter table.
.\"O The map installer looks for
.\"O .I /etc/disktab
.\"O if `disktab' is omitted. The use of disktabs is discouraged.
ディスクのパラメータテーブル名を指定する。
`disktab' が省略されていた場合、マップインストーラは
.I /etc/disktab
を参照する。
`disktab' を使用することはあまりお薦めできない。
.TP
.BI "fix-table"
.\"O This allows lilo to adjust 3D addresses in partition tables. Each 
.\"O partition entry contains a 3D (sector/head/cylinder) and a linear 
.\"O address of the first and the last sector of the partition. If a 
.\"O partition is not track-aligned and if certain other operating systems 
.\"O (e.g. PC/MS-DOS or OS/2) are using the same disk, they may change the 
.\"O 3D address. lilo can store its boot sector only on partitions where 
.\"O both address types correspond. lilo re-adjusts incorrect 3D start 
.\"O addresses if `fix-table' is set.
lilo にパーティションテーブルの 3D (sector/head/cylinder) アドレスの
調節を許可する。それぞれのパーティションエントリには、
最初と最後のセクタのリニアアドレスと 3D アドレスが入っている。
同じディスクを他の OS (例えば、MS/PC-DOS や OS/2) が使っている場合や
パーティションがトラックに切られていない場合には、
3D アドレスが変わるかもしれない。
lilo は両者のアドレスタイプが一致した
パーティションにだけブートセクタを保存できる。
`fix-table' をセットすると、lilo は間違った
3D スタートアドレスを修正する。

.\"O WARNING: This does not guarantee that other operating systems may 
.\"O not attempt to reset the address later. It is also possible that this 
.\"O change has other, unexpected side-effects. The correct fix is to 
.\"O re-partition the drive with a program that does align partitions to 
.\"O tracks. Also, with some disks (e.g. some large EIDE disks with address 
.\"O translation enabled), under some circumstances, it may even be 
.\"O unavoidable to have conflicting partition table entries.
警告： 他のOS が後でアドレスを上書きする可能性がある。
また、これは思わぬ副作用を引き起こすかもしれない。
正しい修正であっても、パーティションを
トラックに合わせようとするようなプログラムでは、
これによって再パーティションがされてしまうかも知れない。
またある種のディスク (例えばアドレス変換の可能ないくつかの Large EIDE) では、
パーティションテーブルの内容がコンフリクトし、
修正できなくなる場合がありうる。
.TP
.BI "force-backup=" <backup-file>
.\"O Like `backup', but overwrite an old backup copy if it exists.
`backup' と同様だが、バックアップが存在しても上書きする。
.TP
.BI "geometric"
.\"O Force disk addressing which is compatible with older versions of LILO. 
.\"O Geometric addressing uses sector/head/cylinder addresses, and is limited to
.\"O disk cylinders up to 1023.  If inaccessible cylinders are referenced,
.\"O diagnostics will be issued at boot-install time, rather than boot-time. 
.\"O With a newer BIOS, use of 'lba32' is recommended.
以前のバージョンの LILO と互換性のあるディスクアドレスを使わせる。
ジオメトリアドレスには sector/head/cylinder という形式が使われ、
ディスクシリンダ数が 1023 に制限されている。
アクセスできないシリンダが参照されている場合、
ブート時ではなく、ブートローダのインストール時に診断メッセージが出される。
最近の BIOS の場合は、'lba32' の使用を推奨する。
.TP
.BI "ignore-table"
.\"O tells lilo to ignore corrupt partition tables. 
おかしくなったパーティションテーブルを無視するよう lilo に指示する。
.TP
.BI "install=" <boot-loader>
.\"O Install the specified file as the new boot loader. 
指定されたファイルを新しいブートローダとしてインストールする。
.\"O Starting with
.\"O version 21.5, two boot loaders are available:
.\"O .I boot-text.b
.\"O and \fIboot-menu.b\fP, with
.\"O .I boot.b
.\"O a symbolic link to the latter. 
バージョン 21.5 からは、
.I boot-text.b
と \fIboot-menu.b\fP の 2 つのブートローダが使用可能になった。
.I boot.b
は後者へのシンボリックリンクである。
.\"O Both boot loaders allow the entry
.\"O of kernel command line options in exactly the same fashion. Both also have full
.\"O serial line support (see \fBserial=\fP below), although no menu
.\"O capabilities are available
.\"O on the serial terminal. The former is
.\"O available for strict compatibility with previous versions of LILO.
両方のブートローダで、全く同じ形式の
カーネルコマンドラインオプションのエントリを使うことができる。
さらに両方ともシリアルライン (下記の \fBserial=\fP を参照) が
完全にサポートされているが、シリアル端末にはメニュー機能がない。
前者は以前の LILO との厳密な互換性を持たせるために使用可能である。
.\"O If `install' is omitted,
.\"O .I /boot/boot.b
.\"O is used as the default.
`install' が省略されると、
.I /boot/boot.b
がデフォルトで使われる。
.TP
.BI "lba32"
.\"O Generate 32-bit Logical Block Addresses instead of sector/head/cylinder 
.\"O addresses. If the BIOS supports packet addressing, then packet calls will be
.\"O used to access the disk. This allows booting from any partition on disks
.\"O with more than 1024 cylinders.
sector/head/cylinder 形式のアドレスではなく、
32 ビットの論理ブロックアドレス (LBA) を生成する。
BIOS がパケットアドレッシングに対応している場合、
ディスクにアクセスするときにパケットコールを用いる。
これにより、1024 シリンダ以上あるディスクの
どのパーティションからでもブートできるようになる。
.\"O If the BIOS does not support packet addressing, then 'lba32' addresses are
.\"O translated to sector/head/cylinder ('geometric'), just as for 'linear'.
BIOS がパケットアドレスに対応していない場合、
\&'lba32' アドレスは「リニアアドレス」として
sector/head/cylinder 形式 (ジオメトリアドレス) に変換される。
.\"O All floppy disk
.\"O references are retained in C:H:S form.  Use of 'lba32' is recommended on
.\"O all post-1998 systems.  Beginning with LILO version 22, 'lba32' is the
.\"O default disk addressing scheme.
フロッピーディスクへの参照は、C:H:S 形式のままである。
1998 年以降の全てのシステムに対して、'lba32' の使用を推奨する。
LILO のバージョン 22 からは、'lba32' がディスクアドレス指定の
デフォルトの方式となった。
.TP
.BI "linear"
.\"O Generate 24-bit linear sector addresses instead of sector/head/cylinder 
.\"O (geometric) addresses. Linear addresses are translated at run time to
.\"O geometric addresses, and are limited to cylinders <= 1023. 
sector/head/cylinder という形式の (ジオメトリ) アドレスを指定する代わりに、
セクタの 24 ビットのリニアアドレスを使用する。
リニアアドレスは実行時にジオメトリアドレスに変換される。
リニアアドレスは cylinder の値が 1023 以下に制限されている。
.\"O When using
.\"O `linear' with large disks,
.\"O .I /sbin/lilo
.\"O may generate references to inaccessible disk cylinders. 'lba32' avoids
.\"O many of these pitfalls with its use of packet addressing, but requires a
.\"O recent BIOS.
`linear' オプションを容量の大きいディスクで使うと
.I /sbin/lilo
はアクセスできないディスクシリンダへの参照をつくるかもしれない。
`lba32' オプションを指定すれば、
これらの多くの落し穴をパケットアドレッシングを使って回避できるが、
最近の BIOS が必要である。
.TP
.BI "lock"
.\"O Enables automatic recording of boot command lines as the defaults 
.\"O for the following boots. This way, lilo "locks" on a choice until it is 
.\"O manually overridden.
このオプション以降のブートコマンドラインを以後のデフォルトとして
自動的に記録する。
lilo はこの記録を、手動で解除されるまで "lock" する。
.TP
.BI "mandatory"
.\"O The per-image password option `mandatory' (see below) applies to all images.
イメージのブートにパスワードを付けるオプション `mandatory' (下記参照) を
全てのイメージに適用する。
.TP
.BI "map=" <map-file>
.\"O Specifies the location of the map file. If `map' is omitted, the file
.\"O .I /boot/map
.\"O is used. 
マップファイルの場所を指定する。`map' が省略された場合、
.I /boot/map
が使われる。
.TP
.BI "menu-title=" <title-string>
.\"O Specifies the title line (up to 37 characters) for the boot menu. This
.\"O title replaces the default "LILO Boot Menu" title string. If
.\"O .I boot-menu.b
.\"O is not installed as the boot loader (see
.\"O .I "install="
.\"O option), then this line has no effect.
ブートメニューに (37 文字までの) タイトル行を指定する。
このタイトルはデフォルトのタイトル文字列 "LILO Boot Menu" を置き換える。
.I boot-menu.b
がブートローダとしてインストールされていない場合
.RI ( "install="
オプション参照)、この行は何も影響を及ぼさない。
.TP
.BI "menu-scheme=" <color-scheme>
.\"O The default color scheme of the boot menu may be overridden on VGA displays
.\"O using this option. (The color scheme of MDA displays is fixed.)
.\"O The general
.\"O .I color-scheme
.\"O string is of the form:
VGA ディスプレイにおけるデフォルトのブートメニューの色スキームを、
このオプションを使って上書きできる
(MDA ディスプレイの色スキームは固定である)。
一般的な
.I color-scheme
文字列は以下のような形となる:
.sp
.nf
     <text>:<highlight>:<border>:<title>
.fi
.sp
.\"O where each entry is two characters which specify a
.\"O foreground color and a background color. Only the first entry is
.\"O required. The default highlight is the reverse of the text color; and the
.\"O default border and title colors are the text color.
各エントリには、前景色と背景色を指定する 2 つの文字が入る。
最初のエントリのみが必須である。
デフォルトのハイライト色は、
文字色の前景色と背景色を入れ換えたものである。
デフォルトの枠色とタイトル色は、文字色と同じである。
.\"O Colors are specified using the characters \fBkbgcrmyw\fP, for blac\fBK\fP,
.\"O \fBB\fPlue, \fBG\fPreen, \fBC\fPyan, \fBR\fPed,
.\"O \fBM\fPagenta, \fBY\fPellow, and \fBW\fPhite: upper case for
.\"O intense (fg only), lower case for dim.
.\"O Legal color-scheme strings would be
文字 \fBkbgcrmyw\fP を使って色を指定する。
それぞれ blac\fBK\fP (黒),
\fBB\fPlue (青), \fBG\fPreen (緑), \fBC\fPyan (シアン), \fBR\fPed (赤),
\fBM\fPagenta (マゼンタ), \fBY\fPellow (黄色), \fBW\fPhite (白) を表す。
大文字の場合は明るい色 (前景色のみ)、小文字の場合は暗い色になる。
有効な色スキーム文字列は以下のようなものである。
.sp
.nf
.\"O     menu-scheme=Wm     intense white on magenta
    menu-scheme=Wm     前景を明るい白、背景をマゼンタにする。
.\"O     menu-scheme=wr:bw:wr:Yr    the LILO default
    menu-scheme=wr:bw:wr:Yr    LILO のデフォルト。
.\"O     menu-scheme=Yk:kw    bright yellow on black
    menu-scheme=Yk:kw    前景を明るい黄色、背景を黒にする。
.fi
.sp
.\"O If
.\"O .I "boot-menu.b"
.\"O is not installed as the boot loader, then this line has no effect.
.I boot-menu.b
がブートローダとしてインストールされていない場合、
この行は何も影響を及ぼさない。
.TP
.BI "message=" <message-file>
.\"O specifies a file containing a message that is displayed before
.\"O the boot prompt. No message is displayed while waiting 
.\"O for a shifting key after printing "LILO ". In the message, the FF
.\"O character ([Ctrl L]) clears the local screen. This is undesirable when
.\"O the \fIboot-menu.b\fP boot loader is installed. 
ブートプロンプトを出す前に出力したいメッセージが書かれたファイルを指定する。
"LILO"と出力された後、Shiftキーが押されるまでは、
メッセージはなにも出力されない。
メッセージに制御文字 FF([Ctrl L]) があると、コンソール画面をクリアする。
\fIboot-menu.b\fP ブートローダがインストールされている場合に、
制御文字 FF を使うのは良くない。
.\"O The size of the message 
.\"O file is limited to 65535 bytes. The map file has to be rebuilt if the 
.\"O message file is changed or moved.  'message=' and 'bitmap=' are mutually
.\"O exclusive.
メッセージファイルの大きさは最大 65535 バイトに制限されている。
メッセージファイルを修正・移動した場合は、
マップファイルを再作成しなければならない。
"message=" と "bitmap=" を一緒に指定することはできない。
.TP
.BI "nowarn"
.\"O Disables warnings about possible future dangers.
将来起こりうる不具合に関する警告メッセージを出力しないようにする。
.TP
.BI "optional"
.\"O The per-image option `optional' (see below) applies to all images.
カーネルイメージごとのオプションである `optional' (詳細は後述) を、
全てのカーネルに適用することを示す。
.TP
.BI "password=" <password>
.\"O The per-image option `password=...' (see below) applies to all images. 
カーネルイメージごとのオプションである `password=...' (詳細は後述) を、
全てのカーネルに適用することを示す。
.\"O This
.\"O option may prevent unattended booting, if the default image is `password='
.\"O protected at the default level `mandatory', which is a level higher than
.\"O `restricted'.
このオプションを指定すると、パスワード照合を通らない限りブートをしない。
デフォルトレベル `mandatory' では、
デフォルトのイメージは `password=' で保護されている。
`mandatory' は `restricted' より 1 段レベルが高い。
.TP
.BI "prompt"
.\"O Automatic booting (see `delay' above) will not take place unless a locked or
.\"O pre-stored ("lilo -R") command line is present. Instead, the boot
.\"O loader will issue the 
.\"O .I boot:
.\"O prompt and wait for user input before proceeding (see
.\"O .I timeout
.\"O below).
ロックされたコマンドライン、
またはあらかじめ ("lilo -R" で) 設定されたコマンドラインがない限り、
自動ブート (上記の `delay' を参照) を行わない。
そのかわりに、ブートローダはプロンプト
.I boot:
を表示して、先に進む前にユーザー入力を待つ (下記の
.I timeout
を参照)。
.\"O Unattended default image reboots are impossible if `prompt' is set
.\"O and `timeout' is not, or the default image is password protected at a higher
.\"O level than `restricted'.
`prompt' が設定されていて `timeout' が設定されていない場合、
またはデフォルトイメージが `restricted' より高いレベルで
パスワードで保護されている場合、
パスワードを照合しないデフォルトイメージのブートは不可能である。
.TP
.BI "raid-extra-boot=" <option>
.\"O This option only has meaning for RAID1 installations.
.\"O The <option> may be specified as \fInone\fP, \fIauto\fP, \fImbr-only\fP,
.\"O or a comma-separated list of devices; e.g., "/dev/hda,/dev/hdc6".  Starting
.\"O with LILO version 22.0, the boot record is normally written to the first
.\"O sector of the RAID1 device.  On PARALLEL raid sets, no other boot records
.\"O are needed.  
このオプションは RAID1 が導入されている場合にのみ意味がある。
<option> には \fInone\fP, \fIauto\fP, \fImbr-only\fP, 
またはコンマで区切ったデバイスのリスト
(例えば "/dev/hda,/dev/hdc6") を指定できる。
LILO バージョン 22.0 からは、通常、
ブートレコードは RAID1 デバイスの最初のセクタに書き込まれる。
PARALLEL raid セットの場合、これ以外のブートレコードは必要ない。
.\"O The
.\"O default action is \fIauto\fP, meaning, automatically generate auxilary boot
.\"O records as needed on SKEWED raid sets.  \fInone\fP means
.\"O suppress generation of all auxiliary boot records. 
.\"O \fImbr-only\fP suppresses generation of boot records on the raid device,
.\"O and forces compatibility with versions of LILO earlier than version 22.0
.\"O by writing boot records to all Master Boot Records (MBRs) of all disks in
.\"O the raid set.
デフォルトの動作は \fIauto\fP であり、
SKEWED raid セットに必要な補助ブートレコードが自動的に作成される。
\fInone\fP を指定すると、予備ブートレコードを全く作成しない。
\fImbr-only\fP を指定すると、
raid デバイス上には予備ブートレコードを作成せず、
raid セットの全てのディスクのマスターブートレコード (MBR) に
ブートレコードを書き込むことで、
バージョン 22.0 以前の LILO との互換性を持たせる。
.\"O Use of an explicit list of devices, forces writing of auxiliary boot records
.\"O only on those devices enumerated, in addition to the boot record on the RAID1
.\"O device. Since the version 22 RAID1 codes will never automatically write a boot
.\"O record on the MBR of device 0x80, if such a boot record is desired, this is
.\"O the way to have it written.
明示的なデバイスのリスト指定すると、
RAID1 デバイスのブートレコードに加えて、
リストに列挙されたデバイスにのみ予備ブートレコードが書き込まれる。
バージョン 22 からは RAID1 コードが
デバイス 0x80 の MBR にブートレコードを自動的に書き込まないので、
このようなブートレコードが必要ならば、
このオプションを使って書き込むことができる。
.TP
.BI "restricted"
.\"O The per-image password option `restricted' (see below) applies to all images.
カーネルイメージごとのパスワードオプションである `restricted' (詳細は後述)を、
全てのカーネルに適用することを示す。
.TP
.BI "serial=" <parameters>
.\"O enables control from a serial line. The specified serial port is
.\"O initialized and the boot loader is accepting input from it and from 
.\"O the PC's keyboard. Sending a break on the serial line corresponds to 
.\"O pressing a shift key on the console in order to get the boot loader's
.\"O attention. 
シリアルラインからの制御を可能にする。
指定したシリアルポートを初期化して、そこからの入力も受付ける。
通常通りキーボードからの入力も可能である。
コンソールでシフトキーを押す動作は、シリアルポートでは
break を送ることに対応する。これによってブートローダの
注意を引くことができる。
.\"O All boot images should be password-protected if the serial access is 
.\"O less secure than access to the console, e.g. if the line is connected 
.\"O to a modem. The parameter string has the following syntax:
モデムがつながっているなど、コンソールよりセキュリティが低い場合、
すべてのブートイメージをパスワードで保護した方が良い。
パラメーターの書式は以下の通りである:
.sp
.nf
    <port>[,<bps>[<parity>[<bits>]]]
.fi
.sp
.\"O <port>:  the number of the serial port, zero-based. 0 corresponds to
.\"O COM1 alias /dev/ttyS0, etc. All four ports can be used (if present).
<port>: シリアルポートの番号を指定する。0 から始まる。
例えば 0 は COM1 (別名 /dev/ttyS0) に対応する。
シリアルポートは 0 から 4 まですべて使用できる (存在していれば)。
.sp
.\"O <bps>:  the baud rate of the serial port. The following baud rates are 
.\"O supported: 110, 150, 300, 600, 1200, 2400(default), 4800, 9600, plus the 
.\"O extended rates 19200, 38400, and 57600(56000).  115200 is allowed, but may
.\"O not work with all COMx port hardware.
<bps>: シリアルポートの速度を指定する。
110, 150, 300, 600, 1200, 
2400 (デフォルト), 4800, 9600 bps が指定可能である。
さらに速い速度として 19200, 38400, 57600 (56000) も指定できる。
115200 も指定可能であるが、
全ての COMx ポートのハードウェアで動作するとは限らない。
.sp
.\"O <parity>:  the parity used on the serial line. The boot loader ignores input 
.\"O parity and strips the 8th bit. The following (upper or lower case) 
.\"O characters are used to describe the parity:  "n" for no parity, "e" 
.\"O for even parity and "o" for odd parity.
ブートローダは入力パリティを無視して 8 ビット目を strip する。
次のどれかの文字 (大文字小文字どちらでも良い) を
パリティの記述に用いることができる。
n: パリティを使用しない
e: 奇数 (odd) パリティを使用する
o: 偶数 (even) パリティを使用する
.sp
.\"O <bits>:  the number of bits in a character. Only 7 and 8 bits are 
.\"O supported. Default is 8 if parity is "none", 7 if parity is "even" 
.\"O or "odd". 
<bits>: 文字のビット数を指定する。7 と 8 が指定できる。
パリティを使わない場合のデフォルトは 8 で、使う場合は 7。
.sp
.\"O If `serial' is set, the value of `delay' is automatically raised to 20.
`serial' をセットすると、`delay' は自動的に 20 になる。
.sp
.\"O Example: "serial=0,2400n8" initializes COM1 with the default parameters.
例： "serial=0,2400n8"  は COM1 をデフォルトのパラメータで
初期化することを意味する。
.TP
.BI "single-key"
.\"O This option specifies that boot images or 'other's are to be selected and
.\"O launched with a single keystroke.  Selection is based upon the first
.\"O character of each name, which must be unique.  This option should not be
.\"O used with the menu or bitmap user interface ("install=").
このオプションは、1 回のキー入力で選択してブートする
ブートイメージや other エントリを指定する。
選択は名前の最初の文字に基づいて行われる。
名前の最初の文字は、他のものとは区別できるものでなければならない。
このオプションは、メニューや
ビットマップユーザーインターフェース ("install=") とともに
使うことはできない。
.TP
.BI "timeout=" <tsecs>
.\"O sets a timeout (in tenths of a second) for keyboard input at the 
.\"O .I boot:
.\"O prompt.  "timeout" only has meaning if "prompt" is mentioned.
.\"O If no key is pressed for the specified time, the default image is 
.\"O automatically booted. The default timeout is infinite.
.I boot:
プロンプトでのキーボード入力待ちのタイムアウト時間 (0.1秒単位) を指定する。
"timeout" は "prompt" が指定されている場合にのみ意味を持つ。
この時間内に入力がない場合は、自動的に最初のカーネルイメージでブートする。
パスワード入力待ちで入力がない場合も同様である。
デフォルトのタイムアウト時間は無限である。
.TP
.BI "verbose=" <number>
.\"O Turns on lots of progress reporting. Higher numbers give more verbose
.\"O output. If  \-v  is additionally specified on the lilo command line,
.\"O the level is increased accordingly. The maximum verbosity level is 5.
進行状況報告の詳細 (verbose) レベルを変更する。
大きな数を指定すると、より詳細な報告を出力する。
lilo のコマンドラインで更に \-v が指定されていた場合、
詳細レベルはそれに応じて上がる。
最大の詳細レベルは 5。

.LP
.\"O Additionally, the kernel configuration parameters
.\"O .BR append ", " ramdisk ", " read-only ", " read-write ", " root
.\"O and
.\"O .B vga
.\"O can be set in the global options section. They are used as defaults
.\"O if they aren't specified in the configuration sections of the
.\"O respective kernel images.
以上に加え、カーネルに対する設定パラメータとして
.BR append ", " ramdisk ", " read-only ", " read-write ", " root ", " vga
をグローバルオプションに設定できる。
各々のカーネルイメージごとの設定として指定されなければ、
これらがデフォルトとして使用される。

.\"O .SH "PER-IMAGE SECTION"
.SH カーネルイメージごとのセクション
.\"O A per-image section starts with either a line
カーネルイメージごとのセクションの始まりは、
Linux カーネルのブートイメージを含むデバイス/ファイルを指定する
.sp
.nf
    \fBimage=\fP\fI<pathname>\fP
.fi
.sp
.\"O to indicate a file or device containing the boot image of a Linux
.\"O kernel, or a line
の行か、ブートしたい任意のシステムを指定する
.sp
.nf
    \fBother=\fP\fI<device>\fP
.fi
.sp
.\"O to indicate an arbitrary system to boot.
という行である。
.LP

.\"O In the former case, if an \fBimage\fP line specifies booting
.\"O from a device, then one has to indicate the range of sectors to be mapped
.\"O using
前者の書式で、\fBimage\fP 行がデバイスからのブートが指定している場合は、
.sp
.nf
    \fBrange=\fP\fI<start>-<end>\fP
    \fBrange=\fP\fI<start>+<nsec>\fP
    \fBrange=\fP\fI<sector>\fP
.fi
.sp
のいずれかによりマップされるセクタの範囲を示さなければならない。
.LP
.\"O In the third case, 'nsec=1' is assumed.
3 番目の場合、"nsec=1" が仮定される。

.\"O .SH "KERNEL OPTIONS (image=)"
.SH "カーネルオプション (image=)"
.\"O If the booted image is a Linux kernel, then one may pass
.\"O command line parameters to this kernel.
ブートイメージが Linux カーネルならば、カーネルに対し
コマンドラインパラメータを与えることができる。
.TP
.BI "append=" <string>
.\"O Appends the options specified to the parameter line passed to the kernel.
.\"O This is typically used to specify parameters of hardware that can't be
.\"O entirely auto-detected or for which probing may be dangerous. Example:
カーネルに渡すパラメータラインに指定するパラメータを追加する。
典型的な利用法としては、自動的には検出されなかったり、
自動検知が危険なハードウェアに対するパラメータを指定する場合などがある。
例を挙げる:
.sp
.nf
     append="hd=576,64,32"
.fi
.sp
.TP
.BI "initrd=" <name>
.\"O Specifies the initial ramdisk image to be loaded with the kernel.  The
.\"O image will contain modules needed at boot time, such as network and scsi
.\"O drivers. See man pages for \fImkinitrd(8)\fP.
カーネルと共に読み込む初期 RAM ディスクイメージを指定する。
このイメージは、ネットワークドライバや SCSI ドライバといった
ブート時に必要なモジュールを含んでいる。
\fImkinitrd(8)\fP の man ページを参照すること。
.TP
.BI "literal=" <string>
.\"O Like `append', but removes all other options (e.g. setting of the root
.\"O device). Because vital options can be removed unintentionally with `literal',
.\"O this option cannot be set in the global options section.
`append' と似ているが、ここに与えた以外のオプション
(ルートデバイスの設定など) をすべて無効にする。
重要なオプションが `literal' により意図せず無効にされる可能性があるため、
これはグローバルオプションには指定できない。
.TP
.BI "ramdisk=" <size>
.\"O This specifies the size (e.g., "4096k") of the optional RAM disk. A value of 
.\"O zero indicates that no RAM disk should be created. If this variable is 
.\"O omitted, the RAM disk size configured into the boot image is used.
RAM ディスクのサイズを指定する (例えば "4096k")。
0 の場合は RAM ディスクを作成しない。
これを省略した場合、 RAM ディスクのサイズは
ブートイメージに設定されている大きさになる。
.TP
.BI "read-only"
.\"O This specifies that the root file system should be mounted read-only.
.\"O It may be specified as a global option.
.\"O Typically, the system startup procedure re-mounts the root 
.\"O file system read-write later (e.g. after fsck'ing it).
ルートファイルシステムをリードオンリーでマウントする。
グローバルオプションとして指定することもできる。
通常システムのブートアップ手続きでは、(fsck などを実行した) 後から
ルートファイルシステムを読み書きモードで再マウントする。
.TP
.BI "read-write"
.\"O This specifies that the root file system should be mounted read-write.
.\"O It may be specified as a global option.
ルートファイルシステムを読み書きモードでマウントする。
グローバルオプションとして指定することもできる。
.TP
.BI "root=" <root-device>
.\"O This specifies the device that should be mounted as root. 
.\"O It may be specified as a global option.
.\"O If the special name
.\"O .B current
.\"O is used, the root device is set to the device on which the root file
.\"O system is currently mounted. 
ルートとしてマウントするデバイスを指定する。
グローバルオプションとして指定することもできる。
現在ルートとなっているデバイスを指定するには
.I current
という特別な名前を使用する。
.\"O If the root has been changed with  -r ,
.\"O the respective device is used. If the variable `root' is omitted,
.\"O the root device setting contained in the kernel image is used.
.\"O (And that is set at compile time using the ROOT_DEV variable in
.\"O the kernel Makefile, and can later be changed with the rdev(8) program.)
\-r オプションによりルートが変更されている場合、
その変更後のデバイスが用いられる。このオプションが
省略されると、ルートデバイスには現在のカーネルイメージが
入っているデバイスが使用される。(また、これはカーネルの
Makefile の ROOT_DEV に指定してコンパイルすれば変更される。
rdev(8) により後で変更することも可能である。)
.TP
.BI "vga=" <mode>
.\"O This specifies the VGA text mode that should be selected when 
.\"O booting.
.\"O It may be specified as a global option.
.\"O The following values are recognized (case is ignored): 
ブート時に選択された VGA の text モードを指定する。
グローバルオプションとして指定することもできる。
以下の値が指定できる (大文字、小文字を区別しない):
.sp
.BR normal :
.\"O select normal 80x25 text mode.
通常の 80x25 テキストモードを指定する。
.sp
.\"O .BR extended " (or " ext ):
.\"O select 80x50 text mode.
.BR extended " (または "  ext ):
80x50 テキストモードを指定する。
.sp
.BR ask :
.\"O stop and ask for user input (at boot time).
ブート時に動作を停止し、入力を要求する。
.sp
.\"O <number>: use the corresponding text mode. A list of available modes 
.\"O can be obtained by booting with
.\"O .I vga=ask
.\"O and pressing [Enter]. 
<number>: 対応するテキストモードを使用する。
.I vga=ask
を指定しておいて、ブート時に
[Enter] を押せば、
使用できるモードのリストが表示される。
.sp
.\"O If this variable is omitted, the VGA mode setting contained in the 
.\"O kernel image is used. (And that is set at compile time using the
.\"O SVGA_MODE variable in the kernel Makefile, and can later be changed with
.\"O the rdev(8) program.)
このオプションが省略されると、VGA モードは現在使用している
カーネルイメージの設定になる。
(また、カーネルの Makefile の SVGA_MODE に指定して
コンパイルすれば変更可能である。
rdev(8) により後で変更することも可能である)。

.\"O .SH "ALTERNATE SYSTEM (other=)"
.SH "他のシステム (other=)"
.LP
.\"O Used to load systems other than Linux. The `other = <device>' specifies
.\"O the boot sector of an alternate system contained on a device or disk
.\"O partition; e.g., DOS on, say, `/dev/hda2', or a floppy on `/dev/fd0'.
.\"O In the case of booting another system there are these options:
Linux 以外のシステムをロードするのに使われる。
`other = <device>' という形式で、他のシステムのブートセクタがある
デバイスやディスクパーティションを指定する。
例えば、DOS の場合は `/dev/hda2'、フロッピーの場合は `/dev/fd0' などである。
他のシステムをブートするときには、以下のオプションが使用できる:
.TP
.BI "loader=" <chain-loader>
.\"O This specifies the chain loader that should be used.  It may also be
.\"O specified as a global option.
使用するチェーンローダを指定する。
このオプションはグローバルセクションに指定することもできる。
.\"O By default
.\"O .I /boot/chain.b
.\"O is used.  This chain loader passes partition and drive information in the
.\"O boot sector it loads only to DOS on FAT12 or FAT16, Windows on FAT16 or
.\"O FAT32, or OS/2 on FAT16 or HPFS.
デフォルトでは、
.I /boot/chain.b
を使用する。
このチェーンローダは読み込んだブートセクタの
パーティションとドライブの情報を渡す。
情報を読み込めるファイルシステムは、
DOS の FAT12 と FAT16, Windows の FAT16 と FAT32,
OS/2 の FAT16 と HPFS のみである。
.\"O The alternate chain loader,
.\"O .I /boot/os2_d.b
.\"O passes partition and drive information unconditionally, and uses a format
.\"O suitalble for OS/2 and DOS (see 
.\"O .I table=<letter>
.\"O below).
代替品のチェーンローダである
.I /boot/os2_d.b
はパーティションとドライブの情報を OS/2 と DOS に適した形で渡す。
(下記の
.I table=<letter>
を参照)
.TP
.BI "table=" <device>
.\"O This specifies the device that contains the partition table. 
.\"O The boot loader will pass default partition information to the booted
.\"O operating system if this variable is omitted. 
.\"O (Some operating systems
.\"O have other means to determine from which partition they have been booted.
.\"O E.g., MS-DOS usually stores the geometry of the boot disk or partition
.\"O in its boot sector.)
パーティションテーブルを持っているデバイスを指定する。
これを省略した場合、ブートローダはブートする OS に
デフォルトパーティションの情報を渡す。
(OS によっては、
自分がどのパーティションからブートされたかを決める方法を別に持っている。
例えば MS-DOS は通常ブートディスク/パーティションのジオメトリ情報を
ブートセクタに保存する。)
.\"O Note that /sbin/lilo must be re-run if a partition table mapped referenced
.\"O with `table' is modified.
\&'table' で参照されているパーティションテーブルが変更された場合は、
.I /sbin/lilo
を再実行する必要があることに注意。
.TP
.BI "table=" <drive-letter>
.\"O This is a special case for the
.\"O .I os2_d.b
.\"O chain loader.  It specifies the DOS drive letter for the partition
.\"O that will be booted.  This is
.\"O .I mandatory
.\"O when booting OS/2 installed on
.\"O an extended partition.  The drive letter may be specified with or without a
.\"O trailing colon.
このオプションは
.I os2_d.b
チェーンローダの場合にのみ有効である。
これはブートするパーティションの DOS ドライブ文字を指定する。
これは OS/2 を拡張パーティションにインストールした場合は
\fI必須\fRである。
ドライブ文字は後ろにコロンをつけてもつけなくても良い。
.TP
.BI "change"
.\"O This keyword starts a section which describes how primary partition IDs are
.\"O changed, and how primary partitions are activated and deactivated.  If
.\"O .B change
.\"O is omitted, change rules are generated as though the 
.\"O .I "automatic"
.\"O keyword were specified.  The keyword
.\"O .B change
.\"O alone, without any rules following, will suppress automatic change-rules.
.\"O For example,
このキーワードは、どのようにプライマリパーティションの ID を変更するか、
そしてどのようにしてプライマリパーティションを有効/無効にするかを
記述するセクションを開始する。
.B change
がなかった場合、
変更ルールは
.I "automatic"
キーワードが指定されたものとして生成される。
キーワード
.B change
だけがあって、その後に変更ルールがない場合、
automatic 変更ルールが無効になる。
例えば、
.IP
.nf
   other=/dev/hda2
      label=dos
      table=/dev/hda
      change
        automatic
        partition=/dev/hda1
           set=DOS12_hidden
           deactivate
        partition=/dev/hda2
           set=DOS16_big_normal
           activate
.fi
.IP
.\"O specifies that when primary partition /dev/hda2 is booted, automatic
.\"O change-rules will be in effect; plus, partition 1, a DOS12 partition, will
.\"O be set hidden, and deactivated.  In addition, partition 2, will be set
.\"O normal, and activated.  Activation sets the boot-flag in the partition
.\"O table.  The 
.\"O .I automatic
.\"O keyword may confict with default change rules, so the
.\"O .I set=
.\"O lines above may be redundant.
この指定では、プライマリパーティション /dev/hda2 からブートされた場合、
自動的に生成される変更ルールが有効となる。
さらに、DOS12 パーティションであるパーティション 1 は隠され、無効にされる。
また、パーティション 2 は普通に設定され、有効にされる。
有効化はパーティションテーブルのブートフラグを設定する。
.I automatic
キーワードはデフォルトの変更ルールと競合するため、上記の
.I set=
行は冗長である。
.TP
.BI "map-drive=" <num>
.\"O Maps BIOS calls for the specified drive to the device code specified on the
.\"O next line as \fBto=\fP<num>.  This mapping is useful for booting operating
.\"O systems, such as DOS, from the second hard drive.  The following, swaps the
.\"O C: and D: drives,
指定されたドライブの BIOS コールを、
次の行で \fBto=\fP<num> の形で指定されたデバイスコードにマッピングする。
このマッピングは DOS のような OS を 2 番目のハードディスクから
ブートするときに便利である。
以下の例では、C: ドライブと D: ドライブを入れ替える。
.sp
.nf
   map-drive=0x80
      to=0x81
   map-drive=0x81
      to=0x80
.fi
.TP
.BI "unsafe"
.\"O Do not access the boot sector at map creation time. This disables 
.\"O some sanity checks, including a partition table check. If the boot 
.\"O sector is on a fixed-format floppy disk device, using UNSAFE avoids the 
.\"O need to put a readable disk into the drive when running the map 
.\"O installer. `unsafe' and `table' are mutually incompatible. 
マップの作成時にブートセクタにアクセスしない。
これにより、パーティションテーブルチェックなどの正当性の検査は
できなくなる。
ブートセクタが固定フォーマットのフロッピー上にある場合に
UNSAFE を用いると、マップインストーラの実行時に
ドライブに読み取り可能なディスクを挿入しなくてすむ。
`unsafe' と `table' は同時に指定できない。

.\"O .SH "COMMON OPTIONS (image= & other=)"
.SH "コマンドオプション (image= & other=)"
.LP
.\"O In both the
.\"O .BR image= " and " other=
.\"O cases, the following options apply.
.BR image= " と " other=
の両方の場合に、以下のオプションが使用できる。
.TP
.BI "label=" <name>
.\"O The boot loader uses the main file name (without its path)
.\"O of each image specification to identify that image.
.\"O A different name can be used by setting the variable `label'.
ブートローダは指定するブートイメージの識別に、
(パス名を除いた) ファイル名を使う。
違った識別名を使うこともでき、変数 `label' に設定すればよい。
.TP
.BI "alias=" <name>
.\"O A second name for the same entry can be used by specifying an alias.
同じブートイメージの 2 番目の識別名として、
ここで指定される別名を使うこともできる。
.TP
.BI "lock"
.\"O (See above.)
(上記を参照。)
.TP
.BI "optional"
.\"O Omit the image if it is not available at map creation time.
.\"O It may be specified as a global option.
.\"O This is useful to specify test kernels that are not always present.
マップ作成時に利用でなければ、このブートイメージを省略する。
常に存在するとは限らないテスト用カーネルを
ブートイメージに指定する際に便利である。
.TP
.BI "password=" <password>
.\"O Protect the `image=' or `other=' with a password (or passphrase).
.\"O It may be specified as a global option.
.\"O The interpretation of the `password=' setting is modified by the words
.\"O `mandatory', `restricted', and `bypass' (see below).
`image=' または `other=' をパスワード (パスフレーズ) で保護する。
グローバルセクションとして指定することもできる。
`password=' 設定の解釈は、
(下記の) `mandatory', `restricted', `bypass' によって変わる。
.br
.\"O The password may be specified in the config-file (less secure) or entered
.\"O at the time the boot loader is installed. To request interactive entry of
.\"O the password, it should be specified: \fBpassword=""\fP.
パスワードは、(セキュリティ上の問題があるが) 設定ファイルで指定することも、
ブートローダのインストール時に入力することもできる。
対話的にパスワードを入力するリクエストをさせるためには、
\fBpassword=""\fP を指定する必要がある。
.\"O Passwords entered interactively are not required to be entered again if the
.\"O boot installer is re-run. They are cached, in hashed form, in a companion
.\"O file to the config-file, default name: \fB/etc/lilo.conf.crc\fP. If the 
.\"O config-file is updated, a warning message
.\"O will be issued telling you to re-run \fIlilo -p\fP to force re-creation of the
.\"O password cache file.
ブートインストーラを再実行する際に、
対話的にパスワードを入力する指定をもう一度行う必要はない。
この指定は、設定ファイルの参考ファイル (デフォルトの名前は
\fB/etc/lilo.conf.crc\fP) にハッシュ形式でキャッシュされている。
設定ファイルが更新された場合、
パスワードキャッシュファイルを再作成するために
\fIlilo -p\fP を再実行せよ、という警告メッセージが出される。
.TP
.BI "mandatory"
.\"O A password is required to boot this image. This is the default. May be used
.\"O on a single `image=' or `other=' to override a different global setting.
このオプションが指定されているイメージをブートするためには、
パスワードが必要である。
これがデフォルトである。
このオプションは、別のグローバル設定を上書きするために、
`image=' または `other=' のセクションで指定される。
.TP
.BI "restricted"
.\"O A password is only required to boot the image if kernel parameters
.\"O are specified on the command line (e.g. 'single').  May be used
.\"O on a single `image=' or `other=' to override a different global setting.
コマンドラインからカーネルパラメータ
(例えば 'single') が指定されたときにだけ、
イメージをブートする際のパスワード入力を要求するようにする。
このオプションは、別のグローバル設定を上書きするために、
`image=' または `other=' のセクションで指定される。
.TP
.BI "bypass"
.\"O No password is required to boot this image. Used to indicate that the global
.\"O password does not apply to this `image=' or `other='.
イメージをブートする際にパスワードを必要としない。
`image=' または `other=' で指定されているイメージのブートに
グローバルパスワードを適用しないことを示すのに使われる。
.LP

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
lilo(8), mkinitrd(8), mkrescue(8), rdev(8).
.br
.sp
.\"O The lilo distribution comes with very extensive documentation
.\"O of which the above is an extract.  (lilo 22.1)
lilo のディストリビューションには、ここで要約した内容の
詳細なドキュメントが含まれている。
(lilo 22.1)
