.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 KAWAGISHI Ryoji
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Jun 8 13:35:00 JST 2002
.\"         by  KAWAGISHI Ryoji <kawagisi@yk.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	1-D coded	一次元圧縮
.\"WORD:	run-length	ランレングス
.\"WORD:	superimpose	スーパーインポーズ
.\"WORD:	overlay		オーバーレイ
.\"
.TH EFIX 1 "February 1999" ""  ""
.UC 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O efix \- convert between fax, text, bit-map and gray-scale formats
efix \- ファックス、 テキスト、ビットマップ、グレイスケールのフォー
マットを変換する。

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B efix
[
.I options
]
.I file...

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O Where \fIoptions\fP are:
\fIoptions\fP には以下のものがある。

.TP 9
.B -i  \fIf\fP
.\"O the input image is in format \fIf\fP. Default is to automatically
.\"O determine the input type from its contents.
入力画像はフォーマット \fIf\fP 。
デフォルトは、その内容から自動的に入力型式を決定する。

.TP 9
.B 
   fax
.\"O fax ("Group3") 1-D coded image
fax ("Group3") 一次元圧縮の画像。

.TP 9
.B 
   text
.\"O text.  Line feeds separate lines, form feeds cause page breaks
.\"O and tabs are expanded assuming tabs every 8 columns.
テキスト。ラインフィードは行を分離し、フォームフィードは改頁し、タブは
8カラムと見なして拡張する。

.TP 9
.B 
   pbm
.\"O raw PBM (portable bit map)
生の PBM (portable bit map)

.TP 9
.B 
   tiffg3
.\"O TIFF format with Group 3 (fax) compression.
Group 3 (fax)圧縮での TIFF フォーマット

.TP 9
.B 
   tiffraw
.\"O TIFF format with no compression.
圧縮無しの TIFF フォーマット

.TP 9
.B -o  \fIf\fP
.\"O write the output in format \fIf\fP.  Default is tiffg3.
フォーマット \fIf\fP で出力に書き込む。デフォルトは tiffg3。

.TP 9
.B 
   fax
.\"O fax ("Group3") 1-D coded image
fax ("Group3") 一次元圧縮の画像。

.TP 9
.B 
   pbm
.\"O raw PBM
生の PBM

.TP 9
.B 
   pgm
.\"O raw PGM (Portable Gray Map).  Gray-scale values are produced by
.\"O summing pixels in 4x4 pixel blocks.  The output file is 1/4 of
.\"O the size given by -p.  The resulting image has 17 discrete values
.\"O between 0 and 255.
生の PGM (Portable Gray Map)。グレイスケール値は、4x4 ピクセル・ブロック
内の合計ピクセル数によって作られる。
出力ファイルは、-p によって与えられる
サイズの 1/4。結果の画像は、0 〜255の間の17の不連続な値を持つ。

.TP 9
.B 
   pcl
.\"O HP-PCL (e.g. HP LaserJet).

HP-PCL (つまり HP LaserJet)

.TP 9
.B 
   ps
.\"O encapsulated Postscript (e.g. Apple Laserwriter).  The file is
.\"O compressed using differential coding vertically and run-length
.\"O coding horizontally.  There is no provision for positioning the
.\"O image within the page and so the image will appear at the lower
.\"O left corner of the page when printed.
カプセル化された Postscript (つまり Apple  Laserwriter)。
ファイルは垂直方向には差分コーディングを、水平方向にはランレングス・
コーディングを使って圧縮される。
ページ内の画像のポジショニングの対策はない。
従って、印刷時の画像はページの左下の角に現れる。

.TP 9
.B 
   tiffg3
.\"O TIFF format with Group 3 (fax) compression.
Group 3 (fax)圧縮での TIFF フォーマット

.TP 9
.B 
   tiffraw
.\"O TIFF format with no compression.
圧縮無しの TIFF フォーマット

.TP 9
.B -n \fIpat\fP
.\"O use the printf(3) pattern \fIpath\fP to generate the output file
.\"O name.  Up to three %d escapes will be replaced by the page number
.\"O starting with 1 (e.g. -n order.%03d will create file names
.\"O order.001, order.002, etc.)
出力ファイル名を作成するのに printf(3) パターンの \fIパス\fP を使う。
3個までの %d エスケープは 1から始まるページ番号によって置き換えられる
(例えば -n  order.%03d は order.001, order.002,〜 のようなファイル名
を作成する)。

.TP 9
.B -v \fIlvl\fP
.\"O print messages of type in string \fIlvl\fP.  Each
.\"O \fIlower-case\fP letter in \fIlvl\fP enables one type of message:
文字列  \fIlvl\fP の型のメッセージを表示する。
\fIlvl\fP 内の各 \fI小文字\fP は下記メッセージ型のどれか一つを有効にする：

.RS 12
.B
e - 
.\"O errors
エラー
.br
.B
w - 
.\"O warnings
ワーニング
.br
.B
i - 
.\"O information messages
情報メッセージ
.br
.B
a - 
.\"O program arguments
プログラムの引数
.br
.B
f - 
.\"O file format details
ファイルフォーマット詳細
.RE

.RS 9
.\"O The default is "ewi".
デフォルトは "ewi"
.RE

.TP 9
.B -f \fIfnt\fP
.\"O use font file \fIfnt\fP for text.  The font file for an WxH font
.\"O should be a bit map of an image of H rows and 256*W columns.
.\"O Each successive WxH cell contains the bit map for characters with
.\"O codes from 0 to 255.  The default is to use a built-in 8x16 font.
テキスト用のフォントファイル \fIfnt\fP を使用する。
WxH フォント用のフォントファイルは、H行で 256*W 列の画像のビットマップ
でなければならない。
各々の連続する WxH セルは 0 から 255 までのコードの文字のビットマップ
を含む。デフォルトは、組込み済みの 8x16 フォントである。

.TP 9
.B -s \fIX\fP\fRx\fP\fIY\fP
.\"O scale the input by a factor of X horizontally and Y vertically.
.\"O Scaling does not change the size of the output (use -p).  If Y is
.\"O not specified it is assumed to be the same as X.  Any floating
.\"O point value may be used for X and Y. The default is 1,1.
水平方向 X、垂直方向 Yのファクタによる入力値で縮尺する。
スケーリングは、出力のサイズを変更しない(-P を使う)。
Yが指定されない場合、Xと同じと見倣す。
X と Y には浮動小数点の値を使用できる。デフォルトは、1,1 。

.TP 9
.B -d \fIR\fP\fR,\fP\fID\fP
.\"O displace the output right by R and down by D (opposite if
.\"O negative). See below for units.  Default is 0,0.
出力を右に R、下に D 移動する(負の場合は反対側)。
単位は下記参照。デフォルトは、0,0 。

.TP 9
.B -p \fIW\fP\fRx\fP\fIH\fP
.\"O truncate or pad the output to generate an image of width W and
.\"O height H.  This does not scale the input.  See below for units.
.\"O The default is the size of the input image if it can be
.\"O determined or A4 (215x297mm) if it can't.
幅 W、高さ H の画像を生成するために、出力を切り詰めるか、詰め物をする。
これは入力画像の縮尺は行わない。単位は下記参照。
デフォルトは、可能ならば入力画像のサイズとなり、それができない場合は、
A4(215x297mm)になる。

.TP 9
.B -r \fIX\fP\fRx\fP\fIY\fP
.\"O assume an output device resolution of X by Y dots per inch.  If Y
.\"O is not specified it is assumed to be the same as X.  The default
.\"O is the input resolution if it can be determined or the fax
.\"O resolution of 204.1x195.6 dpi if it can't.
出力デバイスの解像度を X × Y (ドット/インチ)と見倣す。
Y が指定されない場合、Xと同じと見倣す。デフォルトは、決定できるなら
入力解像度、それができないなら、FAXの解像度 204.1x195.6 dpi 。

.TP 9
.B -R \fIX\fP\fRx\fP\fIY\fP
.\"O assume an input device resolution of X by Y dots per inch.  If Y
.\"O is not specified it is assumed to be the same as X.  The default
.\"O is the input resolution if it can be determined or the fax
.\"O resolution of 204.1x195.6 dpi if it can't.
入力デバイスの解像度を X × Y (ドット/インチ)と見倣す。
Y が指定されない場合、Xと同じと見倣す。デフォルトは、決定できるなら
入力解像度であり、それができないなら、FAXの解像度 204.1x195.6 dpi 。

.TP 9
.B -l \fIn\fP
.\"O place n lines per page during text input. Default is 66.
テキスト入力中に、１ページ当たり n行置く。デフォルトは66。

.TP 9
.B -O \fIf\fP
.\"O overlay (logical OR) the image from file f into the output.  Use
.\"O "-" for standard input (-O-).  Default is no overlay file.
ファイルfの画像を出力にオーバーレイ(論理OR)する。
標準入力は "-" を使用する (-O-) 。
デフォルトは、オーバーレイファイル無し。

.TP 9
.B -M
.\"O ignore all other options and copy the standard input to the
.\"O standard output while applying base64 (MIME) encoding as
.\"O specified by RFC 1521.
これは、他のすべてのオプションを無視します。
そして、base64(MIME)エンコーディング（RFC 1521準拠）を適用して
標準入力を標準出力にコピーします。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル

.\"O If no -n options are given, output is written to the standard
.\"O output.

-n オプションが無い場合、出力は標準出力に書かれる。

.\" .SH UNITS
.SH 単位

.\"O The units of the W, H, R, and D values above are in inches by
.\"O default.  Any floating point value may be used.  Units of inches,
.\"O centimetres, millimetres or points (72 per inch) can be used
.\"O instead by appending one of the strings `in', `cm', `mm', or `pt'
.\"O to the argument (e.g. -d2,4cm).
上記の W, H, R, D の値の単位のデフォルトはインチである。
浮動小数点数も使用できる。引数に`in', `cm', `mm', `pt' を付加する
ことにより、それぞれインチ、センチメートル、ミリメートル、ポイント
(1/72 インチ)の単位を使用できる(例：-d2,4cm)

.\"O .SH CUT AND PASTE
.SH カット & ペースト

.\"O The -d and -p options allow efix to cut out images from received
.\"O faxes for use in other faxes or documents.  The -d option specifies
.\"O the top left portion of the desired image and the -p option gives
.\"O the size of the cut image.  For example, the command
-d と -p オプションは、受信した FAX から画像を切り取って他の FAX や
ドキュメント用に使用できる。-d オプションは希望する画像の左上の部分を
指定し、-p オプションは切り取る画像のサイズを指定する。
例えば下記のコマンド
.RS
.nf
.ft CW
	efix -d-5,-8 -p2,1 sample.001 >sig.001
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.\"O would cut out part of the input with its top left corner 5 inches
.\"O from the left edge and 8 inches from top of the input image.  The
.\"O output image would be 2 inches wide and 1 inch high.
は、入力されたものを左上の角の左端から 5インチ、上から 8インチの部分を
切り取り、出力画像は幅 2インチ、高さ1インチとなる。

.\"O The -O option allows efix to superimpose two or more images.  The
.\"O overlay image must be in fax format and cannot be scaled,
.\"O truncated or shifted. However, multiple efix commands may be used
.\"O to transform images before combining them.  For example, the
.\"O commands
-O オプションは、2つまたはそれ以上の画像をスーパーインポーズできる。
オーバーレイする画像は、FAXフォーマットでなければならないし、縮尺
したり、切り詰めたり、シフトすることはできない。しかし、それらを結合
する前に画像を変換するために複数の efix コマンドをパイプラインにする
ことができる。例えば以下のコマンド
.RS
.nf
.ft CW
	efix -d4,8 signature >sig.fax
	efix -O sig.fax letterhead >letterhead.fax
	efix -O letterhead.fax letter.002 >letter.002.new
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.\"O will shift the image in the file signature down 8 inches and
.\"O right 4 inches and combine (overlay) it with the images in the
.\"O files letterhead and letter.002.
は、signature ファイルの画像を下に 8インチ、右に 4インチ、シフトして
から、 letterhead および letter.002 ファイルの画像と結合(オーバーレイ)
する。

.\"O .SH REFERENCES
.SH 参考文献

Gunter Born, "The File Formats Handbook", International Thompson
Computer Press, 1995.

.\"O .SH COPYRIGHT
.SH 著作権

efix is copyright 1994 -- 1999 by Ed Casas.  It may be used,
copied and modified under the terms of the GNU Public License.

これは、GNU Public License の条項の下で使用、コピー、変更できる。

.\"O .SH DISCLAIMER
.SH 責任の放棄

.\"O Although \fBefix\fP has been tested it may have errors that will
.\"O prevent it from working correctly on your system.  Some of these
.\"O errors may cause serious problems including loss of data.

\fBefix\fP はテストされているが、あなたのシステムで正常に動作する
ことを妨げるようなエラーがあるかもしれない。
これらのエラーはデータの消失を含む深刻な問題を引き起こすかもしれない。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目

.BR efax(1),
.BR ghostscript(1),
.BR pbm(5), 
.BR pgm(5).

.\"O .SH  BUGS
.SH バグ

.\"O Only reads two types of TIFF compression formats.

.\"O Does not write multi-page TIFF files (a feature).

TIFF 圧縮フォーマットの 2 つの型式のみ読み込む。

複数ページの TIFF ファイルは書き込まない（特徴）。
