.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 KAWAGISHI Ryoji
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Jun 8 13:30:00 JST 2002
.\"         by  KAWAGISHI Ryoji <kawagisi@yk.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	answer		応答
.\"WORD:	reception	着信、受信
.\"
.TH FAX 1 "May 1996"
.UC 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O fax \- make, send, receive, view or print a fax
fax \- ファックスの作成、送信、受信、表示、印刷
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.de ML
\fR[\fB-l\fR]
..

.de MV
\fR[\fB-v\fR]
..

.de MU
\fR[\fIunits\fR]
..

.de MF
\fIfilename\fR...
..

.B fax
.B help

.B fax
.B make
.ML
.I file

.B fax
.B send
.ML
.MV
{
.B -m
|
.I number
} 
.MF

.B fax
[
\fBreceive\fR
.MV
[
.I filename-prefix
]
]

.B fax
{
.B print
|
.B view
|
.B rm
}
.MF

.B fax
\fR{\fB queue \fR|\fB status \fR[\fIt\fR] | \fB start \fR|\fB stop \fR}\fR

.B fax
.B answer

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP 9
.B -l
.\"O use low (96 line per inch) resolution
低解像度(98 ライン/インチ)で使用
.\" 原文は 96 line だが間違い。正しくは 98 line。
.TP 9
.B -v
.\"O display verbose messages for debugging
デバッグ用に冗長なメッセージを表示する
.TP 9 
.B -m
.\"O the phone call has already been dialed manually
相手への電話は、手動で既にダイヤルされている

.PP 

.\"O The commands make, send, receive, view and queue may be
.\"O abbreviated to their first characters (e.g. ``fax q'').
make, send, receive, view, queue のコマンドは、最初の文字
で省略できる(例えば ``fax q'')。

.\"O Assignments of the form \fIVARIABLE\fB=\fIvalue\fR may appear
.\"O before the command name to temporarily change the values of most
.\"O fax script variables (e.g. ``fax PAGE=A4 print letter.001'')
VARIABLE=value という型式の割当てが、一時的に大部分の fax 
スクリプト変数の値を変更するためにコマンド名の前に現れてもよい。
(例えば ``fax  PAGE=A4  print  letter.001'')

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBfax\fP provides a simple user interface to the efax(1) and
.\"O efix(1) programs.  It allows you to send text or Postscript files
.\"O as faxes and receive, print or preview received faxes.  The
.\"O \fBfax help\fP command prints a summary of the possible commands.
\fBfax\fP は efax(1) と efix(1) プログラムへのシンプルなユーザインタ
フェースを提供する。これはテキストまたは Postscript ファイルをファッ
クスとして送信、受信、受信したファックスの印刷またはプレビュー(表示)
ができる。\fBfax help\fP コマンドは、可能なコマンドの要約を表示する。

.\"O To send a fax, the original files need to be converted from ASCII
.\"O or Postscript into a particular bit-map format (TIFF with Group 3
.\"O encoding).  This can be done automatically by the \fBfax send\fP
.\"O command or you can use the \fBfax make\fP command to do the
.\"O conversion before sending the fax.  The conversion will create
.\"O one file per page.  These files will have the name of the
.\"O original file with the page number as an additional suffix.  For
.\"O example, running \fBfax make doc.ps\fP on the two-page postscript
.\"O file doc.ps would generate the files doc.ps.001 and doc.ps.002.
ファックスを送信するには、オリジナルのファイルを ASCII また
は Postscript から特殊なビットマップ型式 (TIFF with Group 3
encoding) に変換する必要がある。これは \fBfax send\fP コマンドに
よって自動的に行われる。あるいはファックスを送信する前に
\fBfax make\fP コマンドを使って変換することもできる。
変換は、1ページあたり1つのファイルを作成する。
これらのファイルは、他と重複しないようにページ番号がサフィックス
(接尾辞。ここでは拡張子)として追加されたファイル名になる。例えば、
2ページの Postscript ファイル doc.ps で  \fBfax make doc.ps\fP を
実行すると doc.ps.001 と doc.ps.002 というファイルが作成される。

.\"O When sending a fax with the \fBfax send\fP command you may dial
.\"O the number manually and use the \fB-m\fP option or you may give
.\"O the phone number on the command line.  The names of the files to
.\"O be sent are given on the command line, usually by using
.\"O wildcards.  For example, to send a multi-page fax consisting of
.\"O the files doc.ps.001, doc.ps.002, and so on, you could use the
.\"O command \fBfax send 555-1212 doc.ps.0*\fP (if you had already run
.\"O the \fBfax make\fP command) or simply \fBfax send 555-1212
.\"O doc.ps\fP.  If the number is busy the script will wait and try
.\"O again.
\fBfax send\fP コマンドでファックスを送信する場合、番号を手動でダイ
ヤルし \fB-m\fP オプションを使う、またはコマンドラインで電話番号を
指定することもできる。
送信するファイル名はコマンドラインで指定し、通常はワイルドカードを
使用する。例えば、doc.ps.001, doc.ps.002, … で構成される複数
ページの FAX を送信する場合、
 \fBfax send 555-1212 doc.ps.0*\fP 
または、単に
 \fBfax send 555-1212 doc.ps\fP
というコマンドを使用する(既に \fBfax make\fP コマンドを実行している
場合)。電話が通話中の場合、スクリプトは待機し再度トライする。

.\"O Use the \fBfax receive\fP command to answer the phone and receive
.\"O a fax.  If a file name is specified the received fax will be
.\"O stored in files with the given file name plus an extension equal
.\"O to the page number.  If no options are given, the received fax
.\"O will be stored in files having a name given by the date and time
.\"O and an extension equal to the page number.  For example, a fax
.\"O received beginning on July 4 at 3:05:20 pm will generate files
.\"O 0704150520.001, 0704150520.002, and so on.
電話に応答してファックスを受信するには、 \fBfax receive\fP コマンドを
使う。ファイル名が指定されている場合、受信したファックスは、
(指定したファイル名)＋(拡張子はページ番号)のファイルに格納される。
オプションが何も指定されていない場合、受信したファックスは、日付と
時刻からなる名前で拡張子はページ番号のファイルに格納される。
例えば、7月4日の午後3時05分20秒に受信を開始したファックスの場合、
0704150520.001, 0704150520.002, … というファイルが作成される。

.\"O The \fBfax print\fP, \fBfax view\fP, and \fBfax rm\fP commands
.\"O are used to print, preview or remove received fax files.  As with
.\"O the send command the file names are usually given using
.\"O wildcards.
 \fBfax print\fP, \fBfax view\fP, \fBfax rm\fP コマンドは、受信した
ファックスファイルを印刷、プレビュー(表示)、削除するために使用する。
送信コマンドと同様にファイル名は、通常ワイルドカードを使って与えられる。

.\"O If efax has been installed for automatic fax reception you can
.\"O use the \fBfax queue\fP command to check for files in the
.\"O incoming spool directory.  The fax script can also be configured
.\"O to print received faxes or e-mail them as MIME attachments with
.\"O type image/tiff-f.  For convenience the \fBfax print\fP,
.\"O \fBview\fP and \fBrm\fP commands will first check for the named
.\"O files in this spool directory.  The \fBfax status\fP command
.\"O shows the status of the automatic receive process once, or every
.\"O \fIt\fP seconds.  Privileged users can use the \fBfax stop\fP and
.\"O \fBfax start\fP commands to stop and restart the fax reception
.\"O daemon.
efax が FAX の自動着信用にインストールされると、\fBfax queue\fP
コマンドを使って着信用スプールディレクトリ内のファイルをチェック
できる。fax スクリプトは、受信したファックス、または image/tiff-f 
型式による MIME アタッチメントとしての Eメールを印刷するように
設定することもできる。
便利なように \fBfax print\fP, \fBview\fP, \fBrm\fP コマンドは、
最初にこのスプールディレクトリ内の名前が付いたファイルをチェック
する。\fBfax status\fP コマンドは、1回または \fIt\fP 秒毎に
自動受信処理の状態を表示する。
特権ユーザは、ファックス受信デーモンの停止、再起動をするための
\fBfax stop\fP および \fBfax start\fP コマンドを使用できる。

.\"O The \fBfax answer\fP command is used for unattended reception of
.\"O faxes.  It is normally placed in the inittab(5) or ttytab(5) file
.\"O and is run automatically by init(8).
\fBfax answer\fP コマンドは、無人でファックスを受信するために使用する。
これは通常 inittab(5) または ttytab(5) ファイルの中に置かれ、
init(8) によって自動的に実行する。

.\"O The \fB-v\fP option displays verbose messages.
\fB-v\fP オプションは冗長なメッセージを表示する。

.\"O Other features of the fax script are documented within the
.\"O script:
fax スクリプトの他の機能は、スクリプトの中に書かれている。

.TP 3
.B -
.\"O a directory that lets you specify recipients by name instead of
.\"O number
番号の代わりに名前によって受取人を指定するディレクトリ

.TP 3
.B -
.\"O the \fBfax new\fP command to create a simple cover page and start
.\"O up a text editor
シンプルな表紙ページを作成し、テキストエディタを起動する
ための \fBfax new\fP コマンド

.TP 3
.B -
.\"O the \fBfax makefont\fP command converts a Postscript font to a
.\"O bit-mapped font for use in headers or text
\fBfax makefont\fP コマンドは、ヘッダーまたはテキスト内で使用する
ために Postscript フォントをビットマップフォントに変換する。

.\"O .SH RESOLUTION
.SH 解像度

.\"O Faxes can be created at low (98 lines per inch) or high (196 lpi)
.\"O resolution.  Almost all fax machines will operate at either
.\"O resolution.  By default files are created at high resolution but
.\"O you can use the optional \fB-l\fP argument to create files at low
.\"O resolution.
ファックスは、低解像度(98 ライン/インチ)または高解像度(196 ライン/インチ)
で作成できる。ほとんど全てのファックス機器は、何れの解像度でも動作する。
デフォルトでは、ファイルは高解像度で作成されるが、オプション
の \fB-l\fP 引数を使えば低解像度のファイルを作成できる。

.\"O .SH SESSION LOGS
.SH セッションのログ

.\"O The modem commands and responses together with status and error
.\"O messages are written to file.  If the fax is successfully sent or
.\"O received the log file is removed.  Otherwise a message is printed
.\"O showing the log file name.  Please send a copy of this file when
.\"O reporting problems with efax.
モデムコマンドと、ステータス、エラーメッセージ付きのレスポンスは
ファイルに書き込まれる。
fax が正常に送信または受信を完了するとログファイルは削除される。
そうでない場合ログファイルの名前を示すメッセージが表示される。
efax での問題点を報告する場合は、このファイルの内容を送って欲しい。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル

.\"O The fax script will `source' the optional shell scripts
.\"O \fB/etc/efax.rc\fP, \fB~/.efaxrc\fP and/or \fB./.efaxrc\fP before
.\"O processing command-line arguments.  These files can be used to
.\"O set script variables to custom values for a particular system,
.\"O user and/or directory.
fax スクリプトは、コマンドライン引数を処理する前にオプションのシェル
スクリプト \fB/etc/efax.rc\fP, \fB~/.efaxrc\fP そして／また
は \fB./.efaxrc\fP を `source' する。これらのファイルは、特殊なシステ
ム、ユーザ、そして／またはディレクトリのために、スクリプト変数を
カスタム値にセットするために使用することができる。

.\"O The following files are created in the FAXDIR spool directory
.\"O when automatic fax reception is enabled (see the fax script).
.\"O DEV represents the name of the fax modem device file in /dev
.\"O (e.g. cua1 for /dev/cua1).
以下のファイルは、FAX の自動受信が有効な場合 (fax スクリプト参照)に、
FAXDIR スプールディレクトリ内に作成される。
DEV は FAX モデム・デバイスファイルの名前を表している。
(例えば /dev/cua1 は cua1 )

.TP 10
DEV.\fIn\fP
.\"O the log file created by the fax answer daemon with process id
.\"O \fIn\fP
プロセス ID n の fax 応答デーモンによって作成されるログファイル

.TP 10
DEV.log
.\"O contains collected log files for device DEV.  Log files showing a
.\"O termination status of 1 (device busy) or 4 (no response from
.\"O modem) are not added to this file.
デバイス DEV 用に集められたログファイル。
ログファイルには、終了ステータス1 (デバイスビジー)または 4(モデムから
の応答無し)は、このファイルには追加されない。

.TP 10
DEV.stop
.\"O created by the fax stop command to prevent the fax daemon from
.\"O starting up.
fax stop コマンドによって作成され、fax デーモンの起動を抑止する。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 作者

.\"O Fax was written by Ed Casas.  Please send comments or bug reports
.\"O to edc@cce.com.  Please describe the type of modem used and
.\"O include a copy of the log file.
Fax は Ed Casas によって書かれた。
コメント、バグ報告は edc@cce.com に送って欲しい。
使用モデムの型式を書いて、ログファイルのコピーを付けて欲しい。

.\"O .SH COPYRIGHT
.SH 著作権

Fax is copyright 1993 -- 1999 by Ed Casas.  It may be used,
copied and modified under the terms of the GNU Public License.

これは、GNU Public License の条項の下で使用、コピー、変更できる。

.\"O .SH DISCLAIMER
.SH 責任の放棄

.\"O Although \fBfax\fP has been tested, it may have errors that will
.\"O prevent it from working correctly on your system.  Some of these
.\"O errors may cause serious problems including loss of data and
.\"O interruptions to telephone service.
\fBfax\fP はテストされているが、あなたのシステムで正常に動作することを
妨げるようなエラーがあるかもしれない。
これらのエラーはデータの消失や電話サービスの中断を含む深刻な問題を引き
起こすかもしれない。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目

.BR efax(1),
.BR efix(1),
.BR ghostscript(1).

.\"O .SH  BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O See efax(1).
efax(1)を参照。
