.\"/* Copyright 1988,1990,1993 by Paul Vixie
.\" * All rights reserved
.\" *
.\" * Distribute freely, except: don't remove my name from the source or
.\" * documentation (don't take credit for my work), mark your changes (don't
.\" * get me blamed for your possible bugs), don't alter or remove this
.\" * notice.  May be sold if buildable source is provided to buyer.  No
.\" * warrantee of any kind, express or implied, is included with this
.\" * software; use at your own risk, responsibility for damages (if any) to
.\" * anyone resulting from the use of this software rests entirely with the
.\" * user.
.\" *
.\" * Send bug reports, bug fixes, enhancements, requests, flames, etc., and
.\" * I'll try to keep a version up to date.  I can be reached as follows:
.\" * Paul Vixie          <paul@vix.com>          uunet!decwrl!vixie!paul
.\" */
.\"
.\" $Id: crontab.1,v 2.4 1993/12/31 10:47:33 vixie Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Hirohisa AMAN
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Sep 29 14:16:35 JST 2000
.\"         by Hirohisa AMAN
.\"
.TH CRONTAB 1 "29 December 1993"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O crontab \- maintain crontab files for individual users (V3)
.\"O 
.SH 名前
crontab \- 各ユーザーのための crontab ファイルを管理する (V3)
.\"O 
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.\"O crontab [ -u user ] file
.\"O .br
.\"O crontab [ -u user ] { -l | -r | -e }
.\"O
.SH 書式
crontab [ -u user ] file
.br
crontab [ -u user ] { -l | -r | -e }
.\"O 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O .I Crontab
.\"O is the program used to install, deinstall or list the tables
.\"O used to drive the
.\"O .IR cron (8)
.\"O daemon in Vixie Cron.  Each user can have their own crontab, and though
.\"O these are files in /var, they are not intended to be edited directly.
.\"O .PP
.\"O 
.SH 説明
.I crontab
は、Vixie Cron パッケージの
.IR cron (8)
デーモンの運用に使われるテーブルをインストール・アンインストール・
表示するためのプログラムである。
ユーザーはそれぞれ自分用の crontab を保有できる。
これらは /var 以下に置かれるが、
直接には編集できないようにしてある。
.PP
.\"O 
.\"O If the
.\"O .I allow
.\"O file exists, then you must be listed therein in order to be allowed to use
.\"O this command.  If the
.\"O .I allow
.\"O file does not exist but the
.\"O .I deny
.\"O file does exist, then you must \fBnot\fR be listed in the
.\"O .I deny
.\"O file in order to use this command.  If neither of these files exists, then
.\"O depending on site-dependent configuration parameters, only the super user
.\"O will be allowed to use this command, or all users will be able to use this
.\"O command.
.\"O .PP
.\"O 
.I allow
ファイルが存在する場合、ユーザーがこのコマンドを使用するには、
そのファイル中に（そのユーザーが）リストアップされている必要がある。
.I allow
ファイルは存在せずに
.I deny
ファイルが存在する場合、ユーザーがこのコマンドを使用するには、
.I deny
ファイル中にリストアップされて \fBいない\fR 必要がある。
いずれのファイルも存在しない場合、スーパーユーザーのみがこのコマンドを
使えるか、あるいはすべてのユーザーがこのコマンドを使えることになり、
そのいずれであるかはサイトに依存した設定パラメータによって決まる。
.PP
.\"O 
.\"O If the
.\"O .I -u
.\"O option is given, it specifies the name of the user whose crontab is to be
.\"O tweaked.  If this option is not given,
.\"O .I crontab
.\"O examines "your" crontab, i.e., the crontab of the person executing the
.\"O command.  Note that
.\"O .IR su (8)
.\"O can confuse
.\"O .I crontab
.\"O and that if you are running inside of
.\"O .IR su (8)
.\"O you should always use the
.\"O .I -u
.\"O option for safety's sake.
.\"O .PP
.\"O 
.I -u
オプションでは、対象となる crontab の所有者名を指定する。
このオプションが与えられていない場合、
.I crontab
は "あなたの" crontab 、すなわちコマンドを実行している人の crontab を
調べる。
なお、
.IR su (8)
を使っていると
.I crontab
を混同しかねないため、
.IR su (8)
内部での実行中は、安全のため常に
.I -u
オプションを使うべきである。
.PP
.\"O 
.\"O The first form of this command is used to install a new crontab from some
.\"O named file or standard input if the pseudo-filename ``-'' is given.
.\"O .PP
.\"O 
このコマンドの 1 つ目の書式は、
新しい crontab を（何らかの名前の付けられた）ファイル、
もしくは標準入力（疑似ファイル名 ``-'' が与えられた場合）から
インストールするために使われる。
.PP
.\"O 
.\"O The
.\"O .I -l
.\"O option causes the current crontab to be displayed on standard output.
.\"O .PP
.\"O 
.I -l
オプションは、現在の crontab を標準出力へ表示させる。
.PP
.\"O 
.\"O The
.\"O .I -r
.\"O option causes the current crontab to be removed.
.\"O .PP
.\"O 
.I -r
オプションは、現在の crontab を削除する。
.PP
.\"O 
.\"O The
.\"O .I -e
.\"O option is used to edit the current crontab using the editor specified by
.\"O the \s-1VISUAL\s+1 or \s-1EDITOR\s+1 environment variables.  After you exit
.\"O from the editor, the modified crontab will be installed automatically.
.\"O 
.I -e
オプションは、環境変数 \s-1VISUAL\s+1 もしくは \s-1EDITOR\s+1 で指定されている
エディターを使って、現在の crontab を編集するのに使われる。
編集終了後、変更された crontab は自動的にインストールされる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O crontab(5), cron(8)
.\"O 
.SH 関連項目
crontab(5), cron(8)
.\"O 
.\"O .SH FILES
.\"O .nf
.\"O /var/cron/allow
.\"O /var/cron/deny
.\"O .fi
.\"O
.SH ファイル
.nf
/var/cron/allow
/var/cron/deny
.fi
.\"O 
.\"O .SH STANDARDS
.\"O The
.\"O .I crontab
.\"O command conforms to IEEE Std1003.2-1992 (``POSIX'').  This new command syntax
.\"O differs from previous versions of Vixie Cron, as well as from the classic
.\"O SVR3 syntax.
.\"O 
.SH 準拠
.I crontab
コマンドは、IEEE Std1003.2-1992 (``POSIX'') に準拠している。
この新しいコマンドのシンタックスは、
Vixie Cron の前のバージョンと異なっている
(古典的な SVR3 シンタックスとも異なる)。

.\"O 
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.\"O A fairly informative usage message appears if you run it with a bad command
.\"O line.
.\"O 
.SH 返り値
正しくないコマンドラインでこのコマンドを実行すると、
多少の情報を含む利用法のメッセージが表示される。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.\"O .nf
.\"O Paul Vixie <paul@vix.com>
.\"O 
.SH 著者
.nf
Paul Vixie <paul@vix.com>



