.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Updated with additions from Mitchum DSouza <m.dsouza@mrc-apu.cam.ac.uk>
.\" Portions Copyright 1993 Mitchum DSouza <m.dsouza@mrc-apu.cam.ac.uk>
.\"
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 00:22:35 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 SUTO, Mitsuaki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Jun 27 10:04:58 JST 1997
.\"         by SUTO, Mitsuaki <suto@av.crl.sony.co.jp>
.\" Modified Sun Mar 21 17:24:27 JST 1999
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH GETHOSTID 2 2007-07-26 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O gethostid, sethostid \- get or set the unique identifier of the current host
gethostid, sethostid \- 現在使用しているホストに固有の識別子を取得する、または設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B long gethostid(void);
.br
.BI "int sethostid(long " hostid );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR sethostid ():
_BSD_SOURCE || (_XOPEN_SOURCE && _XOPEN_SOURCE\ <\ 500)
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Get or set a unique 32-bit identifier for the current machine.
.\"O The 32-bit identifier is intended to be unique among all Unix systems in
.\"O existence.
.\"O This normally resembles the Internet address for the local
.\"O machine, as returned by
.\"O .BR gethostbyname (3),
.\"O and thus usually never needs to be set.
現在使用しているホストに固有の 32 ビットの識別子を取得/設定する。
この 32 ビットの識別子は現在存在している全ての Unix システム
の中で唯一になるように決められる。通常は
.BR gethostbyname (3)
によって返されるローカルマシンの Internet アドレスが代わりに使用され、
普通は識別子をあえて設定する必要はない。

.\"O The
.\"O .BR sethostid ()
.\"O call is restricted to the superuser.
.BR sethostid ()
はスーパーユーザしか使用できない。

.\"O The
.\"O .I hostid
.\"O argument is stored in the file
.\"O .IR /etc/hostid .
引き数
.I hostid
は
.I /etc/hostid
ファイルに格納される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR gethostid ()
.\"O returns the 32-bit identifier for the current host as set by
.\"O .BR sethostid ().
.BR gethostid ()
は
.BR sethostid ()
によって設定された、現在使用しているホストの 32 ビットの識別子の値を返す。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/hostid
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O 4.2BSD; these functions were dropped in 4.4BSD.
.\"O SVr4 includes
.\"O .BR gethostid ()
.\"O but not
.\"O .BR sethostid ().
.\"O POSIX.1-2001 specifies
.\"O .BR gethostid ()
.\"O but not
.\"O .BR sethostid ().
4.2BSD。4.4BSD ではこれらの関数はなくなった。
SVr4 には
.BR gethostid ()
は含まれているが、
.BR sethostid ()
は含まれていない。
POSIX.1-2001 では、
.BR gethostid ()
は規定されているが、
.BR sethostid ()
は規定されていない。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O In the glibc implementation, if
.\"O .BR gethostid ()
.\"O cannot open
.\"O .IR /etc/hostid ,
.\"O then it obtains the hostname using
.\"O .BR gethostname (2),
.\"O passes that hostname to
.\"O .BR gethostbyname_r (3)
.\"O in order to obtain the host's IPv4 address,
.\"O and returns a value obtained by bit-twiddling the IPv4 address.
.\"O (This value may not be unique.)
glibc の実装では、
.I /etc/hostid
をオープンできなかった場合、
.BR gethostid ()
は
.BR gethostname (2)
を使ってホスト名を入手し、そのホスト名を
.BR gethostbyname_r (3)
に渡しホストの IPv4 アドレスを取得して、
その IPv4 アドレスのビット入れ替えを行った値を返す。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR hostid (1),
.BR gethostbyname (3)
