.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) Markus Kuhn, 1996
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 1995-11-26  Markus Kuhn <mskuhn@cip.informatik.uni-erlangen.de>
.\"      First version written
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Feb 23 19:48:34 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	paging			ページング
.\"WORD:	process			プロセス
.\"WORD:	lock			ロック
.\"WORD:	unlock			アンロック
.\"
.TH MUNLOCKALL 2 "1995-11-26" "Linux 1.3.43" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
munlockall \- 呼び出したプロセスのページングを再開する
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/mman.h>
.sp
\fBint munlockall(void);
.fi
.SH 説明
.B munlockall
は呼び出したプロセスのアドレス空間にマップされている全てのページの
ページング(paging)を再開(reenable)する。

メモリのロック(lock)は累積しない。例えば複数回
.B mlock
や
.B mlockall
を呼び出してロックされたページも一回の
.BR munlockall
によってアンロック(unlock)される。
複数の場所や複数のプロセスにマップされているページは、少なくとも一つの場所、
一つのプロセスでロックされている限りは RAM に残り続ける。

.B mlockall
と
.B munlockall
が使用可能である POSIX システムでは
.B _POSIX_MEMLOCK
が <unistd.h> に定義されている。
.SH 返り値
成功した場合は、
.B munlockall
はゼロを返す。エラーの場合は、\-1 を返し
.I errno
に適切な値を設定する。

.SH 準拠
POSIX.1b, SVr4
.SH 関連項目
.BR mlockall (2),
.BR mlock (2), 
.BR munlock (2)
