.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) Markus Kuhn, 1996
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 1995-11-26  Markus Kuhn <mskuhn@cip.informatik.uni-erlangen.de>
.\"      First version written
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Feb 23 19:47:50 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Oct 18 JST 2003 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Sun May 23 JST 2004 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"WORD:	paging			ページング
.\"WORD:	memory			メモリ
.\"WORD:	kernel			カーネル
.\"WORD:	swap			スワップ
.\"WORD:	lock			ロック
.\"WORD:	unlock			アンロック
.\"WORD:	process			プロセス
.\"
.TH MUNLOCK 2 2003-08-21 "Linux 2.4" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O munlock \- reenable paging for some parts of memory
munlock \- メモリの一部のページングを再開する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/mman.h>
.sp
\fBint munlock(const void *\fIaddr\fB, size_t \fIlen\fB);
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B munlock
.\"O reenables paging for the memory in the range starting at
.\"O .I addr
.\"O with length
.\"O .I len
.\"O bytes. All pages which contain a part of the specified memory range
.\"O can after calling
.\"O .B munlock
.\"O be moved to external swap space again by the kernel.
.B munlock
は
.I addr
から始まる長さ
.I len
バイトの範囲のメモリのページング(paging)を再開(reenable)する。
指定された範囲のメモリを含んでいる全てのページは
.B munlock
を呼び出し後、
再びカーネルによって外部スワップ(swap)に移動できるようになる。

.\"O Memory locks do not stack, i.e., pages which have been locked several times
.\"O by calls to
.\"O .B mlock
.\"O or
.\"O .B mlockall
.\"O will be unlocked by a single call to
.\"O .B munlock
.\"O for the corresponding range or by
.\"O .BR munlockall .
.\"O Pages which are mapped to several locations or by several processes stay
.\"O locked into RAM as long as they are locked at least at one location or by
.\"O at least one process.
メモリのロック(lock)は累積しない。
すなわち複数回
.B mlock
や
.B mlockall
を呼び出してロックされたページでも、
対応する範囲に対して
.B munlock
を 1 回呼び出したり
.B munlockall
を呼び出したりするだけでロック解除される。
複数の場所や複数のプロセスにマップされているページは、少なくとも一つの場所、
一つのプロセスでロックされている限りは RAM に残り続ける。

.\"O On POSIX systems on which
.\"O .B mlock
.\"O and
.\"O .B munlock
.\"O are available,
.\"O .B _POSIX_MEMLOCK_RANGE
.\"O is defined in <unistd.h> and the value
.\"O .B PAGESIZE
.\"O from <limits.h> indicates the number of bytes per page.
.B mlock
と
.B munlock
が使用可能である POSIX システムでは
.B _POSIX_MEMLOCK_RANGE
が <unistd.h> に定義されており、<limits.h> にある
.B PAGESIZE
の値はページあたりのバイト数を示している。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success,
.\"O .B munlock
.\"O returns zero.  On error, \-1 is returned,
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately, and no changes are made to any locks in the
.\"O address space of the process.
成功した場合、
.B munlock
はゼロを返す、エラーの場合が \-1 を返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定され、プロセスのアドレス空間におけるロックは変更されない。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.\"O Some of the specified address range does not correspond to mapped
.\"O pages in the address space of the process.
指定されたアドレスの範囲はプロセスにマップされたアドレス空間と一致しない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O (Not on Linux)
.\"O .I addr
.\"O was not a multiple of the page size.
.I addr
がページサイズの倍数でない。
.LP
.\"O Linux adds
Linux では、以下が追加される。
.TP
.\"O .B EINVAL
.\"O .I len
.\"O was negative.
.B EINVAL
.I len
が負の数である。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1b, SVr4
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR mlock (2),
.BR mlockall (2),
.BR munlockall (2)
