.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com), 15 April 1995.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified 22 July 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@duracef.shout.net):
.\"   Fixed incorrect word in 'TH' call.
.\"
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 16:44:55 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Feb 23 19:51:47 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	obsolete		廃止する
.\"WORD:	kernel			カーネル
.\"WORD:	implement		実装
.\"WORD:	library			ライブラリ
.\"
.TH OBSOLETE 2 1995-07-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O oldfstat, oldlstat, oldstat, oldolduname, olduname \- obsolete system calls
oldfstat, oldlstat, oldstat, oldolduname, olduname \- 廃止されたシステム・コール
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O Obsolete system calls.
廃止(obsolete)されたシステム・コール。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The Linux 2.0 kernel implements these calls to support old executables.
.\"O These calls return structures which have grown since their
.\"O first implementation,
.\"O but old executables must continue to receive old smaller structures.
Linux 2.0 カーネルではこれらの関数を古い実行プログラムをサポートする
ために実装している。これらのコールは最初の実装より大きな構造体を返すが、
古い実行プログラムは古いより小さな構造体を受けとり続けなければならない。
.PP
.\"O Current executables should be linked with current libraries and never
.\"O use these calls.
現在の実行プログラムは現在のライブラリとリンクされるので、
これらのコールを使用することはない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O These calls are unique to Linux and should not be used at all in new programs.
これらのコールは Linux 特有であり移植を意図したプログラムでは使用して
はいけない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fstat (2),
.BR lstat (2),
.BR stat (2),
.BR uname (2),
.BR unimplemented (2)
