.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)sigblock.2	6.7 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 10:09:15 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Fri Aug 11 1995 by Stephen Lee <sl14@cornell.edu>
.\" Modified 1995 by Mike Battersby <mib@deakin.edu.au>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar  3 23:27:30 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	signal			シグナル
.\"WORD:	mask			マスク
.\"WORD:	obsolete		廃止
.\"WORD:	block			禁止(block)
.\"WORD:	prototype		型宣言
.\"
.TH SIGBLOCK 2 1995-08-31 "Linux 1.3" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sigblock, siggetmask, sigsetmask, sigmask \- manipulate the signal mask
sigblock, siggetmask, sigsetmask, sigmask \- シグナルのマスクを操作する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int sigblock(int " mask );
.sp
.B int siggetmask(void);
.sp
.BI "int sigsetmask(int " mask );
.sp
.BI "int sigmask(int " signum );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This interface is made obsolete by
.\"O .BR sigprocmask (2).
このインターフェースは
.BR sigprocmask (2)
によって廃止 (obsolete) された。

.\"O The 
.\"O .BR sigblock ()
.\"O system call adds the signals specified in
.\"O .I mask
.\"O to the set of signals currently being blocked from delivery.
.BR sigblock ()
システム・コールは
.I mask
で指定したシグナルを現在配送が禁止 (block) されている
シグナルの集合に追加する。
.PP
.\"O The 
.\"O .BR sigsetmask ()
.\"O system call replaces the set of blocked signals totally with a new set
.\"O specified in
.\"O .IR mask .
.BR sigsetmask ()
システム・コールは禁止されているシグナルの集合を
.IR mask 
で指定された新しい集合に完全に置き換える。
.\"O Signals are blocked if the corresponding bit in
.\"O .I mask
.\"O is a 1.
シグナルは
.I mask
の対応するビットが 1 の場合に禁止される。
.PP
.\"O The current set of blocked signals can be obtained using
.\"O .BR siggetmask ().
現在禁止されているシグナルの集合は
.BR siggetmask ()
を使用して得ることができる。
.PP
.\"O The 
.\"O .BR sigmask ()
.\"O macro is provided to construct the mask for a given
.\"O .IR signum .
.BR sigmask ()
マクロは与えられた
.I signum 
のマスクを組み立てるために提供される。

.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR siggetmask ()
.\"O returns the current set of masked signals.
.BR siggetmask ()
現在のマスクされたシグナルの集合を返す。

.\"O .BR sigsetmask ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR sigblock ()
.\"O return the previous set of masked signals.
.BR sigsetmask ()
と
.BR sigblock ()
は今までのマスクされたシグナルの集合を返す。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Prototypes for these functions are only available if
.\"O .B _BSD_SOURCE
.\"O is defined before the inclusion of any system header file.
これらの関数の型宣言(prototype)は全てのシステム・ヘッダが
インクルードされる前に
.B _BSD_SOURCE
が定義されている場合のみ与えられる。
.PP
.\"O It is not possible to block
.\"O .B SIGKILL
.\"O or
.\"O .B SIGSTOP
.\"O \- this restriction is silently imposed by the system.
.B SIGKILL
や
.B SIGSTOP
を禁止することはできない。
\- この制限はシステムによて無言のうちに適用される。

.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O 4.4BSD. These function calls appeared in 4.3BSD and are deprecated.
.\"O Use the POSIX signal facilities for new programs.
4.4BSD. これらの関数は 4.3BSD で登場し、廃止予定である。
新しいプログラムでは POSIX シグナルを使用すること。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigprocmask (2),
.BR signal (7)
