.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" stab.5 1.11 1999/12/21 22:40:19
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH STAB 5 "1999/12/21 22:40:19" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O stab \- current PCMCIA socket status
.SH 名前
stab \- 現在の PCMCIA ソケットの状態
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I stab
.\"O file is created by
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O and contains identification and device driver information for PCMCIA
.\"O cards.  Each socket is described by one header line, followed by one
.\"O or more device driver lines.  The header gives the card name as given
.\"O in
.\"O .IR /etc/pcmcia/config .
.\"O Device driver lines consist of a series of tab-separated fields.  The
.\"O first field is the socket number.  The second field is the device
.\"O class, which identifies which script in
.\"O .I /etc/pcmcia
.\"O is used to configure or shut down this device.
.\"O The third field is the driver name.
.\"O The fourth field is used to number devices when a single
.\"O card has several devices associated with the same driver.  The fifth
.\"O field is the device name, and the final two fields are major and minor
.\"O device numbers for this device, if appropriate.
.I stab
ファイルは
.B cardmgr
によって作成され、 PCMCIA カードの識別情報やデバイスドライバの情報を含む。
各ソケットの記述は、一行のヘッダとそれに続く
一行以上のデバイスドライバの記述行からなる。
ヘッダはカードの名前を
.I /etc/pcmcia/config
中のかたちで与える。
デバイスドライバの行はタブ区切りのフィールド群からなる。
第 1 フィールドはソケット番号である。第 2 フィールドはデバイスクラスであり、
これは
.I /etc/pcmcia
にあるスクリプトの中から、どれをデバイスの設定や終了に用いるかを指定する。
第 3 フィールドはドライバの名前である。
第 4 フィールドは、一つのカードに複数のデバイスがあり、
それらが同じドライバに関連づけられるとき、各デバイスの番号づけに用いられる。
第 5 フィールドはデバイスの名前である。
最後の 2 つのフィールドは、
そのデバイスのメジャー番号とマイナー番号である (もしあれば)。
.PP
.\"O The file is updated by
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O whenever a card is inserted or ejected, and when
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O receives a
.\"O .B SIGHUP
.\"O signal.
.I stab
ファイルは、カードが挿入・イジェクトされるたびに
.B cardmgr
によって更新される。
また
.B cardmgr
が
.B SIGHUP
シグナルを受け取ったときにも更新される。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I stab
.\"O file will normally be created in either
.\"O .I /var/state/pcmcia
.\"O or
.\"O .IR /var/lib/pcmcia ,
.\"O but if neither directory is available, it will be found in
.\"O .IR /var/run .
.I stab
ファイルは通常
.I /var/state/pcmcia " あるいは " /var/lib/pcmcia
に作成される。しかしもしディレクトリが両方ともなかった場合は
.I /var/run
に作成される。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5), cardinfo(1).
.BR cardmgr (8),
.BR pcmcia (5),
.BR cardinfo (1)


