.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1993-2000 
.\" NetBSD jman proj. and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Oct 15 1993
.\" 	    by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jun 10 15:41:46 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	compress		圧縮
.\"WORD:	decompress		伸長
.\"WORD:	executable		実行ファイル
.\"WORD:	executable file		実行ファイル
.\"
.TH GZEXE 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O gzexe \- compress executable files in place
gzexe \- 実行ファイルを実行できる形で圧縮する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B gzexe
[ name ...  ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I  gzexe
.\"O utility allows you to compress executables in place and have them
.\"O automatically uncompress and execute when you run them (at a penalty
.\"O in performance).  For example if you execute ``gzexe /bin/cat'' it
.\"O will create the following two files:
.I gzexe
ユーティリティーは実行ファイルを圧縮する。
この圧縮ファイルが実行されると、自動的に伸長して起動する
(性能の面でペナルティーがある)。
たとえば、``gzexe /bin/cat''を実行すると、以下の 2 つのファイルが生成される。
.nf
.br
    -r-xr-xr-x  1 root  bin   9644 Feb 11 11:16 /bin/cat
    -r-xr-xr-x  1 bin   bin  24576 Nov 23 13:21 /bin/cat~
.fi
.\"O /bin/cat~ is the original file and /bin/cat is the self-uncompressing
.\"O executable file.  You can remove /bin/cat~ once you are sure that
.\"O /bin/cat works properly.
/bin/cat~ は元のファイルで、/bin/cat は自己伸長実行ファイルである。
/bin/cat が正しく動作することが確かめられたら、/bin/cat~ は削除しても良い。
.PP
.\"O This utility is most useful on systems with very small disks.
このユーティリティーは、ディスク容量が非常に小さいシステムでとても役立つ。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Decompress the given executables instead of compressing them.
指定された実行ファイルを圧縮する代わりに伸長する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
gzip(1), znew(1), zmore(1), zcmp(1), zforce(1)
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 注意
.\"O The compressed executable is a shell script. This may create some
.\"O security holes. In particular, the compressed executable relies
.\"O on the PATH environment variable to find
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O and some other utilities
.\"O .I (tail, chmod, ln, sleep).
圧縮実行ファイルはシェルスクリプトある。
このことによって、何らかのセキュリティホールが生成される可能性がある。
特に、圧縮実行ファイルは
.I gzip
や他のユーティリティ
.I (tail, chmod, ln, sleep) 
を見つけるために PATH 環境変数に依存する。
.\"O .SH "BUGS"
.SH バグ
.\"O .I gzexe 
.\"O attempts to retain the original file attributes on the compressed executable,
.\"O but you may have to fix them manually in some cases, using
.\"O .I chmod
.\"O or
.\"O .I chown.
.I gzexe
は、元ファイルの属性を圧縮実行ファイルに引き継ごうとするが、
.I chmod
や
.I chown
を用いて手動で属性を修正しなければならない場合がある。


