.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1993-2000 
.\" NetBSD jman proj. and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved. 
.\" Translated Fri Oct 15 1993
.\" 	    by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Jun  9 15:11:14 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	compress	圧縮する
.\"WORD:	expand		伸長する
.\"WORD:	decompress	伸長する
.\"WORD:	uncompress	伸長する
.\"WORD:	consistency	整合性
.\"WORD:	integrity	整合性
.\"WORD:	concatenate	連結する
.\"WORD:	keep		保存する
.\"WORD:	mode		アクセス権
.\"WORD:	restore		復元する
.\"WORD:	pad		埋める
.\"WORD:	redundant	冗長
.\"WORD:	archiver	アーカイバー
.\"WORD:	verbose		詳細出力
.\"
.PU
.TH GZIP 1 local
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O gzip, gunzip, zcat \- compress or expand files
gzip, gunzip, zcat \- ファイルの圧縮・伸長を行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.ll +8
.B gzip
.RB [ " \-acdfhlLnNrtvV19 " ]
.RB [ \-S\ suffix ]
[
.I "name \&..."
]
.ll -8
.br
.B gunzip
.RB [ " \-acfhlLnNrtvV " ]
.RB [ \-S\ suffix ]
[
.I "name \&..."
]
.br
.B zcat
.RB [ " \-fhLV " ]
[
.I "name \&..."
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I Gzip
.\"O reduces the size of the named files using Lempel-Ziv coding (LZ77).
.\"O Whenever possible,
.\"O each file is replaced by one with the extension
.\"O .B "\&.gz,"
.\"O while keeping the same ownership modes, access and modification times.
.\"O (The default extension is
.\"O .B "\-gz"
.\"O for VMS,
.\"O .B "z"
.\"O for MSDOS, OS/2 FAT, Windows NT FAT and Atari.)
.\"O If no files are specified, or if a file name is "-", the standard input is
.\"O compressed to the standard output.
.\"O .I Gzip
.\"O will only attempt to compress regular files.
.\"O In particular, it will ignore symbolic links.
.I gzip
は Lempel-Ziv コーディング (LZ77) を利用して、
指定されたファイルのサイズを小さくする。
各ファイルは所有権・アクセス時刻・修正時刻を保存したまま、
拡張子
.B "\&.gz"
をつけたファイルに置き換えられる。
(デフォルトの拡張子は、VMSでは
.BR "\-gz",
MSDOS, OS/2 FAT, Windows NT FAT, Atari では
.B "z"
である。)
ファイルが指定されない場合、またはファイル名が "-" の場合、
標準入力を圧縮して標準出力に書き出す。
.I gzip
は通常のファイルしか圧縮しようとしない。
特に、シンボリックリンクは無視される。
.PP
.\"O If the compressed file name is too long for its file system,
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O truncates it.
.\"O .I Gzip
.\"O attempts to truncate only the parts of the file name longer than 3 characters.
.\"O (A part is delimited by dots.) If the name consists of small parts only,
.\"O the longest parts are truncated. For example, if file names are limited
.\"O to 14 characters, gzip.msdos.exe is compressed to gzi.msd.exe.gz.
.\"O Names are not truncated on systems which do not have a limit on file name
.\"O length.
圧縮されたファイル名が、そのファイルシステム上では長すぎる場合、
.I gzip
はファイル名を切り詰める。
.I gzip
はファイル名のうちの 4 文字以上のパートを切り詰めようとする。
(各パートはドットで区切られている。)
小さなパートだけからファイル名ができている場合、
もっとも長いパートが切り詰められる。
例えば、ファイル名が 14 文字までに制限されている場合、
gzip.msdos.exe は gzi.msd.exe.gz という名前で圧縮される。
ファイル名の長さに制限がないシステムでは、
ファイル名が切り詰められることはない。
.PP
.\"O By default,
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O keeps the original file name and timestamp in the compressed file. These
.\"O are used when decompressing the file with the
.\"O .B \-N
.\"O option. This is useful when the compressed file name was truncated or
.\"O when the time stamp was not preserved after a file transfer.
デフォルトでは、
.I gzip
は圧縮ファイルの中に元ファイルの名前とタイムスタンプを保存する。
これらの情報はファイルを
.B \-N
オプションで伸長するときに使われる。
これは、圧縮されたファイルの名前が切り詰められた場合や、
ファイル転送の後でタイムスタンプが保存されなかった場合に役立つ。
.PP
.\"O Compressed files can be restored to their original form using
.\"O .I gzip -d
.\"O or
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O or
.\"O .I zcat.
.\"O If the original name saved in the compressed file is not suitable for its
.\"O file system, a new name is constructed from the original one to make it
.\"O legal.
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O keeps the original file name and timestamp in the compressed file. These
.\"O are used when decompressing the file with the
.\"O .B \-N
.\"O option. This is useful when the compressed file name was truncated or
.\"O when the time stamp was not preserved after a file transfer.
圧縮されたファイルは
.IR "gzip -d" ,
.IR "gunzip" ,
.I zcat
を使うと元の形に復元することができる。
圧縮ファイルに保存された元ファイルの名前がファイルシステムに適合しない場合、
そのファイルシステムに適合するように元の名前から新しい名前が作られる。
.PP
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O takes a list of files on its command line and replaces each
.\"O file whose name ends with .gz, -gz, .z, -z, _z or .Z
.\"O and which begins with the correct magic number with an uncompressed
.\"O file without the original extension.
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O also recognizes the special extensions
.\"O .B "\&.tgz"
.\"O and
.\"O .B "\&.taz"
.\"O as shorthands for
.\"O .B "\&.tar.gz"
.\"O and
.\"O .B "\&.tar.Z"
.\"O respectively.
.\"O When compressing,
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O uses the
.\"O .B "\&.tgz"
.\"O extension if necessary instead of truncating a file with a
.\"O .B "\&.tar"
.\"O extension.
.I gunzip
は、ファイル名が .gz, -gz, .z, -z, _z, .Z でおわっており、
正しいマジックナンバーで始まっているファイルのリストを
コマンドラインから受け取り、
伸長したファイルに置き換える。
このとき圧縮ファイルの拡張子は取り除かれる。
.I gunzip
は
.B "\&.tgz"
と
.B "\&.taz"
という特別な拡張子も認識する。
これらはそれぞれ、
.B "\&.tar.gz"
と
.B "\&.tar.Z"
の省略形である。
圧縮するときに
.B "\&.tar"
という拡張子をもつファイルの名前を切り詰める必要があるなら、
.I gzip
はかわりに
.B "\&.tgz"
という拡張子を使う。
.PP
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O can currently decompress files created by
.\"O .I gzip, zip, compress, compress -H
.\"O or
.\"O .I pack.
.\"O The detection of the input format is automatic.  When using
.\"O the first two formats,
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O checks a 32 bit CRC. For
.\"O .I pack, gunzip
.\"O checks the uncompressed length. The standard
.\"O .I compress
.\"O format was not designed to allow consistency checks. However
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O is sometimes able to detect a bad .Z file. If you get an error
.\"O when uncompressing a .Z file, do not assume that the .Z file is
.\"O correct simply because the standard
.\"O .I uncompress
.\"O does not complain. This generally means that the standard
.\"O .I uncompress
.\"O does not check its input, and happily generates garbage output.
.\"O The SCO compress -H format (lzh compression method) does not include a CRC
.\"O but also allows some consistency checks.
.I gunzip
は
.I gzip, zip, compress, compress -H, pack
で作られたファイルを正しく伸長できる。
入力形式の検知は自動的に行われる。
はじめの 2 つの形式を使った場合、
.I gunzip
は 32 ビットの CRC をチェックする。
.I pack
に対して、gunzip は伸長した長さをチェックする。
標準的な
.I compress
形式は、整合性チェックをするようには設計されていない。
しかし、
.I gunzip
は壊れた .Z ファイルを検知することができる場合もある。.Z ファイルを
伸長しているときにエラーが出たときには、
単に標準の
.I uncompress
がエラーを出さないという理由で .Z ファイルが正しいと考えてはならない。
一般的にいうと、標準的な
.I uncompress
は入力をチェックせず、脳天気にゴミを出力してしまうことがある。
SCO の compress -H 形式 (lzh 圧縮法) は
CRC を含んでいないが、いくつかの整合性チェックができる。
.PP
.\"O Files created by
.\"O .I zip
.\"O can be uncompressed by gzip only if they have a single member compressed
.\"O with the 'deflation' method. This feature is only intended to help
.\"O conversion of tar.zip files to the tar.gz format. To extract zip files
.\"O with several members, use
.\"O .I unzip
.\"O instead of
.\"O .I gunzip.
.I zip
によって作られたファイルは、'deflation' 法で圧縮された元ファイルを
1 つしか含まない場合にだけ、gzip で伸長することができる。
この特徴は、tar.zip ファイルを tar.gz 形式へ変換する際の
補助となることだけを意図している。
複数の元ファイルを含んでいる zip ファイルを伸長するためには、
.I gunzip
ではなく
.I unzip
を使うこと。
.PP
.\"O .I zcat
.\"O is identical to
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O .B \-c.
.\"O (On some systems,
.\"O .I zcat
.\"O may be installed as
.\"O .I gzcat
.\"O to preserve the original link to
.\"O .I compress.)
.\"O .I zcat
.\"O uncompresses either a list of files on the command line or its
.\"O standard input and writes the uncompressed data on standard output.
.\"O .I zcat
.\"O will uncompress files that have the correct magic number whether
.\"O they have a
.\"O .B "\&.gz"
.\"O suffix or not.
.I zcat
は
.I gunzip
.B \-c
と同一である。
(\fIcompress\fR
へのオリジナルのリンクを保存するために、
.I zcat
が
.I gzcat
としてインストールされているシステムがあるかもしれない。)
.I zcat
はコマンドラインで指示されるファイルのリストまたは標準入力を伸長し、
伸長したデータを標準出力に書き出す。
.I zcat
はファイルが
.B "\&.gz"
という拡張子であるかどうかわらず、
正しいマジックナンバーを持っているファイルであれば伸長しようとする。
.PP
.\"O .I Gzip
.\"O uses the Lempel-Ziv algorithm used in
.\"O .I zip
.\"O and PKZIP.
.\"O The amount of compression obtained depends on the size of the
.\"O input and the distribution of common substrings.
.\"O Typically, text such as source code or English
.\"O is reduced by 60\-70%.
.\"O Compression is generally much better than that achieved by
.\"O LZW (as used in 
.\"O .IR compress ),
.\"O Huffman coding (as used in
.\"O .IR pack ),
.\"O or adaptive Huffman coding
.\"O .RI ( compact ).
.I gzip
は
.I zip
と PKZIP で使われている Lempel-Ziv アルゴリズムを使う。
得られる圧縮量は、入力のサイズと共通の部分データ列の分布に依存する。
一般に、ソースコードや英文といったテキストでは
60\-70% 小さくなる。
(\fIcompress\fR に使われている) LZW・
(\fIpack\fR に使われている) Huffman コーディング・
(\fIcompact\fR に使われている) 適応 Huffman コーディング、
これらによる圧縮に比べて、この圧縮率は一般にかなり良い。
.PP
.\"O Compression is always performed, even if the compressed file is
.\"O slightly larger than the original. The worst case expansion is
.\"O a few bytes for the gzip file header, plus 5 bytes every 32K block,
.\"O or an expansion ratio of 0.015% for large files. Note that the actual
.\"O number of used disk blocks almost never increases.
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O preserves the mode, ownership and timestamps of files when compressing
.\"O or decompressing.
たとえ圧縮されたファイルが元ファイルより少し大きくなるとしても、
圧縮は常に行われる。
最悪の場合、gzip ファイルヘッダのための数バイトと
32K バイトブロック毎に 5 バイトの増加となり、
大きなファイルでは 0.015% の増加率となる。
ただし実際の使用ディスクブロック数は、
ほとんど絶対に増加しない。
.I gzip
は圧縮・伸長時にファイルのアクセス権・所有者・タイムスタンプを保存する。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-a --ascii
.\"O Ascii text mode: convert end-of-lines using local conventions. This option
.\"O is supported only on some non-Unix systems. For MSDOS, CR LF is converted
.\"O to LF when compressing, and LF is converted to CR LF when decompressing.
アスキーテキストモード：局所変換を使って行末の変換をする。
このオプションはいくつかの非 Unix システムでサポートされている。
MSDOS では、圧縮時に CR LF が LF に変換され、
伸長時に LF が CR LF に変換される。
.TP
.B \-c --stdout --to-stdout
.\"O Write output on standard output; keep original files unchanged.
.\"O If there are several input files, the output consists of a sequence of
.\"O independently compressed members. To obtain better compression,
.\"O concatenate all input files before compressing them.
出力を標準出力に書き出し、元ファイルを変更しない。
入力ファイルが複数ある場合、出力はファイル毎に圧縮されたものとなる。
圧縮率を上げるには、圧縮する前にすべての入力ファイルを
(tar などで) まとめること。
.TP
.B \-d --decompress --uncompress
.\"O Decompress.
伸長する。
.TP
.B \-f --force
.\"O Force compression or decompression even if the file has multiple links
.\"O or the corresponding file already exists, or if the compressed data
.\"O is read from or written to a terminal. If the input data is not in
.\"O a format recognized by
.\"O .I gzip,
.\"O and if the option --stdout is also given, copy the input data without change
.\"O to the standard ouput: let
.\"O .I zcat
.\"O behave as
.\"O .I cat.
.\"O If
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O is not given,
.\"O and when not running in the background,
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O prompts to verify whether an existing file should be overwritten.
ファイルが複数のリンクを張られていたり、
対応するファイルが既に存在していたり、
圧縮されたデータが端末に対して読み書きされてしているような場合でも、
強制的に圧縮・伸長を行う。
入力データが
.I gzip
で認識できない形式のときに --stdout オプションが指定されていると、
入力データは変更なしに標準出力にコピーされる。
つまり、
.I zcat
を
.I cat
として動作させる。
.B \-f
が指定されず、かつバックグラウンドで動作していない場合、
.I gzip
は既に存在するファイルを上書きするかを問い合わせるプロンプトを出す。
.TP
.B \-h --help
.\"O Display a help screen and quit.
ヘルプ画面を表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-l --list
.\"O For each compressed file, list the following fields:
圧縮された個々のファイルについて、以下のフィールドを列挙する。

.\"O     compressed size: size of the compressed file
.\"O     uncompressed size: size of the uncompressed file
.\"O     ratio: compression ratio (0.0% if unknown)
.\"O     uncompressed_name: name of the uncompressed file
    compressed size: 圧縮されたファイルのサイズ
    uncompressed size: 伸長されたファイルのサイズ
    ratio: 圧縮率 (不明の場合は 0.0%)
    uncompressed_name: 伸長されたファイルの名前

.\"O The uncompressed size is given as -1 for files not in gzip format,
.\"O such as compressed .Z files. To get the uncompressed size for such a file,
.\"O you can use:
compress でつくられた .Z ファイルのように、
gzip 形式でないファイルの伸長時サイズは -1 にされる。
そのようなファイルについて伸長されたファイルのサイズを求める場合は、

    zcat file.Z | wc -c

.\"O In combination with the --verbose option, the following fields are also
.\"O displayed:
を使うこと。--verbose オプションと組み合わせると
以下のフィールドも表示される。

.\"O     method: compression method
.\"O     crc: the 32-bit CRC of the uncompressed data
.\"O     date & time: time stamp for the uncompressed file
    method: 圧縮法
    crc: 伸長されたデータの 32 ビット CRC
    date & time: 伸長されたファイルのタイムスタンプ

.\"O The compression methods currently supported are deflate, compress, lzh
.\"O (SCO compress -H) and pack.  The crc is given as ffffffff for a file
.\"O not in gzip format.
現在サポートされている圧縮法は、deflate, compress,
lzh (SCO compress -H), pack である。
gzip 形式でないファイルについて、crc は ffffffff とされる。 

.\"O With --name, the uncompressed name,  date and time  are
.\"O those stored within the compress file if present.
--name が同時に指定されると、(もし記録されているなら) 
伸長されたファイルの名前・日付・時刻は
圧縮ファイル内に記録されているものになる。

.\"O With --verbose, the size totals and compression ratio for all files
.\"O is also displayed, unless some sizes are unknown. With --quiet,
.\"O the title and totals lines are not displayed.
--verbose が同時に指定されると、どれかのファイルのサイズが不明でない限り、
サイズの合計とその圧縮率も表示される。
--quiet が同時に指定されると、タイトルと合計の行は表示されない。
.TP
.B \-L --license
.\"O Display the
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O license and quit.
.I gzip
のライセンスを表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-n --no-name
.\"O When compressing, do not save the original file name and time stamp by
.\"O default. (The original name is always saved if the name had to be
.\"O truncated.) When decompressing, do not restore the original file name
.\"O if present (remove only the
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O suffix from the compressed file name) and do not restore the original
.\"O time stamp if present (copy it from the compressed file). This option
.\"O is the default when decompressing.
デフォルトでは、圧縮時に元ファイルの名前とタイムスタンプを保存させない。
(元の名前を切り詰める必要がある場合は、元の名前は必ず保存される。)
伸長時に、元のファイル名が存在しても復元せず
(圧縮ファイル名から
.I gzip
拡張子を取り除くだけとし)、
元ファイルのタイムスタンプが存在しても復元しない
(圧縮ファイルからコピーする)。
このオプションは伸長時のデフォルトである。
.TP
.B \-N --name
.\"O When compressing, always save the original file name and time stamp; this
.\"O is the default. When decompressing, restore the original file name and
.\"O time stamp if present. This option is useful on systems which have
.\"O a limit on file name length or when the time stamp has been lost after
.\"O a file transfer.
圧縮時に元ファイルの名前とタイムスタンプを保存する。
これがデフォルトである。
伸長時に元ファイルの名前とタイムスタンプが存在するなら復元する。
このオプションは、ファイル名の長さに制限があるシステムや、
ファイル転送の後にタイムスタンプが失われた場合に役立つ。
.TP
.B \-q --quiet
.\"O Suppress all warnings.
すべての警告を抑制する。
.TP
.B \-r --recursive
.\"O Travel the directory structure recursively. If any of the file names
.\"O specified on the command line are directories, 
.\"O .I gzip
.\"O will descend into the directory and compress all the files it finds there
.\"O (or decompress them in the case of
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O ).
ディレクトリ構造を再帰的に巡る。
コマンドラインで指定されたファイル名がディレクトリであった場合、
.I gzip
はディレクトリに降りて、見つかったすべてのファイルを圧縮する
(\fIgunzip\fR
の場合は、すべてのファイルを伸長する)。
.TP
.B \-S .suf   --suffix .suf
.\"O Use suffix .suf instead of .gz. Any suffix can be given, but suffixes
.\"O other than .z and .gz should be avoided to avoid confusion when files
.\"O are transferred to other systems.  A null suffix forces gunzip to  try
.\"O decompression on all given files regardless of suffix, as in:
拡張子 .gz のかわりに .suf を使う。
どのような拡張子でも指定することができるが、.z と .gz 以外の拡張子は
使うべきでない。
他のシステムにファイルが転送されたときの混乱を避けるためである。
拡張子なしの場合、以下のように拡張子に関係なく、
すべての指示されたファイルを gunzip に伸長させることができる。

.\"O     gunzip -S "" *       (*.* for MSDOS)
    gunzip -S "" *       (MSDOS の場合は *.*)

.\"O Previous versions of gzip used
.\"O the .z suffix. This was changed to avoid a conflict with
.\"O .IR pack "(1)".
前のバージョンの gzip は拡張子 .z を使った。
これは
.IR pack "(1)"
との衝突を避けるために変更された。
.TP
.B \-t --test
.\"O Test. Check the compressed file integrity.
テストする。圧縮ファイルの整合性をチェックする。
.TP
.B \-v --verbose
.\"O Verbose. Display the name and percentage reduction for each file compressed
.\"O or decompressed.
詳細出力。圧縮・伸長される各ファイルについて名前と圧縮率を表示する。
.TP
.B \-V --version
.\"O Version. Display the version number and compilation options then quit.
バージョン。バージョン番号とコンパイルオプションを表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-# --fast --best
.\"O Regulate the speed of compression using the specified digit
.\"O .IR # ,
.\"O where
.\"O .B \-1
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-\-fast
.\"O indicates the fastest compression method (less compression)
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-9
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-\-best
.\"O indicates the slowest compression method (best compression).
.\"O The default compression level is
.\"O .BR \-6
.\"O (that is, biased towards high compression at expense of speed).
指定した数字
.I #
を用いて圧縮のスピードを調整する。
.B \-1
と
.B \-\-fast
は最も速い圧縮法を示す (圧縮率は低い)。
.B \-9
と
.B \-\-best
は最も遅い圧縮法を示す (圧縮率は最も高い)。
デフォルトの圧縮レベルは
.B \-6
である (つまり、速さを犠牲にして圧縮率の良い方にしてある)。
.\"O .SH "ADVANCED USAGE"
.SH 高度な使用法
.\"O Multiple compressed files can be concatenated. In this case,
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O will extract all members at once. For example:
複数の圧縮ファイルを連結することができる。
この場合、
.I gunzip
はすべての圧縮ファイルを一度に伸長する。たとえば、

      gzip -c file1  > foo.gz
      gzip -c file2 >> foo.gz

.\"O Then
の後
      gunzip -c foo

.\"O is equivalent to
とするのは、以下と同じである。

      cat file1 file2

.\"O In case of damage to one member of a .gz file, other members can
.\"O still be recovered (if the damaged member is removed). However,
.\"O you can get better compression by compressing all members at once:
\&.gz ファイルのうち 1 つのファイルが壊れても、
(壊れたファイルを削除すれば) 他のファイルはまだ回復できる。
しかし、次のようにすべてのファイルを一度に圧縮すれば、より高い圧縮が得られる。

      cat file1 file2 | gzip > foo.gz

.\"O compresses better than
これは下の例より高く圧縮できる。

      gzip -c file1 file2 > foo.gz

.\"O If you want to recompress concatenated files to get better compression, do:
より高い圧縮を得るために、結合されたファイルをもう一度圧縮するには、
次のようにすること。

      gzip -cd old.gz | gzip > new.gz

.\"O If a compressed file consists of several members, the uncompressed
.\"O size and CRC reported by the --list option applies to the last member
.\"O only. If you need the uncompressed size for all members, you can use:
圧縮ファイルが複数の元ファイルで構成されている場合、
--list オプションで表示される伸長時のサイズと CRC は、
最後の元ファイルについてのみ適用されたものである。
すべての元ファイルについて伸長時のサイズが必要な場合は、
次のコマンドを使うこと。

      gzip -cd file.gz | wc -c

.\"O If you wish to create a single archive file with multiple members so
.\"O that members can later be extracted independently, use an archiver
.\"O such as tar or zip. GNU tar supports the -z option to invoke gzip
.\"O transparently. gzip is designed as a complement to tar, not as a
.\"O replacement.
複数の元ファイルからなる 1 つの書庫ファイルを作って、
後から元ファイルを別々に伸長できるようにしたいなら、
tar や zip といったアーカイバーを使うこと。
GNU tar は gzip を透過的に起動するために -z オプションをサポートしている。
gzip は tar の代用としてではなく、補助として設計されている。
.\"O .SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.SH 環境変数
.\"O The environment variable
.\"O .B GZIP
.\"O can hold a set of default options for
.\"O .I gzip.
.\"O These options are interpreted first and can be overwritten by
.\"O explicit command line parameters. For example:
.\"O       for sh:    GZIP="-8v --name"; export GZIP
.\"O       for csh:   setenv GZIP "-8v --name"
.\"O       for MSDOS: set GZIP=-8v --name
環境変数
.B GZIP
に
.I gzip
のデフォルトのオプションセットを入れることができる。
これらのオプションは最初に解釈されるので、
明示的なコマンドラインパラメータで上書きすることができる。
例を示す。
      sh の場合:    GZIP="-8v --name"; export GZIP
      csh の場合:   setenv GZIP "-8v --name"
      MSDOS の場合: set GZIP=-8v --name

.\"O On Vax/VMS, the name of the environment variable is GZIP_OPT, to
.\"O avoid a conflict with the symbol set for invocation of the program.
Vax/VMS では、環境変数の名前は GZIP_OPT である。
これは、プログラムを呼び出すためのシンボルセットとの衝突を避けるためである。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
znew(1), zcmp(1), zmore(1), zforce(1), gzexe(1), zip(1), unzip(1), compress(1),
pack(1), compact(1)
.\"O .SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
.SH 返り値
.\"O Exit status is normally 0;
.\"O if an error occurs, exit status is 1. If a warning occurs, exit status is 2.
通常、終了状態は 0 である。
エラーが起きた場合、終了状態は 1 である。
警告が起きた場合、終了状態は 2 である。
.PP
Usage: gzip [-cdfhlLnNrtvV19] [-S suffix] [file ...]
.in +8
.\"O Invalid options were specified on the command line.
無効なオプションがコマンドラインから指定された。
.in -8
.IR file :
not in gzip format
.in +8
.\"O The file specified to
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O has not been compressed.
.I gunzip
に指示されたファイルが圧縮されたものではない。
.in -8
.IR file:
Corrupt input. Use zcat to recover some data.
.in +8
.\"O The compressed file has been damaged. The data up to the point of failure
.\"O can be recovered using
圧縮されたファイルが壊れている。
破損した位置までのデータは、次のコマンドを使って修復できる。
.in +8
zcat file > recover
.in -16
.IR file :
compressed with 
.I xx
bits, can only handle 
.I yy
bits
.in +8
.\"O .I File
.\"O was compressed (using LZW) by a program that could deal with
.\"O more 
.\"O .I bits
.\"O than the decompress code on this machine.
.\"O Recompress the file with gzip, which compresses better and uses
.\"O less memory.
.I ファイル
が、このマシン上での伸長コードより多くの
.I ビット
を扱うことができるプログラムで (LZW を使って) 圧縮されている。
より高い圧縮ができ、メモリ使用量の少ない、gzip を使って
ファイルを再圧縮すること。
.in -8
.IR file :
already has .gz suffix -- no change
.in +8
.\"O The file is assumed to be already compressed.
.\"O Rename the file and try again.
ファイルが既に圧縮されていると考えられる。
ファイル名を変更し、再度試みること。
.in -8
.I file
already exists; do you wish to overwrite (y or n)?
.in +8
.\"O Respond "y" if you want the output file to be replaced; "n" if not.
出力ファイルで置き換えたいなら "y" と答えること。
さもなければ、"n" と答えること。
.in -8
gunzip: corrupt input
.in +8
.\"O A SIGSEGV violation was detected which usually means that the input file has
.\"O been corrupted.
SIGSEGV 違反が検知された。通常は、入力ファイルが壊れていることを意味している。
.in -8
.I "xx.x%"
.in +8
.\"O Percentage of the input saved by compression.
.\"O (Relevant only for
.\"O .BR \-v
.\"O and
.\"O .BR \-l \.)
圧縮により減った入力のパーセント表示。
(\fB\-v\fR と
.B \-l
のみに関連する。)
.in -8
-- not a regular file or directory: ignored
.in +8
.\"O When the input file is not a regular file or directory,
.\"O (e.g. a symbolic link, socket, FIFO, device file), it is
.\"O left unaltered.
入力ファイルが通常ファイルでもディレクトリでもない場合
(たとえば、シンボリックリンク・ソケット・FIFO・デバイスファイルの場合)、
変更せずにそのままにされる。
.in -8
-- has 
.I xx 
other links: unchanged
.in +8
.\"O The input file has links; it is left unchanged.  See
.\"O .IR ln "(1)"
.\"O for more information. Use the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O flag to force compression of multiply-linked files.
入力ファイルにリンクが張られているので、変更しない。
詳しい情報は
.IR ln "(1)"
を参照すること。
複数にリンクが張られているファイルを強制的に圧縮するには
.B \-f
フラグを使うこと。
.in -8
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O When writing compressed data to a tape, it is generally necessary to
.\"O pad the output with zeroes up to a block boundary. When the data is
.\"O read and the whole block is passed to
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O for decompression,
.\"O .I gunzip
.\"O detects that there is extra trailing garbage after the compressed data
.\"O and emits a warning by default. You have to use the --quiet option to
.\"O suppress the warning. This option can be set in the
.\"O .B GZIP
.\"O environment variable as in:
.\"O   for sh:  GZIP="-q"  tar -xfz --block-compress /dev/rst0
.\"O   for csh: (setenv GZIP -q; tar -xfz --block-compr /dev/rst0
.\"O 
.\"O In the above example, gzip is invoked implicitly by the -z option of
.\"O GNU tar. Make sure that the same block size (-b option of tar) is used
.\"O for reading and writing compressed data on tapes.  (This example
.\"O assumes you are using the GNU version of tar.)
圧縮されたデータをテープに書き込むときは、
一般的に、出力のブロック境界をゼロで埋める必要がある。
伸長のためにデータを読み込んですべてのブロックを
.I gunzip
に渡すと、
.I gunzip
は通常、圧縮されたデータの後ろに余分なゴミが続いていると検知して、
警告を発する。
この警告を抑制するには --quiet オプションを使う必要がある。
このオプションは環境変数
.B GZIP
に次のようにして設定できる。
  sh の場合:  GZIP="-q"  tar -xfz --block-compress /dev/rst0
  csh の場合: (setenv GZIP -q; tar -xfz --block-compress /dev/rst0

上の例では、gzip は GNU tar の -z オプションによって暗に呼び出されている。
テープ上の圧縮されたデータの読み出しと書き込みに
同じブロックサイズ (tar の -b オプション) が使われていることに注意すること。
(この例は、GNU 版の tar を使うことを仮定している。)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The --list option reports incorrect sizes if they exceed 2 gigabytes.
.\"O The --list option reports sizes as -1 and crc as ffffffff if the
.\"O compressed file is on a non seekable media.
サイズが 2GB を越える場合、--list オプションによる表示は正しくない。
圧縮ファイルがシーク不可媒体の上に存在する場合、
--list オプションによる表示は、サイズが -1、crc が ffffffff となる。

.\"O In some rare cases, the --best option gives worse compression than
.\"O the default compression level (-6). On some highly redundant files,
.\"O .I compress
.\"O compresses better than
.\"O .I gzip.
稀に --best オプションによって、デフォルトの圧縮レベル (-6) より
圧縮が悪くなることがある。
非常に冗長なファイルでは、
.I compress
による圧縮が
.I gzip
より良くなることがある。






