.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1993-2000 
.\" NetBSD jman proj. and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Oct 15 1993
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jun 10 15:41:46 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	compress		圧縮
.\"WORD:	uncompress		伸長
.\"WORD:	temporary		テンポラリ
.\"
.TH ZDIFF 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O zcmp, zdiff \- compare compressed files
zcmp, zdiff \- 圧縮されたファイルを比較する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B zcmp
[ cmp_options ] file1
[ file2 ]
.br
.B zdiff
[ diff_options ] file1
[ file2 ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I  Zcmp
.\"O and 
.\"O .I zdiff
.\"O are used to invoke the
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or the
.\"O .I diff
.\"O program on compressed files.  All options specified are passed directly to
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or
.\"O .IR diff "."
.\"O If only 1 file is specified, then the files compared are
.\"O .I file1
.\"O and an uncompressed
.\"O .IR file1 ".gz."
.\"O If two files are specified, then they are uncompressed if necessary and fed to
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or
.\"O .IR diff "."
.\"O The exit status from 
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or
.\"O .I diff
.\"O is preserved.
.I  zcmp
と
.I zdiff
は圧縮されたファイルに対し、それぞれ
.I cmp
と
.I diff
プログラムを呼び出すために使われる。
指定されたすべてのオプションは
.I cmp
や
.I diff
に直接渡される。
ファイルが 1 つしか指定されていない場合、比較されるファイルは
.I file1
と
.IR file1 ".gz"
を伸長したファイルである。
2 つのファイルが指定された場合、必要であれば伸長を行ってから、
.I cmp
や
.I diff 
に渡される。
終了状態は
.I cmp
や
.I diff
のものが採用される。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
cmp(1), diff(1), zmore(1), zgrep(1), znew(1), zforce(1), gzip(1), gzexe(1)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Messages from the
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or
.\"O .I diff
.\"O programs refer to temporary filenames instead of those specified.
.I cmp
や
.I diff
プログラムのメッセージは、指定されたファイル名ではなく、
テンポラリのファイル名を参照する。


