.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1993-2000 
.\" NetBSD jman proj. and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Fri Oct 15 1993
.\" 	    by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jun 10 15:41:46 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	compress	圧縮する
.\"WORD:	decompress	伸長する
.\"WORD:	uncompress	伸長する
.\"WORD:	
.\"
.TH ZGREP 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O zgrep \- search possibly compressed files for a regular expression
zgrep \- 圧縮されている可能性のあるファイルで、正規表現の検索をする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B zgrep
[ grep_options ]
.BI  [\ -e\ ] " pattern"
.IR filename ".\|.\|."
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .IR  Zgrep
.\"O is used to invoke the
.\"O .I grep
.\"O on compress'ed or gzip'ed files. All options specified are passed directly to
.\"O .I grep.
.\"O If no file is specified, then the standard input is decompressed
.\"O if necessary and fed to grep.
.\"O Otherwise the given files are uncompressed if necessary and fed to
.\"O .I grep.
.I zgrep
は、compress や gzip で圧縮されたファイルに対して
.I grep
を呼び出すために使われる。
指定されたすべてのオプションは
.I grep
に直接渡される。
ファイルが指定されない場合は、標準入力を (必要であれば伸長した後で)
.I grep 
に渡す。
それ以外の場合は、指示されたファイルを (必要であれば伸長した後で) 
.I grep 
に渡す。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I zgrep
.\"O is invoked as
.\"O .I zegrep
.\"O or
.\"O .I zfgrep
.\"O then
.\"O .I egrep
.\"O or
.\"O .I fgrep
.\"O is used instead of
.\"O .I grep.
.\"O If the GREP environment variable is set,
.\"O .I zgrep
.\"O uses it as the
.\"O .I grep
.\"O program to be invoked. For example:
.\"O 
.\"O     for sh:  GREP=fgrep  zgrep string files
.\"O     for csh: (setenv GREP fgrep; zgrep string files)
.I zgrep
が
.I zegrep
や
.I zfgrep
として呼び出された場合、
.I egrep
と
.I fgrep
がそれぞれ
.I grep
の代わりに使われる。
環境変数 GREP が設定された場合、
.I zgrep
はその内容を
.I grep
プログラムの代わりに呼び出す。
たとえば、

    sh の場合:  GREP=fgrep  zgrep string files
    csh の場合: (setenv GREP fgrep; zgrep string files)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Charles Levert (charles@comm.polymtl.ca)
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
grep(1), egrep(1), fgrep(1), zdiff(1), zmore(1), znew(1), zforce(1),
gzip(1), gzexe(1)



