.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1993-2000 
.\" NetBSD jman proj. and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Oct 15 1993
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jun 10 15:41:46 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	compress		圧縮
.\"WORD:	uncompress		伸長
.\"WORD:	perusal			閲覧
.\"WORD:	terminal		端末
.\"WORD:	caridge return		キャリッジリターン
.\"WORD:	sequence		シーケンス
.\"WORD:	erase charactor		削除文字
.\"WORD:	kill charactor		キル文字
.\"WORD:	teletype		テレタイプ
.\"
.TH ZMORE 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O zmore \- file perusal filter for crt viewing of compressed text
zmore \- 圧縮されたテキストを CRT で見るためのファイル閲覧フィルタ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B zmore
[ name ...  ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I  Zmore
.\"O is a filter which allows examination of compressed or plain text files
.\"O one screenful at a time on a soft-copy terminal.
.\"O .I zmore
.\"O works on files compressed with
.\"O .I compress, pack
.\"O or
.\"O .I gzip,
.\"O and also on uncompressed files.
.\"O If a file does not exist,
.\"O .I zmore
.\"O looks for a file of the same name with the addition of a .gz, .z or .Z suffix.
.I zmore
は、圧縮されたテキストファイルや通常のテキストファイルを
ソフトコピー端末上で一度に全画面で閲覧するためのフィルタである。
.I zmore
は
.I compress, pack, gzip
で圧縮されたファイルに対して動作する
(圧縮されていないファイルに対しても動作する)。
ファイルが存在しない場合、
.I zmore
は、そのファイル名に拡張子 .gz, .z, .Z をつけた名前のファイルを探す。
.PP
.\"O .I Zmore
.\"O normally pauses after each screenful, printing --More--
.\"O at the bottom of the screen.
.\"O If the user then types a carriage return, one more line is displayed.
.\"O If the user hits a space,
.\"O another screenful is displayed.  Other possibilities are enumerated later.
.I zmore
は通常、1 画面毎に画面の一番下に --More-- と表示して一時停止する。
キャリッジリターンを打つと、1 行分表示を進める。
スペースを打つと、1 画面分表示を進める。
他のキーについては、後に列挙する。
.PP
.\"O .I Zmore
.\"O looks in the file
.\"O .I /etc/termcap
.\"O to determine terminal characteristics,
.\"O and to determine the default window size.
.\"O On a terminal capable of displaying 24 lines,
.\"O the default window size is 22 lines.
.\"O To use a pager other than the default
.\"O .I more,
.\"O set environment variable PAGER to the name of the desired program, such as
.\"O .I less.
.I zmore
は端末の特性とデフォルトのウインドウサイズを決定するために、
ファイル
.I /etc/termcap
を調べる。
24 行表示できる端末では、デフォルトのウインドウサイズは 22 行である。
デフォルトの
.I more
以外のページャーを使いたい場合、環境変数 PAGER を
.I less
のような好みのプログラム名に設定すること。
.PP
.\"O Other sequences which may be typed when
.\"O .I zmore
.\"O pauses, and their effects, are as follows (\fIi\fP is an optional integer
.\"O argument, defaulting to 1) :
.I zmore
が一時停止しているときに打つことのできる、
その他のシーケンスとその結果は次の通りである
(\fIi\fP はオプションの引き数 (整数値) で、デフォルトは 1 である)。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fP<space>
.\"O display
.\"O .I i
.\"O more lines, (or another screenful if no argument is given)
.I i
行分表示を進める
(引き数が与えられない場合、1 画面分進める)。
.PP
.IP ^D
.\"O display 11 more lines (a ``scroll'').
.\"O If
.\"O .I i
.\"O is given, then the scroll size is set to \fIi\|\fP.
11 行進めて表示する (``スクロール'')。
.I i
が与えられると、スクロールサイズが \fIi\|\fP に設定される。
.PP
.IP d
.\"O same as ^D (control-D)
^D (control-D) と同じ。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fPz
.\"O same as typing a space except that \fIi\|\fP, if present, becomes the new
.\"O window size.  Note that the window size reverts back to the default at the
.\"O end of the current file.
\fIi\|\fP が与えられた場合に新しいウインドウサイズになる、という以外は
スペースを打った場合と同じ。
現在のファイルの終りでは、ウインドウサイズがデフォルトの値に
戻ることに注意すること。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fPs
.\"O skip \fIi\|\fP lines and print a screenful of lines
\fIi\|\fP 行分スキップし、画面いっぱいに表示する。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fPf
.\"O skip \fIi\fP screenfuls and print a screenful of lines
\fIi\|\fP 画面分スキップし、画面いっぱいに表示する。
.PP
.\"O .IP "q or Q"
.\"O quit reading the current file; go on to the next (if any)
.IP "q または Q"
現在のファイルの読み込みを終了し、(もしあるなら) 次のファイルに移る。
.PP
.\"O .IP "e or q"
.\"O When the prompt --More--(Next file: 
.\"O .IR file )
.\"O is printed, this command causes zmore to exit.
.IP "e または q"
プロンプト --More--(Next file: 
.IR file )
が表示されているとき、このコマンドは zmore を終了させる。
.PP
.IP s
.\"O When the prompt --More--(Next file: 
.\"O .IR file )
.\"O is printed, this command causes zmore to skip the next file and continue.
プロンプト --More--(Next file: 
.IR file )
が表示されているとき、このコマンドは zmore を次のファイルに
スキップさせ続行させる。
.PP 
.IP =
.\"O Display the current line number.
現在の行番号を表示する。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fP/expr
.\"O search for the \fIi\|\fP-th occurrence of the regular expression \fIexpr.\fP
.\"O If the pattern is not found,
.\"O .I zmore
.\"O goes on to the next file (if any).
.\"O Otherwise, a screenful is displayed, starting two lines before the place
.\"O where the expression was found.
.\"O The user's erase and kill characters may be used to edit the regular
.\"O expression.
.\"O Erasing back past the first column cancels the search command.
正規表現 \fIexpr\fP の \fIi\|\fP 番目の場所を検索する。
パターンが見つからない場合、
.I zmore
は (もしあるなら) 次のファイルに移る。
見つかった場合は、正規表現が見つかった場所の 2 行前から始まる
1 画面分を表示する。
削除文字やキル文字を正規表現を編集するために使用してもよい。
最初の桁を越えて削除すると、検索コマンドはキャンセルされる。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fPn
.\"O search for the \fIi\|\fP-th occurrence of the last regular expression entered.
前に打ち込んだ正規表現の \fIi\|\fP 番目の場所を検索する。
.PP
.IP !command
.\"O invoke a shell with \fIcommand\|\fP. 
.\"O The character `!' in "command" are replaced with the
.\"O previous shell command.  The sequence "\\!" is replaced by "!".
\fIcommand\|\fP でシェルを起動する。
"command" 内の `!' という文字は、前のシェルコマンドで置き換えられる。
"\\!" という文字列は "!" で置き換えられる。
.PP
.\"O .IP ":q or :Q"
.\"O quit reading the current file; go on to the next (if any)
.\"O (same as q or Q).
.IP ":q または :Q"
現在のファイルの読み込みを終了し、(もしあるなら) 次のファイルに移る。
(q または Q と同じ)。
.PP
.IP .
.\"O (dot) repeat the previous command.
(ドット) 前のコマンドを繰り返す。
.PP
.\"O The commands take effect immediately, i.e., it is not necessary to
.\"O type a carriage return.
.\"O Up to the time when the command character itself is given,
.\"O the user may hit the line kill character to cancel the numerical
.\"O argument being formed.
.\"O In addition, the user may hit the erase character to redisplay the
.\"O --More-- message.
コマンドはすぐに影響を及ぼす。
つまりキャリッジリターンを打つ必要はない。
ユーザーはコマンド文字そのものを打つ前に、
数値の引き数の入力をキャンセルするために、
キル文字を打ち込むことができる。
さらに、ユーザーは --More-- というメッセージを
もう一度表示させるために、削除文字を打ち込むことができる。
.PP
.\"O At any time when output is being sent to the terminal, the user can
.\"O hit the quit key (normally control\-\\).
.\"O .I Zmore
.\"O will stop sending output, and will display the usual --More--
.\"O prompt.
.\"O The user may then enter one of the above commands in the normal manner.
.\"O Unfortunately, some output is lost when this is done, due to the
.\"O fact that any characters waiting in the terminal's output queue
.\"O are flushed when the quit signal occurs.
出力が端末に送られるどの時点でも、ユーザーは終了キー (通常は control\-\\) を
打ち込むことができる。
.I zmore
は出力を送るのを止めて、通常の --More-- プロンプトを表示する。
その後、ユーザーは上のコマンドを普通の方法で打ち込むことができる。
終了キーを打った場合に、運悪く出力が失われることがある。
それは、終了シグナルが起きたときに、端末の出力キューで待っていた
すべての文字がフラッシュされてしまったためである。
.PP
.\"O The terminal is set to
.\"O .I noecho
.\"O mode by this program so that the output can be continuous.
.\"O What you type will thus not show on your terminal, except for the / and !
.\"O commands.
このプログラムは出力を連続的なものにするために、端末を
.I noecho
モードにする。/ と ! コマンドを除いて、打ち込まれた文字は端末上に見えない。
.PP
.\"O If the standard output is not a teletype, then
.\"O .I zmore
.\"O acts just like
.\"O .I zcat,
.\"O except that a header is printed before each file.
標準出力がテレタイプでない場合、
.I zmore
は
.I zcat
のように動作する。
ただし、ヘッダが各ファイルの前に表示される。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.DT
.\"O /etc/termcap		Terminal data base
/etc/termcap		端末データベース
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
more(1), gzip(1), zdiff(1), zgrep(1), znew(1), zforce(1), gzexe(1)


