'\" te
.\" To print, first run through tbl
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Nov 25 18:34:39 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH APPLE_DRIVER 8 "18 May 1998" "Version 1.0"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O apple_driver \- extract Macintosh partition label, maps and boot driver
apple_driver \- Macintosh パーティションのラベル・マップ・ブートドライバを取り出す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B apple_driver
CDROM_device > HFS_driver_file
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I Apple_driver
.\"O extracts the information from an Apple (or compatible) CD-ROM required
.\"O for the
.\"O .I \-hfs-boot-file
.\"O option to
.\"O .IR mkhybrid (1). 
.I apple_driver
は
.IR mkhybrid (1)
の
.I \-hfs-boot-file 
オプションに必要な情報を Apple (またはその互換) の CD-ROM から取り出す。
.PP
.\"O The 
.\"O .I CDROM_device
.\"O is the device name used by the CD-ROM (e.g. /dev/cdrom).
.I CDROM_device
は
CD-ROM に使われているデバイス名である (例えば /dev/cdrom)。
.PP
.\"O The format of the HFS driver file is:
HFS ドライバファイルのフォーマットは、以下の通りである:
.PP
.TS
l l .
.\"O HFS CD Label Block	512 bytes
HFS CD ラベルブロック	512 バイト
.\"O Driver Partition Map (for 2048 byte blocks)	512 bytes
ドライバパーティションマップ (2048 バイトブロック用)	512 バイト
.\"O Driver Partition Map (for 512 byte blocks)	512 bytes
ドライバパーティションマップ (512 バイトブロック用)	512 バイト
.\"O Empty	512 bytes
空き領域	512 バイト
.\"O Driver Partition	N x 2048 bytes
ドライバパーティション	N x 2048 バイト
.\"O HFS Partition Boot Block	1024 bytes
HFS パーティションブートブロック	1024 バイト
.TE
.PP
.\"O The Perl script
.\"O .I hdisk.pl
.\"O can be used to give a listing of what's on a Mac CD. hdisk.pl is part of
.\"O hfsutils.
Perl スクリプト
.I hdisk.pl
を使えば、Mac の CD の内容をリストできる。
hdisk.pl は hfsutils に含まれている。
.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.\"O By using a driver from an Apple CD and copying Apple software to your CD,
.\"O you become liable to obey Apple Computer, Inc. Software License Agreements.
Apple CD に含まれるドライバを使って
Apple のソフトウェアを CD にコピーする場合は、
アップルコンピュータのソフトウェア使用許諾契約に従わなくてはならない。

.\"O .SH SEE\ ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.IR mkhybrid (1)
.\"O .SH PROGRAMMER
.SH プログラマ
James Pearson (j.pearson@ge.ucl.ac.uk) 18/5/98
.PP
.\"O The driver code (both extracting the driver and creating partitions etc.
.\"O is based on code from 
.\"O .I mkisofs 1.05 PLUS
.\"O by Andy Polyakov <appro@fy.chalmers.se>
.\"O (see http://fy.chalmers.se/~appro/mkisofs_plus.html)
(ドライバの抽出とパーティションなどの作成を行う) ドライバのコードは、
Andy Polyakov <appro@fy.chalmers.se> の
.I mkisofs 1.05 PLUS
のコードに基づいている
(http://fy.chalmers.se/~appro/mkisofs_plus.html を参照)。
