.\"
.\" @(#)isoinfo.8	1.5 01/04/19 eric
.\"
.\" Translated Sat Oct 28 2001 
.\"         by Yutaka Konishi
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Dec  9 20:23:49 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH ISOINFO 8 "01/04/19" "Version 1.14"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O devdump, isoinfo, isovfy, isodump \- Utility programs for dumping and verifying iso9660
.\"O images.
devdump, isoinfo, isovfy, isodump \- ISO9660 イメージをダンプ・検証するユーティリティプログラム
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B devdump
.I isoimage
.PP
.B isodump
.I isoimage
.PP
.B isoinfo
[
.B \-d
]
[
.B \-h
]
[
.B \-R
]
[
.B \-J
]
[
.B \-j
.I charset
]
[
.B \-f
]
[
.B \-l
]
[
.B \-p
]
[
.B \-T
.I sector
]
[
.B \-N
.I sector
]
[
.B \-i
.I isoimage
]
[
.B \-x
.I path
]
.PP
.B isovfy
.I isoimage
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B devdump
.\"O is a crude utility to interactively display the contents of device or
.\"O filesystem images.
.\"O The initial screen is a display of the first 256 bytes of the first
.\"O 2048 byte
.\"O sector.
.B devdump
は、ファイルシステムイメージやデバイスの内容を
対話的に表示するユーティリティである。
初期画面には最初の 2048 バイトセクタの先頭 256 バイトが表示される。
.\"O The commands are the same as with
.\"O .BR isodump .
.B devdump
のコマンドは
.B isodump
と同じである。
.PP
.\"O .B isodump
.\"O is a crude utility to interactively display the contents of iso9660 images
.\"O in order to verify directory integrity.
.\"O The initial screen is a display of the first part of the root
.\"O directory,
.\"O and the prompt shows you the extent number and offset in the extent.
.B isodump
は、ディレクトリの整合性を検証するため、
ISO9660 イメージの内容を対話的に表示するユーティリティである。
初期画面にはルートディレクトリの最初の部分が表示される。
プロンプトはエクステント番号とエクステントのオフセットを示す。
.RS
.PP
.\"O You can use the 'a' and 'b'
.\"O commands to move backwards and forwards within the image. The 'g' command
.\"O allows you to goto an arbitrary extent, and the 'f' command specifies
.\"O a search string to be used. The '+' command searches forward for the next
.\"O instance of the search string, and the 'q' command exits
.\"O .B devdump
.\"O or
.\"O .BR isodump .
\&'a' コマンドと \&'b' コマンドを使うと、
それぞれイメージ内を前進・後進できる。
\&'g' コマンドで任意のエクステントに移動することができる。
\&'f' コマンドは使用する探索文字列を指定する。
\&'+' コマンドは探索文字列の次の候補を前向きに探索する。
\&'q' コマンドは
.B devdump
と
.B isodump
を終了させる。
.RE
.PP
.\"O .B isoinfo
.\"O is a utility to perform directory like listings of iso9660 images.
.B isoinfo
は、ISO9660 イメージをディレクトリ形式で
一覧表示するユーティリティである。
.PP
.\"O .B isovfy
.\"O is a utility to verify the integrity of an iso9660 image. Most of the tests
.\"O in
.\"O .B isovfy
.\"O were added after bugs were discovered in early versions of
.\"O .B mkisofs.
.\"O It isn't all that clear how useful this is anymore, but it doesn't hurt to
.\"O have this around.
.B isovfy
は、ISO9660 イメージの正当性を検証するユーティリティである。
.B isovfy
でのテストの多くは、
.B mkisofs
の早期バージョンで複数のバグが発見された後に追加された。
今後このコマンドがどのように役に立つのかは、それほど明確ではないが、
このコマンドがあっても特に悪いことは起らないだろう。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O Only the
.\"O .B isoinfo
.\"O program has any command line options. These are:
.B isoinfo
プログラムのみがコマンドラインのオプションをとる。以下に示す。
.TP
.\"O .B \-h
.\"O print a summary of all options.
.B \-h
すべてのオプションの要約を表示する。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Print information from the primary volume descriptor (PVD) of the iso9660
.\"O image. This includes information about Rock Ridge and Joliet extensions
.\"O if present.
ISO9660 イメージのプライマリボリュームディスクリプタ (PVD) にある
情報を表示する。
Rock Ridge 拡張や Joliet 拡張がある場合は、その情報も含まれる。
.TP
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O generate output as if a 'find . -print' command had been run on the iso9660
.\"O image. You should not use the
.\"O .B -l
.\"O image with the
.\"O .B -f
.\"O option.
.B \-f
\&'find . -print' コマンドが
ISO9660 イメージに対して実行されたかのような出力を生成する。
.B -f
オプションとともに
.B -l
image を使うべきではない。
.TP
.\"O .B \-i iso_image
.\"O Specifies the path of the iso9660 image that we wish to examine.
.B \-i iso_image
検査を行う ISO9660 イメージのパス名を指定する。
.TP
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O generate output as if a 'ls -lR' command had been run on the iso9660 image.
.\"O You should not use the
.\"O .B -f
.\"O image with the
.\"O .B -l
.\"O option.
.B \-l
\&'ls -lR' コマンドが
ISO9660 イメージに対して実行されたかのような出力を生成する。
.B -l
オプションとともに
.B -f
image を使うべきではない。
.TP
.\"O .B \-N sector
.\"O Quick hack to help examine single session disc files that are to be written to
.\"O a multi-session disc. The sector number specified is the sector number at
.\"O which the iso9660 image should be written when send to the cd-writer. Not
.\"O used for the first session on the disc.
.B \-N sector
マルチセッションディスクに書かれる
シングルセッションディスクファイルの検査を手助けする
簡単な仕掛けである。
セクタ番号は、ISO9660 イメージが CD ライタに送られる時に
書込まれるべきセクタ番号を指定する。
ディスク上の最初のセッションは使えない。
.TP
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O Print path table information.
.B \-p
パステーブル情報を表示する。
.TP
.\"O .B \-R
.\"O Extract information from Rock Ridge extensions (if present) for permissions,
.\"O file names and ownerships.
.B \-R
Rock Ridge 拡張されている場合、
パーミッション・ファイル名・オーナー名といった情報を抽出する。
.TP
.\"O .B \-J
.\"O Extract information from Joliet extensions (if present) for file names.
.B \-J
Joliet 拡張されている場合、ファイル名を抽出する。
.TP
.B \-j charset
.\"O Convert Joliet file names (if present) to the supplied charset. See
.\"O .BR mkisofs (8)
.\"O for details.
Joliet 拡張のファイル名が存在する場合は、
指定された文字集合 (charset) で変換する。
詳細は
.BR mkisofs (8)
を参照すること。
.TP
.\"O .B \-T sector
.\"O Quick hack to help examine multi-session images that have already been burned
.\"O to a multi-session disc. The sector number specified is the sector number for
.\"O the start of the session we wish to display.
.B  \-T sector
マルチセッションディスクに既に焼き付けられた
マルチセッションイメージの検査を手助けする
簡単な仕掛けである。
セクタ番号は、表示したいセッションの最初のセクタ番号を指定する。
.TP
.\"O .B \-x pathname
.\"O Extract specified file to stdout.
.B  -x pathname
指定されたファイルを標準出力に書き出す。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Eric Youngdale <ericy@gnu.ai.mit.edu> or <eric@andante.jic.com> is to blame
.\"O for these shoddy hacks. Patches to improve general usability would be
.\"O gladly accepted.
これらのやっつけ仕事については
Eric Youngdale <ericy@gnu.ai.mit.edu>, <eric@andante.jic.com> に責任がある。
一般的な操作性の向上のためのパッチは、喜んで受け入れる。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.\"O The user interface really sucks.
.SH バグ
ユーザインターフェースが実にまずい。
.\"O .SH FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS
.\"O These utilities are really quick hacks, which are very useful for debugging
.\"O problems in mkisofs or in an iso9660 filesystem. In the long run, it would
.\"O be nice to have a daemon that would NFS export a iso9660 image.
.\"O The isoinfo program is probably the program that is of the most use to
.\"O the general user.
.SH 将来の改良
これらのユーティリティは本当に急いでプログラミングしたものだが、
ISO9660 ファイルシステムあるいは mkisofs での問題を
デバッグするためには非常に役立つ。
長い目で見ると、ISO9660 イメージを NFS でエクスポートする
デーモンがあると素晴らしい。
一般的なユーザにとってはたぶん isoinfo が最も便利なプログラムである。
.PP
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.\"O These utilities come with the mkisofs package, and the primary ftp site
.\"O is tsx-11.mit.edu in /pub/linux/BETA/cdrom/mkisofs and many other mirror
.\"O sites. Despite the name, the software is not beta.
.SH 入手方法
これらのユーティリティは mkisofs パッケージとともに提供される。
一次 ftp サイトは tsx-11.mit.edu の /pub/linux/BETA/cdrom/mkisofs で、
他に多くのミラーサイトがある。
名称にも関わらず、本ソフトウエアはベータ版ではない。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.\"O mkisofs(8)
.SH 関連項目
mkisofs(8)
