.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"   Copyright (C) 1993 Yggdrasil Computing, Incorporated
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111, USA. 
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 TER Software Develop,
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\"         See also http://www.jah.ne.jp/~jurai/mailpolicy.html
.\" Modified on Tue Apr 4 11:14:20 2000
.\"         by Tatsuo SEKINE <tsekine@isoternet.org>
.\" Modified on Fri, 7 Apr 2000 23:04:23 +0900
.\"         by Kentaroh SHIRAKATA <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Modified on Tue Mar  6 02:07:27 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" $Id: mkisofs.8,v 1.4 2001/03/05 17:23:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\"WORD: slice	スライス
.\"WORD: Rock Ridge extension	Rock Ridge 拡張
.\"WORD: generic_boot_image	汎用ブートイメージ
.\"WORD: BOOT INFORMATION TABLE	ブート情報テーブル
.\"WORD: file reference count	参照回数
.\"WORD: Continuation Area	継続領域
.\"
.if t .ds a \v'-0.55m'\h'0.00n'\z.\h'0.40n'\z.\v'0.55m'\h'-0.40n'a
.if t .ds o \v'-0.55m'\h'0.00n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.55m'\h'-0.45n'o
.if t .ds u \v'-0.55m'\h'0.00n'\z.\h'0.40n'\z.\v'0.55m'\h'-0.40n'u
.if t .ds A \v'-0.77m'\h'0.25n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.77m'\h'-0.70n'A
.if t .ds O \v'-0.77m'\h'0.25n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.77m'\h'-0.70n'O
.if t .ds U \v'-0.77m'\h'0.30n'\z.\h'0.45n'\z.\v'0.77m'\h'-0.75n'U
.if t .ds s \\(*b
.if t .ds S SS
.if n .ds a ae
.if n .ds o oe
.if n .ds u ue
.if n .ds s sz
.TH MKISOFS 8 "17. Jan 2000" "Version 1.12"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mkisofs \- create a iso9660 filesystem with optional Rock Ridge attributes.
mkisofs \- はオプションの Rock Ridge 属性で ISO9660 ファイルシステムを作成する。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mkisofs
[
.B \-a
]
[
.B \-abstract 
.I FILE
]
[
.B \-biblio
.I FILE
]
[
.B \-b
.I eltorito_boot_image
]
[
.B \-B
.I sparc_boot_image_list
]
[
.B \-G
.I generic_boot_image
]
[
.B \-gui
]
[
.B \-C
.I #,#
]
[
.B \-hard\-disk\-boot
]
[
.B \-no\-emul\-boot
]
[
.B \-no\-boot
]
[
.B \-boot\-load\-seg
]
[
.B \-boot\-load\-size
]
[
.B \-boot\-info\-table
]
[
.B \-c
.I boot_catalog
]
[
.B \-copyright 
.I FILE
]
[
.B \-A
.I application_id
]
[
.B \-f
]
[
.B \-d
]
[
.B \-D
]
[
.B \-hide
.I glob
]
[
.B \-hide\-list
.I file
]
[
.B \-hide\-joliet
.I glob
]
[
.B \-hide\-joliet\-list
.I file
]
[
.B \-hide\-joliet\-trans\-tbl
]
[
.B \-hide\-rr\-moved
]
[
.B \-J
]
[
.B \-l
]
[
.B \-L
]
[
.B \-log\-file
.I log_file
]
[
.B \-M
.I path | device
]
[
.B \-nobak
]
[
.B \-no\-bak
]
[
.B \-no\-split\-symlink\-components
]
[
.B \-no\-split\-symlink\-fields
]
[
.B \-path\-list
.I file
]
[
.B \-p
.I preparer
]
[
.B \-print\-size
]
[
.B \-P
.I publisher
]
[
.B \-quiet
]
[
.B \-r
]
[
.B \-R
]
[
.B \-sysid
.I ID
]
[
.B \-T
]
[
.B \-U
]
[
.B \-v
]
[
.B \-V
.I volid
]
[
.B \-volset
.I ID
]
[
.B \-volset\-size
.I #
]
[
.B \-volset\-seqno
.I #
]
[
.B \-x
.I path
]
[
.B \-exclude\-list
.I file
]
[
.B \-z
]
[
.B \-m
.I glob
]
.B \-o
.I filename
.I pathspec [pathspec]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O is effectively a pre-mastering program to generate the iso9660 filesystem - it
.\"O takes a snapshot of a given directory tree, and generates a binary image which
.\"O will correspond to an iso9660 filesystem when written to a block device.
.B mkisofs
は効果的に ISO9660 ファイルシステムを生成するプリマスタリングプログラ
ムである。与えられたディレクトリツリーのスナップショットを撮り、ブロッ
クデバイスに書き込むときに ISO9660 ファイルシステムに一致するバイナリ
イメージを生成する。
.PP
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O is also capable of generating the System Use Sharing Protocol records specified
.\"O by the Rock Ridge Interchange Protocol.  This is used to further describe the
.\"O files in the iso9660 filesystem to a unix host, and provides information such
.\"O as longer filenames, uid/gid, posix permissions, and block and character
.\"O devices.
.B mkisofs
はまた、Rock Ridge Interchange Protocol で指定された System Use
Sharing Protocol レコードを生成することができる。これは UNIX ホストへ
の ISO9660 ファイルシステムの詳細な説明に使用され、また長いファイル名
や UID/GID、POSIX パーミッション、そしてブロックやキャラクタデバイスの
情報を提供する。
.PP
.\"O Each file written to the iso9660 filesystem must have a filename in the 8.3
.\"O format (8 characters, period, 3 characters, all upper case), even if Rock Ridge
.\"O is in use.  This filename is used on systems that are not able to make use of
.\"O the Rock Ridge extensions (such as MS-DOS), and each filename in each directory
.\"O must be different from the other filenames in the same directory.
Rock Ridge が使用されていても、それぞれの ISO9660 ファイルシステムに書
き込まれるファイルは、8.3 フォーマット (8 文字、ピリオド、3 文字ですべ
て大文字) でファイル名を保持していなければならない。このファイル名は 
Rock Ridge 拡張を使用するようにできないシステム (MS\-DOS のように) で使
用され、それぞれのファイル名は、それぞれのディレクトリで、同じディレク
トリの中では他のファイル名と異なるものでなければならない。
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O generally tries to form correct names by forcing the unix filename to upper
.\"O case and truncating as required, but often times this yields unsatisfactory
.\"O results when there are cases where the
.\"O truncated names are not all unique.
.B mkisofs 
は一般的に UNIX ファイル名を要求されているように大文字にしたり、省略す
ることにより正しい名前を作ろうとするが、省略された名前が全て唯一のもの
でない場合があるので、しばしば満足できない結果を出してしまうことがある。
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O assigns weightings to each filename, and if two names that are otherwise the
.\"O same are found the name with the lower priority is renamed to have a 3 digit
.\"O number as an extension (where the number is guaranteed to be unique).  An
.\"O example of this would be the files foo.bar and
.\"O foo.bar.~1~ - the file foo.bar.~1~ would be written as FOO.000;1 and the file
.\"O foo.bar would be written as FOO.BAR;1
.B mkisofs
はそれぞれのファイル名に重み付けをし、もし二つの異なるファイル名が同じ
になってしまう場合、プライオリティの低い方は拡張子が 3 桁の数字(
数字は唯一のものと保証される)に変更される。
この例として、ファイル名 foo.bar と foo.bar.~1~ は、foo.bar.~1~ は 
FOO.000;1 として書き込まれ、そして foo.bar は FOO.BAR;1 として書き込ま
れる。
.PP
.\"O Note that
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O is not designed to communicate with the writer directly.  Most writers
.\"O have proprietary command sets which vary from one manufacturer to
.\"O another, and you need a specialized tool to actually burn the disk.
.B mkisofs
は書き込み機と直接やりとりするために作成されていないことに注意すること。
ほとんどの書き込み機は製造元ごとに異なる独自のコマンドセットを持ってい
て、そして実際にディスクを焼くためには専門的なツールが必要である。
.\"O The
.\"O .B cdwrite
.\"O utility is one such tool that runs under Linux and performs this task.
.\"O The latest version of
.\"O .B cdwrite
.\"O is capable of communicating with the Phillips/IMS/Kodak, HP and Yamaha drives
.\"O that have been manufactured before 1997.
.\"O Most writers come with some version of DOS software that allows a direct image
.\"O copy of an iso9660 image to the writer.  The current version of
.\"O .B cdwrite
.\"O is available from sunsite.unc.edu: /utils/disk-management/cdwrite-2.0.tar.gz
.\"O Note that cdwrite has not been actively maintained since 1995.
.B cdwrite
ユーティリティは Linux で動作し、この仕事を行うツールのひとつである。
.B cdwrite
の最新のバージョンは Phillips/IMS/Kodak, HP と Yamaha ドライブとやりと
りすることができる。ほとんどの書き込み機は ISO9660 イメージの直接的な
イメージコピーを書き込み機に対して行うことができる DOS ソフトウェアの
何らかのバージョンがついている。
.B cdwrite
の現在のバージョンは sunsite.unc.edu:
/utils/disk\-management/cdwrite\-2.0.tar.gz からもってくることができる。
cdwrite は最近積極的に保守されていないことに注意すること。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B
.\"O cdrecord
.\"O utility is another utility capable of burning an actual disc.  The latest version
.\"O of
.\"O .B cdrecord
.\"O is available from
.\"O ftp://ftp.fokus.gmd.de/pub/unix/cdrecord
.\"O Cdrecord is under constant development.
.B cdrecord
ユーティリティは実際のディスクに書き込みを行うもうひとつのユーティリティ
である。最新のバージョンの
.B cdrecord
は ftp://ftp.fokus.gmd.de/pub/unix/cdrecord から持ってくることができる。
.PP
.\"O Also you should know that most cd writers are very particular about timing.
.\"O Once you start to burn a disc, you cannot let their buffer empty before you
.\"O are done, or you will end up with a corrupt disc.  Thus it is critical
.\"O that you be able to maintain an uninterrupted data stream to the writer
.\"O for the entire time that the disc is being written.
また、ほとんどの CD 書き込み機はタイミングに対して非常にうるさい。一度
ディスクを焼きはじめたら、終了する前に書き込み機のバッファを空にさせる
ことはできず、空にしてしまうと壊れたディスクができて終わる。従って
ディスクが書き込まれているすべての時間に途切れないデータストリームを持
続できることが重要である。
.PP
.br
.\"O .B pathspec
.\"O is the path of the directory tree to be copied into the iso9660 filesystem.
.\"O Multiple paths can be specified, and
.\"O .B
.\"O mkisofs
.\"O will merge the files found in all of the specified path components to form the cdrom
.\"O image.
.B pathspec
は ISO9660 ファイルシステムにコピーするディレクトリツリーのパスである。
複数のパスが指定可能で、
.B mkisofs
は CD\-ROM イメージを作成するすべての指定されたパスの組み合わせから見つ
けたファイルを組み合わせる。
.PP
.\"O It is possible to graft the paths at points other than the root
.\"O directory, and it is possible to graft files or directories onto the
.\"O cdrom image with names different than what they have in the source filesystem.  This is
.\"O easiest to illustrate with a couple of examples.   Let's start by assuming that a local
.\"O file ../old.lis exists, and you wish to include it in the cdrom image.
ルートディレクトリ以外の場所にパスを結合することは可能で、元のファイル
システムの中にあるファイルやディレクトリと異なった名前で CD\-ROM イメー
ジに結合することができる。これはいくつかの例で図示するのがもっとも簡単
だ。ローカルファイル ../old.lis が存在するものと仮定して、それを 
CD\-ROM イメージに含めたいとする。


	foo/bar/=../old.lis

.\"O will include the file old.lis in the cdrom image at /foo/bar/old.lis, while
は、CD\-ROM イメージにファイル old.lis を /foo/bar/old.lis に含み、同時に

	foo/bar/xxx=../old.lis

.\"O will include the file old.lis in the cdrom image at /foo/bar/xxx.  The
.\"O same sort of syntax can be used with directories as well.
は CD\-ROM イメージにファイル old.lis を /foo/bar/xxx に含む。同じ
種類の文法はディレクトリにも同じように使用することができる。
.\"O .B
.\"O mkisofs will create any directories required such that the graft
.\"O points exist on the cdrom image - the directories do not need to
.\"O appear in one of the paths.  Any directories that are created on the
.\"O fly like this will have permissions 0555 and appear to be owned by the
.\"O person running mkisofs.  If you wish other permissions or owners of
.\"O the intermediate directories, the easiest solution is to create real
.\"O directories in the path such that mkisofs doesn't have to invent them.
.B mkisofs
は CD\-ROM イメージ上に結合場所が存在するような必要なすべてのディレクト
リを作成する。ディレクトリはパスのうちの一つに出現する必要はない。作業
中にこのように作成されるすべてのディレクトリは、パーミッション 0555 を
持ち、mkisofs を実行している人の所有となる。もしあなたが他のパーミッショ
ンや中間のディレクトリの所有者を希望した場合、もっとも簡単な解決法は 
mkisofs がそれらを作成する必要がないような実体のディレクトリを作成する
ことである。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Include all files on the iso9660 filesystem.  Normally files that contain the
.\"O characters '~' or '#' will not be included (these are typically backup files
.\"O for editors under unix). This option is now obsolete (see -no-bak option).
ISO9660 ファイルシステム上のすべてのファイルを含む。通常 "~" や "#" を
含むファイルは通常含まれない (これらは多くの場合 UNIX 下のエディタのバッ
クアップファイルである)。このオプションは、現在は廃止(obsolete)されて
いる(\-no\-bak オプションを見よ)。
.TP
.BI \-abstract " FILE
.\"O Specifies the abstract file name.
.\"O This parameter can also be set in the file
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O with ABST=filename.
.\"O If specified in both places, the command line version is used.
要約ファイル名を指定する。このパラメータはファイル
.B \&.mkisofsrc
で ABST=filename として設定される。
もし両方の場所で指定された場合、コマンドラインで指定したものが使用される。
.TP
.BI \-A " application_id
.\"O Specifies a text string that will be written into the volume header.
.\"O This should describe the application that will be on the disc.  There
.\"O is space on the disc for 128 characters of information.  This parameter can
.\"O also be set in the file
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O with APPI=id.
.\"O If specified in both places, the command line version is used.
ボリュームヘッダに書き込まれる文字列を指定する。これはディスクにあるア
プリケーションを説明するであろう。
ディスク上には 128 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
このパラメータはファイル
.I \&.mkisofsrc
で APPI=id として設定される。
もし両方の場所で指定された場合、コマンドラインのものが使用される。
.TP
.BI \-biblio " FILE
.\"O Specifies the bibliographic file name.
.\"O This parameter can also be set in the file
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O with BIBLO=filename.
.\"O If specified in both places, the command line version is used.
書誌情報ファイルを指定する。このパラメータはファイル
.B \&.mkisofsrc
で BIBLO=filename として設定される。もし両方の場所で指定された場合、コマン
ドラインのものが使用される。
.TP
.BI \-b " eltorito_boot_image
.\"O Specifies the path and filename of the boot image to be used when making
.\"O an "El Torito" bootable CD. The pathname must be relative to the source
.\"O path specified to
.\"O .B mkisofs.
"El Torito" ブータブル CD を作成するときに使用されるブートイメージのパ
スとファイル名を指定する。パス名は
.B mkisofs
に対して指定している元の相対パスでなければならない。
.\"O This option is required to make an "El Torito" bootable CD.
.\"O The boot image must be exactly the size of either a 1.2, 1.44, or a 2.88
.\"O meg floppy, and
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O will use this size when creating the output iso9660
.\"O filesystem. It is assumed that the first 512 byte sector should be read
.\"O from the boot image (it is essentially emulating a normal floppy drive).
.\"O This will work, for example, if the boot image is a LILO based boot floppy.
このオプションは "El Torito" ブータブル CD を作成するのに必須である。
ブートイメージは 1.2MB, 1.44MB または 2.88MB フロッピーの正確なサイズ
でなければならず、また
.B mkisofs
は、ISO9660 ファイルシステムを出力する際にこのサイズを使用する。最初の 
512 バイトセクタはブートイメージから読まれるものとされている (通常の
フロッピードライブをエミュレートするのに必須である)。これは、たとえば、
もしブートイメージが LILO ベースのブートフロッピーであった場合に働く。
.TP
.BI \-B " img_sun4,img_sun4c,img_sun4m,img_sun4d,img_sun4e
.\"O Specifies a comma separated list of boot images that are needed to make
.\"O a bootable CD for sparc systems.
.\"O There may be empty fields in the comma separated list.
.\"O This option is required to make a bootable CD for Sun sparc systems.
Sparc システムでのブータブル CD の作成に必要なブートイメージをコンマで
区切られたリストで指定する。
 コンマで区切られたリストには空のフィールドがあってもよい。
.\"O If the 
.\"O .B \-B
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-sparc-boot
.\"O option has been specified, the first sector of the resulting image will
.\"O contain a Sun disk label. This disk label specifies slice 0 for the
.\"O iso9660 image and slice 1 .\|.\|. slice 7 for the boot images that
.\"O have been specified with this option. Byte offset 512 .\|.\|. 8191
.\"O within each of the additional boot images must contain a primary boot
.\"O that works for the appropriate sparc architecture. The rest of each
.\"O of the images usually contains an ufs filesystem that is used primary
.\"O kernel boot stage.
もし
.B \-B
または
.B \-sparc\-boot
オプションが指定されると、作成されるイメージの最初のセクタは Sun ディ
スクラベルを含む。このディスクラベルは、スライス 0 は iso9660 イメージ
を、スライス 1 .\|.\|. スライス 7 はこのオプションで指定されたブートイ
メージを、それぞれ指定する。
各、ブートイメージにあるバイトオフセット 512 .\|.\|. 8191 は適切な 
sparc アーキテクチャで動くプライマリブートを含まなければならない。
通常は、最初にカーネルの boot 段階で使われる ufs ファイルシステムが残
る部分に含まれる。
.sp
.\"O The implemented boot method is the boot method found with SunOS 4.x and SunOS 5.x.
.\"O However, it does not depend on SunOS internals but only on properties of
.\"O the Open Boot prom. For this reason, it should be usable for any OS
.\"O that boots off a sparc system.
実装されているブート方法は、SunOS 4.x 及び SunOS 5.x に見られるブート
方法である。
しかしこれは、SunOS の内部に依存しているのではなく、
Open Boot prom の性質にのみ依存している。
この理由により、sparc システムを動かせる他の OS でも使えるだろう。
.TP
.BI \-G " generic_boot_image
.\"O Specifies the path and filename of the generic boot image to be used when making
.\"O a generic bootable CD.
汎用ブータブル CD を作成する時に使われる汎用ブートイメージのパスと
ファイル名を指定する。
.\"O The 
.\"O .B generic_boot_image
.\"O wil be placed on the first 16 sectors of the CD. The first 16 sectors 
.\"O are the sectors that are located before the iso9660 primary volume descriptor.
.B 汎用ブートイメージ
は CD の先頭 16 セクタに置かれる。
先頭の 16 セクタは、iso9660 の最初のボリューム記述子の前に配置される。
.\"O If this option is used together with the 
.\"O .B \-sparc-boot
.\"O option, the Sun disk label will overlay the first 512 bytes of the generic
.\"O boot image.
もしこのオプションが
.B \-sparc\-boot
オプションと一緒に使われると、Sun ディスクラベルは汎用ブートイメージの先頭 512 バイトを上書きする。
.TP
.BI \-hard\-disk\-boot
.\"O Specifies that the boot image used to create "El Torito" bootable CDs is
.\"O a hard disk image. The hard disk image must begin with a master boot
.\"O record that contains a single partition.
"El Torito" ブータブル CD の作成に使われるブートイメージが、ハードディ
スクイメージであると指定する。ハードディスクイメージは一つのパーティショ
ンだけを含むマスターブートレコードで始まらなければならない。
.TP
.BI \-no\-emul\-boot
.\"O Specifies that the boot image used to create "El Torito" bootable CDs is
.\"O a 'no emulation' image. The system will load and execute this image without
.\"O performing any disk emulation.
"El Torito" ブータブル CD の作成に使われるブートイメージが
 '非エミュレーション' イメージであると指定する。システムはこのイメージ
を、なんらディスクエミュレーションをせずにロードし、実行する。
.TP
.BI \-no\-boot
.\"O Specifies that the created "El Torito" CD should be marked as not bootable. The
.\"O system will provide an emulated drive for the image, but will boot off
.\"O a standard boot device.
"El Torito" CD がブート不可であるとマークされるように指示する。
システムはこのイメージのエミュレートされたドライブを提供するが、標準
のブートデバイスから起動する。
.TP
.BI \-boot\-load\-seg " segment_address
.\"O Specifies the load segment address of the boot image for no-emulation 
.\"O "El Torito" CDs.
 '非エミュレーション' "El Torito" CD ブートイメージのロードセグメント
アドレスを指定する。
.TP
.BI \-boot\-load\-size " load_sectors
.\"O Specifies the number of "virtual" (512-byte) sectors to load in
.\"O no-emulation mode.  The default is to load the entire boot file.  Some
.\"O BIOSes may have problems if this is not a multiple of 4.
非エミュレーションモードでロードされる "仮想"(512バイト)セクタの数を指定する。
デフォルトはブートファイルの全部である。
これが 4 の倍数でない場合に問題がある BIOS があるかも知れない。
.TP
.BI \-boot\-info\-table
.\"O Specifies that a 56-byte table with information of the CD-ROM layout
.\"O will be patched in at offset 8 in the boot file.  If this option is
.\"O given, the boot file is modified in the source filesystem, so make
.\"O sure to make a copy if this file cannot be easily regenerated!  See
.\"O the
.\"O .B " BOOT INFO TABLE
.\"O section for a description of this table.
CD\-ROM の配置に関する情報の 56 バイトのテーブルが、ブートファイルのオ
フセット 8 に置かれることを指示する。
このオプションが与えられると、ブートファイルは作成元となるファイルシス
テム上で修正されるので、このファイルが簡単に再作成できないのならちゃんと
コピーをとっておくこと。
このテーブルの記述に関しては
.B " BOOT INFORMATION TABLE
の項を見よ。
.TP
.BI \-C " last_sess_start,next_sess_start
.\"O This option is needed when 
.\"O .B mkisofs 
.\"O is used to create the image of a second session or a higher level session
.\"O for a multi session disk.
このオプションは、マルチセッションのディスクで第 2 セッション以降のイメージを
作成するのに
.B mkisofs 
が用いられた場合に必要となる。
.\"O The option 
.\"O .B \-C
.\"O takes a pair of two numbers separated by a comma. The first number is the
.\"O sector number of the first sector in the last session of the disk
.\"O that should be appended to.
.\"O The second number is the starting sector number of the new session.
この
.B \-C
オプションは、コンマで区切られた二つの数を引数にとる。一つ目の数は、追
加されるディスクの最後のセッションの最初のセクタ番号である。二つ目の数は
新しいセッションの最初のセクタ番号である。
.\"O The expected pair of numbers may be retrieved by calling
.\"O .B "cdrecord -msinfo ...
.\"O the 
.\"O .B \-C
.\"O option may only be uses in conjunction with the 
.\"O .B \-M
.\"O option.
期待される二つの数は、
.B "cdrecord \-msinfo ...
というコマンドの呼び出しで得られる。
.B \-C
オプションは
.B \-M
オプションと組合せた場合にのみ使われる。
.TP
.BI \-c " boot_catalog
.\"O Specifies the path and filename of the boot catalog to be used when making
.\"O an "El Torito" bootable CD. The pathname must be relative to the source
.\"O path specified to
.\"O .B mkisofs.
.\"O This option is required to make a bootable CD.
.\"O This file will be created by
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O in the source filesystem, so be
.\"O sure the specified filename does not conflict with an existing file, as
.\"O it will be quietly overwritten! Usually a name like "boot.catalog" is
.\"O chosen.
"El Torito" ブータブル CD を作成する際に使用されるブートカタログのパス
とファイル名を指定する。パス名は
.B mkisofs
に対して指定している元の相対パスでなければならない。このオプションはブー
タブル CD を作成するのに必須である。このファイルは
.B mkisofs
によって元になるファイルシステムの中に作成されるので、黙って上書きされ
ないように、指定されたファイル名が存在しているファイルとコンフリクトし
ないように注意すること! 通常 "boot.catalog" という名前が選ばれる。
.TP
.BI \-copyright " FILE
.\"O Specifies the Copyright file name.
.\"O This parameter can also be set in the file
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O with COPY=filename.
.\"O If specified in both places, the command line version is used.
著作権ファイルを指定する。このパラメータはファイル
.B \&.mkisofsrc
で COPY=filename として設定される。もし両方の場所で指定された場合、コマン
ドラインのものが使用される。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Omit trailing period from files that do not have a period.  This violates the
.\"O ISO9660 standard, but it happens to work on many systems.  Use with caution.
ピリオドを持たないファイルに後続するピリオドをファイルから省く (訳注: 
たとえば ファイル名 "hogehoge." の最後の "." など)。これは ISO9660 標
準に違反しているが、ほとんどのシステムで働く。注意して使用すること。
.TP
.B \-D
.\"O Do not use deep directory relocation, and instead just pack them in the
.\"O way we see them.  This violates the ISO9660 standard, but it works on many
.\"O systems.  Use with caution.
深いディレクトリの再配置を行わず、かわりにそのまま格納する。これは 
ISO9660 標準に違反しているが、ほとんどのシステムで働く。注意して使用す
ること。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Follow symbolic links when generating the filesystem.  When this option is not
.\"O in use, symbolic links will be entered using Rock Ridge if enabled, otherwise
.\"O the file will be ignored.
ファイルシステムを生成する時にシンボリックリンクを追跡する。このオプショ
ンが使用されていないとき、シンボリックリンクは、もし Rock Ridge が有効に
なっていれば格納され、無効になっていれば無視される。
.TP
.B \-gui
.\"O Switch the behaviour for a GUI. This currently makes the output more verbose
.\"O but may have other effects in future.
GUI のために動きを切替える。現在のところこれにより出力が詳細になるが、
将来的には他の効果をもつだろう。
.TP
.BI \-hide " glob
.\"O Hide
.\"O .I glob
.\"O from being seen on the ISO9660 or Rock Ridge directory.
.\"O .I glob
.\"O is a shell wild-card-style pattern that must match any part of the filename 
.\"O or path.
ISO9660 または Rock Ridge ディレクトリにある
.I glob
を隠す。
.I glob
はシェルのワイルドカード形式のパターンで、ファイル名かパスの一部にマッ
チする。
.\"O Multiple globs may be hidden (up to 1000).
.\"O If
.\"O .I glob
.\"O matches a directory, then the contents of that directory will be hidden.
.\"O All the hidden files will still be written to the output CD image file.
.\"O Should be used with the
.\"O .B \-hide-joliet
.\"O option.
(1000 個までの) glob の複数指定が可能である。もし
.I glob
がディレクトリにマッチした場合、ディレクトリの中身が隠される。
すべての隠されたファイルは CD イメージファイルには書き出される。
.B \-hide\-joliet
オプションと共に用いられるべきである。
.TP
.BI \-hide\-list " file
.\"O A file containing a list of
.\"O .I globs
.\"O to be hidden as above.
上で述べた、隠される
.I globs
のリストを収めたファイル
.TP
.BI \-hide\-joliet " glob
.\"O Hide
.\"O .I glob
.\"O from being seen on the Joliet directory.
.\"O .I glob
.\"O is a shell wild-card-style pattern that must match any part of the filename 
.\"O or path.
Joliet ディレクトリにある
.I glob
を隠す。
.I glob
はシェルのワイルドカード形式のパターンで、ファイル名かパスの一部にマッ
チする。
.\"O Multiple globs may be hidden (up to 1000).
.\"O If
.\"O .I glob
.\"O matches a directory, then the contents of that directory will be hidden.
.\"O All the hidden files will still be written to the output CD image file.
.\"O Should be used with the
.\"O .B \-hide
.\"O option.
(1000 個までの) glob の複数指定が可能である。もし
.I glob
がディレクトリにマッチした場合、ディレクトリの中身が隠される。
すべての隠されたファイルは CD イメージファイルには書き出される。
.B \-hide
オプションと共に用いられるべきである。
.TP
.BI \-hide\-joliet\-list " file
.\"O A file containing a list of
.\"O .I globs
.\"O to be hidden as above.
上で述べた、隠される
.I globs
のリストを収めたファイル
.TP
.B \-hide\-joliet\-trans\-tbl
.\"O Hide the 
.\"O .B TRANS.TBL
.\"O files from the Joliet tree.
Joliet ツリーから
.B TRANS.TBL
ファイルを隠す。
.\"O These files usually don't make sense in the Joliet World as they list
.\"O the real name and the ISO9660 name which may both be different from the
.\"O Joliet name.
普通 Joliet の世界では、これらのファイルは意味をなさない。
なぜならこのファイルがリストする本当の名前と ISO9660 の名前はともに、
Joliet の名前とは違うからである。
.TP
.B \-hide\-rr\-moved
.\"O Rename the directory 
.\"O .B RR_MOVED
.\"O to
.\"O .B .rr_moved
.\"O in the Rock Ridge tree.
Rock Ridge ツリーではディレクトリ
.B RR_MOVED
を
.B .rr_moved
という名前に変更する。
.\"O It seems to be impossible to completely hide the
.\"O .B RR_MOVED
.\"O directory from the Rock Ridge tree.
Rock Ridge ツリーから
.B RR_MOVED
ディレクトリを完全に隠すことは不可能のようにみえる。
.\"O This option only makes the visible tree better to understand for
.\"O people who don't know what this directory is for.
このオプションは、このディレクトリが何なのかを知らない人々が、
目にするツリーを理解しやすくするようにするだけである。
.\"O If you need to have no 
.\"O .B RR_MOVED
.\"O directory at all, you should use the 
.\"O .B \-D
.\"O option. Note that in case that the
.\"O .B \-D 
.\"O option has been specified, the resulting filesystem is not ISO9660
.\"O level-1 compliant and will not be readable on MS-DOS.
もし
.B RR_MOVED
ディレクトリを全く必要としないのなら、
.B \-D
オプションを使うべきである。
.B \-D
オプションが指定された場合には、作成されるファイルシステムは ISO9660 
レベル\-1 互換でなく、MS\-DOS からは読めないことに注意せよ。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Allow full 30 character filenames.  Normally the ISO9660 filename will be in an
.\"O 8.3 format which is compatible with MS-DOS, even though the ISO9660 standard
.\"O allows filenames of up to 30 characters.  If you use this option, the disc may
.\"O be difficult to use on a MS-DOS system, but this comes in handy on some other
.\"O systems (such as the Amiga).  Use with caution.
30 文字のファイル名を許す。通常 ISO9660 ファイル名は ISO9660 標準が 30 
文字までのファイル名を認めていても MS\-DOS 互換の 8.3 フォーマットにな
る。このオプションを使用すれば、ディスクは MS\-DOS で使用するのが困難に
なるが、その他のシステム (Amiga のような) で使いやすくなる。注意して使
用すること。
.TP
.B \-J
.\"O Generate Joliet directory records in addition to regular iso9660 file
.\"O names.  This is primarily useful when the discs are to be used on Windows-NT
.\"O or Windows-95 machines.   The Joliet filenames are specified in Unicode and
.\"O each path component can be up to 64 Unicode characters long.
通常の ISO9660 ファイル名に加えて Joliet ディレクトリレコードを生成す
る。これはディスクが Windows95 や Windows NT マシンで使用されるとき一
番便利である。Joliet ファイル名は Unicode で指定され、それぞれのパスは
最大 64 Unicode 文字で構成することができる。
.TP
.B \-L
.\"O Allow ISO9660 filenames to begin with a period.  Usually, a leading dot is
.\"O replaced with an underscore in order to maintain MS-DOS compatibility.
ISO9660 のファイル名をピリオドで始めることを許す。通常、先頭のドットは 
MS\-DOS との互換性を維持するためにアンダースコアに変換される。
.TP
.BI \-log\-file " log_file
.\"O Redirect all error, warning and informational messages to
.\"O .I log_file
.\"O instead of the standard error.
標準エラー出力の代わりに、
.I log_file
にすべてのエラー、警告、一般的な通知メッセージを出力する。
.TP
.BI \-m " glob
.\"O Exclude
.\"O .I glob
.\"O from being written to CDROM.
.\"O .I glob
.\"O is a shell wild-card-style pattern that must match part of the filename (not 
.\"O the path as with option
.\"O .BR -x ).
CD-ROM に書き込まれるときに
.I glob
を除外する。
.I glob
はシェルのワイルドカード形式のファイル名
.RB ( \-x
のようにパスではない) の一部に一致するパターンである (訳注: glob はファ
イル名に一致するパターンを生成し、それはしばしばシェルに依存する)。
.\"O Technically
.\"O .I glob
.\"O is matched against the
.\"O .I d->d_name
.\"O part of the directory entry.
.\"O Multiple globs may be excluded (up to 1000).
技術的には
.I glob
は、ディレクトリエントリの
.I d\->d_name
部分に対して一致される。複数の glob が実行可能である (最大 1000)。
.\"O Example:
例:

mkisofs \-o rom \-m '*.o' \-m core \-m foobar

.\"O would exclude all files ending in ".o", called "core" or "foobar" to be
.\"O copied to CDROM. Note that if you had a directory called "foobar" it too (and
.\"O of course all its descendants) would be excluded.
.\"O .sp
は ".o" で終わるファイルまたは "core" または "foobar" のすべてが 
CD\-ROM にコピーするファイルから除外される。もし "foobar" と呼ばれる
ディレクトリがあれば、それも除外される (そしてもちろんそのサブディレ
クトリも除外される)。
.\"O NOTE: The \-m and \-x option description should both be updated, they are wrong.
.\"O Both now work identical and use filename globbing. A file is excluded if either
.\"O the last component matches or the whole path matches.
注意: \-m と \-x オプションに関する説明は間違っており、更新されるべきである。
ファイル名そのままの指定とワイルドカード形式の指定の両方が可能である。
ファイル名が一致した場合か、パスの全てが一致した場合にファイルは除外される。
.TP
.BI \-exclude\-list " file
.\"O A file containing a list of
.\"O .I globs
.\"O to be exclude as above.
上で述べた、隠される
.I globs
のリストを収めたファイル
.TP
.BI \-M " path 
.\"O or
もしくは
.PD 0
.TP
.BI \-M " device
.PD
.\"O Specifies path to existing iso9660 image to be merged. The alternate form
.\"O takes a SCSI device specifier that uses the same syntax as the 
.\"O .B "dev=
.\"O parameter of 
.\"O .B cdrecord.
結合される、すでに存在する ISO9660 イメージのパスを指定する。
代わりに SCSI デバイスを指定する場合は
.B cdrecord
の
.B "dev=
と同じ書式を用いる。
.\"O The output of 
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O will be a new session which should get written to the end of the
.\"O image specified in -M.  Typically this requires multi-session capability
.\"O for the recorder and cdrom drive that you are attempting to write this
.\"O image to.
.B mkisofs
の出力は \-M で指定したイメージの後ろに新しいセッションとして書き込まれ
るだろう。通常、これはこのイメージを書き込もうとしている書き込み機およ
び CD\-ROM ドライブに対しマルチセッション機能を要求する。マルチセッショ
ン機能のサポートは、CD\-ROM 上で次の書き込み可能なアドレスを決定するた
めに mkisofs と cdwrite との間でいくつかのハンドシェークが要求されるた
め、まだ完全ではない。
.\"O This option may only be used in conjunction with the 
.\"O .B \-C
.\"O option.
このオプションは
.B \-C
との組合せの場合のみ用いられる。
.TP
.B \-N
.\"O Omit version numbers from ISO9660 file names.  This may violate the ISO9660
.\"O standard, but no one really uses the version numbers anyway.  Use with caution.
ISO9660 ファイル名のバージョン番号を省略する。これは ISO9660 標準に
違反するが、このバージョン番号を本当に使っているシステムはない。
注意して使用すること。
.TP
.B \-nobak
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-no\-bak
.PD
.\"O Do not include backup files files on the iso9660 filesystem. 
iso9660 ファイルシステム上にバックアップファイルを含まない。
.\"O If the 
.\"O .B \-no-bak
.\"O option is specified, files that contain the characters '~' or '#'
.\"O or end in '.bak' will not be included (these are typically backup files
.\"O for editors under unix).
.B \-no\-bak
オプションが指定されると、文字 '~' または '#' を含むファイルと、'.bak' で終わるファイルは含まれない(これらは unix 上のエディタの典型的なバックアップファイルである)。
.TP
.B \-no\-rr
.\"O Do not use the Rock Ridge attributes from previous sessions.
.\"O This may help to avoid getting into trouble when
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O finds illegal Rock Ridge signatures on an old session.
前のセッションからの Rock Ridge 属性を使わない。
これは、
.B mkisofs
が古いセッションの不正な Rock Ridge 署名を見つけた時に、トラブルになるのを
避けるのに役立つだろう。
.TP
.B \-no\-split\-symlink\-components
.\"O Don't split the SL components, but begin a new Continuation Area (CE)
.\"O instead. This may waste some space, but the SunOS 4.1.4 cdrom driver
.\"O has a bug in reading split SL components (link_size = component_size 
.\"O instead of link_size += component_size).
SL コンポーネントを分割せず、代わりに新しい継続領域 (Continuation Area
(CE)) を開始する。これは空き領域を浪費するが、SunOS 4.1.4 の CD\-ROM 
ドライバは分割された SL コンポーネントの読み込みにバグがある。
(link_size += component_size の代わりに link_size = component_size)
.TP
.B \-no\-split\-symlink\-fields
.\"O Don't split the SL fields, but begin a new Continuation Area (CE)
.\"O instead. This may waste some space, but the SunOS 4.1.4 and
.\"O Solaris 2.5.1 cdrom driver have a bug in reading split SL fields
.\"O (a `/' can be dropped).
SL フィールドを分割せず、代わりに新しい継続領域 (Continuation Area
(CE)) を開始する。これは空き領域を浪費するが、SunOS 4.1.4 及び Solaris
2.5.1 の CD\-ROM ドライバは 分割された SL フィールドの読み込みにバグが
ある(`/' が抜け落ちることがある)。
.TP
.BI \-o " filename
.\"O is the name of the file to which the iso9660 filesystem image should be
.\"O written.  This can be a disk file, a tape drive, or it can correspond directly
.\"O to the device name of the optical disc writer.  If not specified, stdout is
.\"O used.  Note that the output can also be a block special device for a regular
.\"O disk drive, in which case the disk partition can be mounted and examined to
.\"O ensure that the premastering was done correctly.
は、書き込まれる ISO9660 ファイルシステムイメージのファイル名である。
これはディスクファイルやテープドライブまたは直接一致する光学ディスク書
き込み機のデバイス名でもかまわない。もし指定されなければ、標準出力が使
用される。出力は通常のディスクドライブの特殊ブロックデバイスでも構わな
いが、この場合にはディスクパーティションはマウント可能で、プリマスタリ
ングが正常に終了したかを確証していなければならないことに注意するように。
.TP
.BI \-path-list " file
.\"O A file containing a list of
.\"O .I pathspec
.\"O directories and filenames to be added to the ISO9660 filesystem. This list
.\"O of pathspecs are processed after any that appear on the command line. If the
.\"O argument is
.\"O .IR - ,
.\"O then the list is read from the standard input. There must be at least one
.\"O .I pathspec
.\"O given on the command line as well.
ISO9660 ファイルシステムに追加される
.I pathspec
ディレクトリとファイル名のリスト。
この pathspec リストは、コマンドラインに現れるすべてのもののあとに処理される。
もし引数が
.I \-
ならば、リストは標準入力から読まれる。
少なくとも一つの
.I pathspec
がコマンドラインで与えられなければならない。
.TP
.BI \-P " publisher_id
.\"O Specifies a text string that will be written into the volume header.
.\"O This should describe the publisher of the CDROM, usually with a
.\"O mailing address and phone number.  There is space on the disc for 128
.\"O characters of information.  This parameter can also be set in the file
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O with PUBL=.
.\"O If specified in both places, the command line version is used.
ボリュームヘッダに書き込まれる文字列を指定する。これは CD\-ROM の出版者
を説明し、通常メールアドレスと電話番号が記載される。
ディスク上には 128 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
このパラメータは
.I \&.mkisofsrc
の PUBL= でも設定可能である。もし二つの場所で指定されている場合、コマ
ンドラインのものが使用される。
.TP
.BI \-p " preparer_id
.\"O Specifies a text string that will be written into the volume header.
.\"O This should describe the preparer of the CDROM, usually with a mailing
.\"O address and phone number.  There is space on the disc for 128
.\"O characters of information.  This parameter can also be set in the file
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O with PREP=.
.\"O If specified in both places, the command line version is used.
ボリュームヘッダに書き込まれる文字列を指定する。
これは CD\-ROM の作成者を説明し、通常メールアドレスと電話番号が記載される。
ディスク上には 128 文字の情報の分の容量がある。このパラメータは
.I \&.mkisofsrc
の PREP= でも設定可能である。
もし二つの場所で指定されている場合、コマンドラインのものが使用される。
.TP
.B \-print-size
.\"O Print estimated filesystem size and exit. This option is needed for
.\"O Disk At Once mode and with some CD-R drives when piping directly into
.\"O .B cdrecord.
.\"O In this case it is needed to know the size of the filesystem before the
.\"O actual CD-creation is done.
.\"O The option \-print-size allows to get this size from a "dry-run" before
.\"O the CD is actually written.
予測されたファイルシステムのサイズを表示して終了する。このオプションは 
Disk At Once モードで
.B cdrecord
に直接パイプしているときに、いくつかの CD\-R ドライブで使用される。
この場合には、実際の CD 作成が行われる前にファイルシステムのサイズを知っ
ておく必要がある。\-print\-size オプションは、CD が実際に書き込まれる前
に "dry\-run" (訳注: 実際の書き込みを伴わない試験書き込み) によりこのサ
イズを取得する。
.TP
.B \-quiet
.\"O This makes
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O even less verbose.  No progress output will be provided.
このオプションは
.B mkisofs
にそれほど詳細な出力をさせないようにする。
進捗状況が出力されない。
.TP
.B \-R
.\"O Generate SUSP and RR records using the Rock Ridge protocol to further describe
.\"O the files on the iso9660 filesystem.
ISO9660 ファイルシステムのファイルを詳細に説明するために
Rock Ridge プロトコルを使用して SUSP 及び RR レコードを生成する。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O This is like the \-R option, but file ownership and modes are set to
.\"O more useful values.  The uid and gid are set to zero, because they are
.\"O usually only useful on the author's system, and not useful to the
.\"O client.  All the file read bits are set true, so that files and
.\"O directories are globally readable on the client.  If any execute bit is
.\"O set for a file, set all of the execute bits, so that executables are
.\"O globally executable on the client.  If any search bit is set for a
.\"O directory, set all of the search bits, so that directories are globally
.\"O searchable on the client.  All write bits are cleared, because the
.\"O CD-Rom will be mounted read-only in any case.  If any of the special
.\"O mode bits are set, clear them, because file locks are not useful on a
.\"O read-only file system, and set-id bits are not desirable for uid 0 or
.\"O gid 0.
これは \-R オプションに似ているが、ファイルの所有とモードがより便利な
値に設定される。UID と GID は通常作者のシステムでのみ有用で、クライア
ントでは有用でないため 0 にセットされる。すべての読み込みビットは true 
でファイルとディレクトリはクライアントで全体的に読み込み可能になる。も
しいかなる実行ビットがファイルに設定されていたら、実行ビットのすべてが
設定され、クライアントで実行可能ファイルは全体的に実行可能になる。もし
いかなる検索ビットがディレクトリにセットされていれば、検索ビットのすべ
てを設定し、ディレクトリは全体的にクライアントで検索可能になる。すべて
の書き込みビットは、CD\-ROM はすべての場合において読み込み専用でマウン
トされるため、消去される。もしいかなる特殊モードのビットが設定されてい
れば、読み込み専用のファイルシステム上でのファイルロックは有用ではなく、
set\-id ビットは UID 0 または GID 0 では望ましくないため、消去する。
.TP
.BI \-sysid " ID
.\"O Specifies the system ID.
.\"O This parameter can also be set in the file
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O with SYSI=system_id.
.\"O If specified in both places, the command line version is used.
システム ID を指定する。このパラメータはファイル
.B \&.mkisofsrc
で SYSI=system_id として設定される。もし両方の場所で指定された場合、コマン
ドラインのものが使用される。
.TP
.B \-T
.\"O Generate a file TRANS.TBL in each directory on the CDROM, which can be used
.\"O on non-Rock Ridge capable systems to help establish the correct file names.
.\"O There is also information present in the file that indicates the major and
.\"O minor numbers for block and character devices, and each symlink has the name of
.\"O the link file given.
Rock Ridge が使用できないシステム上で正しいファイル名を得るために 
TRANS.TBL を CD\-ROM のそれぞれのディレクトリに生成する。ファイルの中に
は他にもブロックデバイスやキャラクタデバイスのメジャー番号やマイナー番
号情報があり、それぞれのシンボリックリンクは与えられたファイルの名前を
持つ。
.TP
.BI \-table\-name " TABLE_NAME
.\"O Alternative translation table file name (see above). Implies the
.\"O .B \-T
.\"O option.
.\"O If you are creating a multi-session image you must use the same name
.\"O as in the previous session.
代わりの変換テーブルファイルネーム(上を見よ)。
.B \-T
オプションを含む。
もしマルチセッションイメージを作成したならば、前のセッションと同じ名前
にしなければならない。
.TP 
.B \-U
.\"O Allows "Untranslated" filenames, completely violating the iso9660 standards
.\"O described above. Forces on the -d, -l, -L and -N flags, and also allows more
.\"O than one '.' character in the filename, as well as mixed case filenames.
.\"O This is useful on HP-UX system, where the built-in CDFS filesystem does
.\"O not recognize ANY extensions. Use with extreme caution.
iso9660 標準に完全に違反する、"未変換" ファイル名を許可する。
\-d、\-l、\-L、\-N フラグが自動的に指定され、文字 '.' を 1 個以上含む
ファイル名や、大文字小文字が混ざったファイル名も許可される。
これは、最初からある CDFS ファイルシステムが何の拡張も認識しない HP-UX 
システムで有効である。使用には細心の注意を払うこと。
.TP
.BI \-V " volid 
.\"O Specifies the volume ID to be written into the master block.  This
.\"O parameter can also be set in the file
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O with VOLI=id.
.\"O If specified in both places, the command line version is used.  Note that 
.\"O if you assign a volume ID, this is the name that will be used as the mount  
.\"O point used by the Solaris volume management system and the name that is
.\"O assigned to the disc on a Windows or Mac platform. 
マスターブロックに記載するボリューム ID を指定する。 
このパラメータは、ファイル
.B \&.mkisofsrc
で VOLI=id により指定することもできる。もし二つの場所で指定された場合, 
コマンドラインのものが使用される。
もしボリューム ID を指定した場合、その名前は、Solaris ボリューム管理シ
ステムではマウントポイントとして、Windows または Mac プラットフォームでは
ディスク名として使われるので、注意すること。
.TP
.BI \-volset " ID
.\"O Specifies the volset ID.
.\"O This parameter can also be set in the file
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O with VOLS=volset_id.
.\"O If specified in both places, the command line version is used.
.\"SEKINE: volset => volume set ?
ボリュームセット ID を指定する。このパラメータはファイル
.B \&.mkisofsrc
で VOLS=volset_id として設定される。もし両方の場所で指定された場合、コマン
ドラインのものが使用される。
.TP
.BI \-volset\-size " #
.\"O Sets the volume set size to #. 
.\"O The volume set size is the number of CD's that are in a CD set.
.\"O The 
.\"O .B \-volset-size
.\"O option may be used to create CD's that are part of e.g. a Operation
.\"O System installation set of CD's.
.\"O The option 
.\"O .B \-volset-size
.\"O must be specified before
.\"O .B \-volset-seqno
.\"O on each command line.
ボリュームセットサイズを # に設定する。ボリュームセットサイズとは CD 
のセットの中の CD の枚数である。
.B \-volset\-size
オプションは、オペレーティングシステムのインストールなどで CD が(複数
枚の)セットになっている場合に、その部分としての CD を作成するときに指
定する事ができる。
.B \-volset\-size
オプションは、コマンドライン上で
.B \-volset\-seqno
より前に指定されなければならない。
.TP
.BI \-volset\-seqno " #
.\"O Sets the volume set sequence number to #. 
.\"O The volume set sequence number is the index number of the current
.\"O CD in a CD set.
.\"O The option 
.\"O .B \-volset-size
.\"O must be specified before
.\"O .B \-volset-seqno
.\"O on each command line.
ボリュームセット番号を # に設定する。ボリュームセット番号とは、その CD 
の、CD セットの中での順番である。
.B \-volset\-size
オプションは、コマンドライン上で
.B \-volset\-seqno
より前に指定されなければならない。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose execution.
冗長な出力。
.TP
.BI \-x " path
.\"O Exclude
.\"O .I path
.\"O from being written to CDROM.
.\"O .I path
.\"O must be the complete pathname that results from concatenating the pathname
.\"O given as command line argument and the path relative to this directory.
.\"O Multiple paths may be excluded (up to 1000).
CD\-ROM の書き込みに
.I path
を排除する。
.I path
はコマンドライン引数として連続して与えられた完全なパス名で、パスはこの
ディレクトリに相対でなければならない。複数のパスが除外可能である (最大 
1000)。
.\"O Example: 
例:

mkisofs \-o cd \-x /local/dir1 \-x /local/dir2 /local
.sp
.\"O NOTE: The \-m and \-x option description should both be updated, they are wrong.
.\"O Both now work identical and use filename globbing. A file is excluded if either
.\"O the last component matches or the whole path matches.
注意: \-m と \-x オプションに関する説明は間違っており、更新されるべきである。
ファイル名そのままの指定とワイルドカード形式の指定の両方が可能である。
ファイル名が一致した場合か、パスの全てが一致した場合にファイルは除外される。
.TP
.B \-z
.\"O Generate special SUSP records for transparently compressed files.  This is
.\"O only of use and interest for hosts that support transparent decompression.
.\"O This is an experimental feature, and no hosts yet support this, but there
.\"O are ALPHA patches for Linux that can make use of this feature.
特殊な SUSP レコードを transparent 圧縮されたファイルに対して生成する。
これは transparent 圧縮をサポートするホストに対してのみ使用される。こ
れは試験的な機能で、どのホストもこれをサポートしていないが、この機能を
使用可能にする Linux 用の alpha パッチが存在する。
.\"O .SH BOOT INFORMATION TABLE
.SH ブート情報テーブル
.\"O When the
.\"O .B \-boot-info-table 
.\"O option is given,
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O will modify the boot file specified by the
.\"O .B \-b
.\"O option by inserting a 56-byte "boot information table" at offset 8 in
.\"O the file.  This modification is done in the source filesystem, so make
.\"O sure you use a copy if this file is not easily recreated!  This file
.\"O contains pointers which may not be easily or reliably obtained at boot
.\"O time.
.B \-boot\-info\-table 
オプションが与えられると、
.B mkisofs
は
.B \-b
オプションで与えられたブートファイルのオフセット 8 に 56 バイトの "ブー
ト情報テーブル(boot information table)" を挿入して、ブートファイルを修
正する。
この修正は作成元となるファイルシステム上で行われるので、このファイルが
簡単に再作成できないのならちゃんとコピーをとっておくこと!
このファイルはブート時には簡単には得られない、または信頼できる値が得ら
れないポインタを含む。
.PP
.\"O The format of this table is as follows; all integers are in
.\"O section 7.3.1 ("little endian") format.
このテーブルのフォーマットは以下の通り; すべての整数は 7.3.1 節("リトルエンディアン") フォーマットである。
.sp
.RS +.2i
.ta 1.1i 2.5i 3.5i
.nf
.\"O Offset	Name	Size	Meaning
.\"O  8	bi_pvd	4 bytes	LBA of primary volume descriptor
.\"O 12	bi_file	4 bytes	LBA of boot file
.\"O 16	bi_length	4 bytes	Boot file length in bytes
.\"O 20	bi_csum	4 bytes	32-bit checksum
.\"O 24	bi_reserved	40 bytes	Reserved
オフセット	名前	サイズ	意味
 8	bi_pvd	4 bytes	最初のボリューム記述子の LBA
12	bi_file	4 bytes	ブートファイルの LBA
16	bi_length	4 bytes	バイト単位でのブートファイルの長さ
20	bi_csum	4 bytes	32 ビットチェックサム
24	bi_reserved	40 bytes	予約済み
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O The 32-bit checksum is the sum of all the 32-bit words in the boot
.\"O file starting at byte offset 64.  All linear block addresses (LBAs)
.\"O are given in CD sectors (normally 2048 bytes).
32 ビットチェックサムは、オフセット 64 バイトから始まるブートファイル
のすべての32 ビットワードの和である。
.\"O .SH CONFIGURATION
.SH 環境
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O looks for the
.\"O .B \&.mkisofsrc
.\"O file,
.\"O first in the current working directory,
.\"O then in the user's home directory,
.\"O and then in the directory in which the
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O binary is stored.  This file is assumed to contain a series of lines
.\"O of the form 
.\"O .BI TAG= value,
.\"O and in this way you can specify certain options.
.B mkisofs
は
.IR \&.mkisofsrc
ファイルを検索するために、最初は現在の作業ディレクトリを参照し、そして
ユーザのホームディレクトリ、そのあとに
.B mkisofs
バイナリが保存されているディレクトリを参照する。このファイルは、
"TAG=value" 形式の行が含まれるものであり、この形式でいくつかのオプショ
ンを設定できる。
.\"O The case of the tag is not significant.
.\"O Some fields in the volume header
.\"O are not settable on the command line, but can be altered through this
.\"O facility.
.\"O Comments may be placed in this file,
.\"O using lines which start with a hash (#) character.
タグの大文字小文字は意味を持たない。
ボリュームヘッダのいくつかのフィールドはコマンドラインで設定不可能であ
るが、この設定ファイルで設定可能である。このファイルには、"#" 文字を使
用することによりコメントを付けられる。
.TP
.B APPI
.\"O The application identifier
.\"O should describe the application that will be on the disc.
.\"O There is space on the disc for 128 characters of information.
.\"O May be overridden using the 
.\"O .B \-A 
.\"O command line option.
アプリケーション識別子は、ディスクにあるアプリケーションを説明する。
ディスク上には 128 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
.B \-A
コマンドラインオプションにより上書きできる。
.TP
.B COPY
.\"O The copyright information,
.\"O often the name of a file on the disc containing the copyright notice.
.\"O There is space in the disc for 37 characters of information.
.\"O May be overridden using the 
.\"O .B \-copyright
.\"O command line option.
多くの場合著作権情報が格納されているディスク上のファイルの名前となって
いる、著作権情報である。ディスク上には 37 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
.B \-copyright
コマンドラインオプションにより上書きできる。
.TP
.B ABST
.\"O The abstract information,
.\"O often the name of a file on the disc containing an abstract.
.\"O There is space in the disc for 37 characters of information.
.\"O May be overridden using the 
.\"O .B \-abstract
.\"O command line option.
多くの場合要約情報が格納されているディスク上のファイルとなっている、要
約情報である。ディスク上には 37 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
.B \-abstract
コマンドラインオプションにより上書きできる。
.TP
.B BIBL
.\"O The bibliographic information,
.\"O often the name of a file on the disc containing a bibliography.
.\"O There is space in the disc for 37 characters of information.
.\"O May be overridden using the 
.\"O .B \-bilio
.\"O command line option.
多くの場合書誌情報が格納されているディスク上のファイルとなっている、書
誌情報である。ディスク上には 37 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
.B \-bilio
.\"SEKINE -biblio
コマンドラインオプションにより上書きできる。
.TP
.B PREP
.\"O This should describe the preparer of the CDROM,
.\"O usually with a mailing address and phone number.
.\"O There is space on the disc for 128 characters of information.
.\"O May be overridden using the 
.\"O .B \-p 
.\"O command line option.
これは CD-ROM の作成者をメールアドレスや電話番号で説明する。
ディスク上には 128 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
コマンドラインの
.B \-p 
オプションにより上書きできる。
.TP
.B PUBL
.\"O This should describe the publisher of the CDROM,
.\"O usually with a mailing address and phone number.
.\"O There is space on the disc for 128 characters of information.
.\"O May be overridden using the 
.\"O .B \-P 
.\"O command line option.
これは CD-ROM の編集者をメールアドレスや電話番号で説明する。
ディスク上には 128 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
コマンドラインの
.B \-P 
オプションにより上書きできる。
.TP
.B SYSI
.\"O The System Identifier.
.\"O There is space on the disc for 32 characters of information.
.\"O May be overridden using the 
.\"O .B \-sysid
.\"O command line option.
システム識別子である。ディスク上には 32 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
コマンドラインの
.B \-sysid
オプションにより上書きできる。
.TP
.B VOLI
.\"O The Volume Identifier.
.\"O There is space on the disc for 32 characters of information.
.\"O May be overridden using the 
.\"O .B \-V 
.\"O command line option.
ボリューム識別子である。
ディスク上には 32 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
コマンドラインの
.B \-V
オプションにより上書きできる。
.TP
.B VOLS
.\"O The Volume Set Name.
.\"O There is space on the disc for 128 characters of information.
.\"O May be overridden using the 
.\"O .B \-volset
.\"O command line option.
ボリュームセット名。
ディスク上には 128 文字の情報の分の容量がある。
コマンドラインの
.B \-volset
オプションにより上書きできる。
.PP
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O can also be configured at compile time with defaults for many of these fields.
.\"O See the file defaults.h.
.B mkisofs
はコンパイル時にこれらのほとんどのフィールドをデフォルトとして設定する
こともできる。 defaults.h ファイルを参照すること。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O is not based on the standard mk*fs tools for unix, because we must generate
.\"O a complete  copy of an existing filesystem on a disk in the  iso9660
.\"O filesystem.  The name mkisofs is probably a bit of a misnomer, since it
.\"O not only creates the filesystem, but it also populates it as well.
.B mkisofs
は、ディスク上の ISO9660 ファイルシステムを完全に生成しなければならな
いため、UNIX 向けの標準の mk*fs をベースにしていない。mkisofs という名
前は、ファイルシステムを作成するだけでなく、それを移植することもできる
ため、おそらく少し不適切な名前かもしれない。
.PP
.br
.\"O Eric Youngdale <ericy@gnu.ai.mit.edu> or <eric@andante.org> wrote both the
.\"O Linux isofs9660 filesystem and the mkisofs utility.
.\"O The copyright for the mkisofs utility is held by
.\"O Yggdrasil Computing, Incorporated.
Eric Youngdale <ericy@gnu.ai.mit.edu> または <eric@andante.org> は、
Linux の ISOFS9660 ファイルシステム及び mkisofs ユーティリティを作成し、
これらは彼らにより保守されている。mkisofs ユーティリティの著作権 は 
Yggdrasil Computing, Incorporated により所有されている。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O .B Mkisofs
.\"O may safely be installed suid root. This may be needed to allow 
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O to read the previous session when creating a multi session image.
.B mkisofs
は、suid root でインストールされても多分安全である。
これはマルチセッションを作成する時に
.B mkisofs
が前のセッションを読むのに必要なことである。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.TP
\(bu
.\"O Any files that have hard links to files not in the tree being copied to the
.\"O iso9660 filesystem will have an incorrect file reference count.
ISO9660 ファイルシステムにコピーされるツリーにないファイルへハードリ
ンクしているすべてのファイルは誤った参照回数を持つ。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O Does not check for SUSP record(s) in "." entry of the
.\"O root directory to verify the existence of Rock Ridge
.\"O enhancements.
Rock Ridge 拡張の存在を検証するために、ルートディレクトリの "." エントリにある
SUSP レコードをチェックしない。
.sp
.\"O This problem is present when reading old sessions while
.\"O adding data in multi-session mode.
この問題はマルチセッションモードでデータを追加している間に古いセッショ
ンを読み込む時に起こる。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O Does not properly read relocated directories in multi-session
.\"O mode when adding data.
マルチセッションモードでのデータ追加時に、再配置されたディレクトリを適
切に読み込まない。
.sp
.\"O Any relocated deep directory is lost if the new session does not
.\"O include the deep directory.
新しいセッションが深いディレクトリを持たない場合、再配置された深いディレクトリは失われる。
.sp
.\"O Repeat by: create first session with deep directory relocation
.\"O then add new session with a single dir that differs from the
.\"O old deep path.
繰り返す: 深いディレクトリを再配置して最初のセッションを作成し、単一の
ディレクトリで新しいセッションを加えると、前の深いパスとは異なる。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O Does not re-use RR_MOVED when doing multi-session from TRANS.TBL
マルチセッションでは、TRANS.TBL からできる RR_MOVED を再利用しない。
.TP
\(bu
.\"O Does not create whole_name entry for RR_MOVED in multi-session
.\"O mode.
マルチセッションモードでは、RR_MOVED には完全な名前のエントリは作成されない。
.PP
.\"O There may be some other ones.  Please, report them to the author.
おそらく他にもあるだろう。作者に報告してほしい。
.\"O .SH FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS
.SH 将来の改良
.\"O Some sort of gui interface.
ある種の GUI インターフェース.
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手性
.\"O .B mkisofs
.\"O is available for anonymous ftp from tsx-11.mit.edu in
.\"O /pub/linux/packages/mkisofs and many other mirror sites.
.B mkisofs
は anonymous FTP の tsx-11.mit.edu の /pub/linux/packages/mkisofs や他
のたくさんのミラーサイトから入手できる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH "MAILING LISTS
.SH メイリングリスト
.\"O If you want to actively take part on the development of mkisofs,
.\"O you may join the cdwriting mailing list by sending mail to:
.\"O .nf
.\"O .sp
.\"O 	other-cdwrite-request@lists.debian.org
.\"O .sp
.\"O .fi
.\"O and include the word 
.\"O .I subscribe
.\"O in the body.
もし mkisofs の開発に積極的に関わりたいなら、
本文に
.I subscribe
と書いたメールを
.nf
.sp
	other-cdwrite-request@lists.debian.org
.sp
.fi
に送って cdwriting メイリングリストに参加しよう。
.\"O The mail address of the list is:
ML のメールアドレスは
.nf
.sp
	cdwrite@lists.debian.org
.fi
である。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH MAINTAINER
.SH メンテナー
.nf
J\*org Schilling
Seestr. 110
D-13353 Berlin
Germany
.fi
.PP
.\"O Mail bugs and suggestions to:
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B
.\"O schilling@fokus.gmd.de
.\"O or
.\"O .B
.\"O js@cs.tu-berlin.de
.\"O or
.\"O .B
.\"O joerg@schily.isdn.cs.tu-berlin.de
バグや改善のメールは
.PP
.B
schilling@fokus.gmd.de
または
.B
js@cs.tu-berlin.de
または
.B
joerg@schily.isdn.cs.tu-berlin.de
へ。
