'\" t
.\" @(#)lilo.8 1.0 950728 aeb
.\" This page is based on the lilo docs, which carry the following
.\" COPYING condition:
.\"
.\" LILO program code, documentation and auxiliary programs are
.\" Copyright 1992-1998 Werner Almesberger.
.\" Extensions to LILO, documentation and auxiliary programs are
.\" Copyright 1999-2001 John Coffman.
.\" All rights reserved by the respective copyright holders.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms of parts of or the
.\" whole original or derived work are permitted provided that the
.\" original work is properly attributed to the author. The name of the
.\" author may not be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\" this software without specific prior written permission. This work
.\" is provided "as is" and without any express or implied warranties.
.\"
.\" Original version, Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl), 950728
.\" Added t directive, as Daniel Quinlan asked, 950824
.\" Added L switch, John Coffman, 991118
.\" Added T switch, John Coffman, 001001
.\" Added p switch, John Coffman, 010402
.\" Added x switch, John Coffman, 010409
.\" Added A switch, John Coffman, 010417
.\" Added M switch, John Coffman, 010417
.\" Added g switch, John Coffman, 010526
.\" Added z switch, John Coffman, 010829
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 TACHIBANA Akira
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jul 28 17:42:39 JST 1996
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@tky.threewebnet.or.jp>
.\" Modified Sat May  3 12:31:22 JST 1997
.\"	by SUGIURA Yoshiki <yox@in.aix.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun May  6 23:28:40 JST 2001
.\"     by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 26 08:16:45 JST 2002
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	boot loader		ブートローダ
.\"WORD:	boot sector		ブートセクター
.\"WORD:	disk geometry		ディスクジオメトリ
.\"
.TH LILO 8 "31 Oct 2001"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O lilo \- install boot loader
lilo \- ブートローダ をインストールする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O Main function:
主な使い方:
.LP
.B " /sbin/lilo"
.\"O \- install boot loader
\- ブートローダをインストールする
.LP
.\"O Auxiliary uses:
他の使い方:
.LP
.B " /sbin/lilo -q"
.\"O \- query map
\- マップを調べる
.br
.B " /sbin/lilo -R"
.\"O \- set default command line for next reboot
\- 次回のリブートでデフォルトとなるコマンドラインパラメータを設定する
.br
.B " /sbin/lilo -I"
.\"O \- inquire path name of current kernel
\- 現在のカーネルのパス名を調べる
.br
.B " /sbin/lilo -A"
.\"O \- activate a partition / show active partition
\- パーティションをアクティブにする / アクティブなパーティションを表示する
.br
.B " /sbin/lilo -M [-z]"
.\"O \- write a Master Boot Record on a device
.\"O \- or clear the device serial number
\- デバイスのマスタブートレコードを書き込む
\- またはデバイスシリアル番号を消去する
.br
.B " /sbin/lilo -T"
.\"O \- tell more about specified topic
指定したトピックについて詳細を表示する
.br
.B " /sbin/lilo {-u|-U}"
.\"O \- uninstall lilo
\- lilo をアンインストールする
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.LP
.\"O .B lilo
.\"O installs a boot loader that will be activated next time you boot.
.\"O It has lots of options.
.B lilo 
は、次回ブート時に有効となるブートローダをインストールする。 
以下のオプションがある。
.LP
.TP
.BI "\-\^A " "master-device [ N ]"
.\"O Inquire of active partition on device
.\"O .IR master-device ;
.\"O e.g., "/dev/hda".  With a number in the range 1 to 4, activate the specified
.\"O partition on the master device.
デバイス
.I master-device
(例えば "/dev/hda") にあるアクティブなパーティションを調べる。
1 〜 4 の範囲の数字を付けて指定すると、
.I master-device
にある指定されたパーティションがアクティブにされる。
.TP
.BI "\-\^b " bootdev
.\"O Specify the boot device; i.e., where the boot loader will be installed.
.\"O "-b /dev/hda" specifies the Master Boot Record; "-b /dev/sdb5" specifies
.\"O the first extended partition on the second SCSI disk.
ブートデバイスを指定する。
つまり、ブートローダをインストールする場所を指定する。
"-b /dev/hda" はマスターブートレコードを指定する。
"-b /dev/sdb5" は二つ目の SCSI ディスクの最初の拡張パーティションを指定する。
.TP
.B "\-\^c"
.\"O Enable map compaction. This will merge read requests from adjacent
.\"O sectors. Speeds up the booting (especially from floppy).
マップの圧縮を有効にする。
これにより、隣り合ったセクタからの read リクエストがひとまとめになり、
ブートのスピードが上がる (特にフロッピーの場合)。
.TP
.BI "\-\^C " config-file
.\"O .B lilo
.\"O reads its instructions about what files to map from the specified
.\"O configuration file.  This option overrides the use of the default config
.\"O file,
.\"O .IR "/etc/lilo.conf" .
.B lilo
はデフォルトでは設定を指定されたファイルから読み込む。
このオプションはデフォルトの設定ファイル
.I "/etc/lilo.conf"
以外を用いる場合に使う。
.TP
.BI "\-\^d " delay
.\"O Specifies the delay time in tenths of a second (20 = 2 sec) before
.\"O automatically booting the first image.  Gives you time to interrupt the
.\"O automatic boot process with Shift, Alt, Ctrl, ScrollLock, or CapsLock.  If
.\"O interrupted, the `boot:' prompt is displayed.  This switch is overriden by
.\"O the appearance of
.\"O .I prompt
.\"O in the config-file.
自動的に最初のイメージをブートするまでの
遅延時間を 1/10 秒単位で指定する (20 = 2 秒である)。
Shift, Alt, Ctrl, ScrollLock, CapsLock などで
自動ブートプロセスを中断するための余裕を与える。
中断されると `boot:' というプロンプトが表示される。
このスイッチは設定ファイル config-file に
.I prompt
がある場合は上書きされる。
.TP
.BI "\-\^D " label
.\"O Use the kernel with the given label, instead of the first one
.\"O in the list, as the default kernel to boot.
ブート時にリストの最初に現れるデフォルトカーネルの代わりに、
指定されたラベルのカーネルを使用する。
.TP
.BI "\-\^f " disk-tab
.\"O Specify disk geometry parameter file. (The default is
.\"O .IR /etc/disktab .)
ディスクジオメトリパラメータファイルを指定する (デフォルトは
.IR /etc/disktab )。
.TP
.BI "\-\^g"
.\"O Generate sector/head/cylinder (geometric) disk addresses.  Limited to
.\"O cylinders up to 1023.  Forces compatibility with older versions of LILO.
sector/head/cylinder (ジオメトリ) ディスクアドレスを生成する。
cylinders は 1023 までに制限される。
古いバージョンの LILO と互換性があるようにする。
.TP
.BI "\-\^i " boot-loader
.\"O Specify a file to be used as the new boot loader. (The default is
.\"O .IR /boot/boot.b .)
ブートローダとして使うファイルを指定する (デフォルトは
.IR /boot/boot.b )。
.TP
.\"O .BI "\-\^I " "label" "\[i|r\]"
.BI "\-\^I " "label" " [i|r]"
.\"O The label of the running kernel can be found in the environment
.\"O variable BOOT_IMAGE after startup, or in the pseudo-file `/proc/cmdline'.
.\"O This command will print path name of the corresponding kernel file, or of
.\"O any initial ramdisk file ("i" or "r" option).
スタートアップ後に、環境変数 BOOT_IMAGE または
仮想ファイル`/proc/cmdline' で実行したカーネルのラベルが
参照できるようする。
このコマンドは一致したカーネルファイルまたは
初期ラムディスクファイルのパス名を表示する
(それぞれ "i" または "r" オプションで指定する)。
.TP
.BI "\-\^l"
.\"O Generate 24-bit linear sector addresses instead of sector/head/cylinder
.\"O addresses.
sector/head/cylinder アドレスの代わりに、
24 ビット linear sector アドレスを生成する。
.TP
.BI "\-\^L"
.\"O Generate 32-bit Logical Block Addresses instead of C:H:S addresses, allowing
.\"O access to all partitions on disks with more than 1024 cylinders.
C:H:S アドレスではなく、32 ビット論理ブロックアドレス (LBA) を生成する。
これにより、1024 シリンダ以上あるディスクの
全てのパーティションにアクセスできる。
.TP
.BI "\-\^m " map-file
.\"O Use specified map file instead of the default.
デフォルトのマップファイルの代わりに指定されたファイルを使用する。
.TP
.BI "\-\^M " "master-device [ mbr-file ]"
.\"O Install a Master Boot Record on the device specified as
.\"O .IR master-device .
.\"O The new MBR is copied by default from "/boot/mbr.b", unless a specific
.\"O file is named as the second argument.  The primary partition table on
.\"O .I master-device
.\"O is undistrubed.  If no device serial number is present, then generate one
.\"O and write it to the MBR.
.I master-device
で指定されたデバイスのマスタブートレコード (MBR) をインストールする。
第 2 引き数でファイルを指定しない限り、
デフォルトでは新しい MBR は "/boot/mbr.b" からコピーされる。
.I master-device
のプライマリパーティションテーブルは配置されない。
デバイスシリアル番号がない場合は、生成して MBR に書き込む。
.TP
.BI "\-\^p"
.\"O Require interactive entry of all passwords specified as
.\"O .B """""" 
.\"O in the configuration file.
設定ファイルにおいて
.B """""" 
で指定されている全てのパスワードを対話的に入力させる。
.TP
.BI "\-\^P " "{fix|ignore}"
.\"O Fix (or ignore) `corrupt' partition tables, i.e., partition tables
.\"O with linear and sector/head/cylinder addresses that do not correspond.
linear アドレスと  sector/head/cylinder アドレスが一致しなくなったなどの
「異常」の見つかったパーティションテーブルを修復もしくは無視する。
.TP
.B \-\^q
.\"O List the currently mapped files.
.\"O .B lilo
.\"O maintains a file, by default
.\"O .IR "/boot/map" ,
.\"O containing the name and location of the kernel(s) to boot.
.\"O This option will list the names therein.  Use with \fB-v\fP for
.\"O more detailed information about the installed boot loader.
現在のマップファイルの内容を表示する。
.B lilo
はデフォルトで
.I "/boot/map" 
を使用する。このファイルにはブート可能な (複数の) カーネルの名前と
その場所が入っている。
このオプションはその中にあるカーネルの名前を表示する。
\fB-v\fP オプションを使うとインストールしたブートローダに関する
より詳しい情報が得られる。
.TP
.BI "\-\^r " root-directory
.\"O Before doing anything else, do a \fIchroot\fP to the indicated
.\"O directory. The new root directory must contain a
.\"O .I /dev
.\"O directory, and may need a
.\"O .I /boot
.\"O directory. It may also need an
.\"O .IR /etc/lilo.conf " file."
操作を行う前に、
\fIchroot\fP でルートディレクトリを変更する。
新しいルートディレクトリは
.I /dev
ディレクトリを含まなければならず、
.I /boot
ディレクトリが必要な場合もある。
さらに
.I /etc/lilo.conf
ファイルが必要な場合もある。

.\"O Used by the
.\"O .I mkbootdisk
.\"O shell script for creating a bootable floppy.
シェルスクリプト
.I mkbootdisk
でブート可能なフロッピーを作成するときに使われる。
.TP
.BI "\-\^R " "command line"
.\"O This option sets the default command for the boot loader the next
.\"O time it executes. The boot loader will then erase this line: this
.\"O is a once-only command. It is typically used in reboot scripts,
.\"O just before calling `shutdown -r'.  Used without any arguments, it will
.\"O cancel a \fIlock\fP-ed or \fIfallback\fP command line.
このオプションは次回ブート時に使用されるデフォルトのコマンドを
設定する。ブートローダは次回ブート後この設定を破棄する。
設定されたコマンドが有効なのは一回限りである。
典型的な使用法はリブートスクリプトの中で、`shutdown -r' を行う前などである。
引き数なしで使うと、コマンドライン \fIlock\fP-ed や \fIfallback\fP が
キャンセルされる。 
.TP
.BI "\-\^s " save-file
.\"O When
.\"O .B lilo
.\"O overwrites the boot sector, it preserves the old contents in
.\"O a file, by default
.\"O .I /boot/boot.NNNN
.\"O where NNNN depends on the device. This option specifies an
.\"O alternate save file for the boot sector. (Or, together with the
.\"O \fB-u\fP option, specifies from where to restore the boot sector.)
.B lilo
がブートセクターを上書きするとき、以前の内容を保存するのにデフォルトでは
.I /boot/boot.NNNN
を使用する。
NNNN が何になるかはデバイスに依存する。
このオプションは、その代わりにブートセクタを保存するファイル名を指定する
(または、\fB-u\fP オプションと共に指定し、ブートセクタを復旧するファイル名を
指定する)。
.TP
.BI "\-\^S " save-file
通常、
.B lilo
は既にあるセーブファイルを上書きしないが、このオプションを指定すると
上書きされる。
.TP
.B "\-\^t "
.\"O Test only. Do not really write a new boot sector or map file.
.\"O Use together with \fB-v\fP to find out what
.\"O .B lilo
.\"O is about to do.
テストを行う。ブートセクターやマップファイルは書換えない。
これを \fB-v\fP と共に指定すると、
.B lilo
が何を行うかを確認できる。
.TP
.BI "\-\^T " option
.\"O Print out system information, some of it extracted from the system
.\"O bios.  This is more convenient than booting the LILO diagnostic
.\"O floppy on problem systems.
システム情報を表示する。
そのうちいくつかはシステム BIOS からの情報である。
これは問題のあるシステムを LILO 診断フロッピーで起動するよりも便利である。
.\"O .I option
.\"O may be any one of the following:
.I option
は以下のうちひとつである。
.IP
.\"O .nf
.\"O    help  - print a list of available diagnostics
.\"O    ChRul - list the partition types subject to
.\"O            Change-Rules
.\"O    EBDA  - list Extended BIOS Data Area information
.\"O    geom=<drive> list drive geometry for bios drive;
.\"O            e.g., geom=0x80
.\"O    geom  - list drive geometry for all drives
.\"O    table=<drive> list the primary partition table;
.\"O            e.g., table=/dev/sda
.\"O    video - list graphic modes available to boot
.\"O            loader
.\"O .fi
.nf
   help  - 使用可能な診断のリストを表示する。
   ChRul - CHANGE-RULES で指定されているパーティション
           タイプを表示する。
   EBDA  - 拡張 BIOS データエリア情報の一覧を表示する。
   geom=<drive> BIOS ドライブのドライブジオメトリを表示する。
           例: geom=0x80
   geom  - 全てのドライブのドライブジオメトリの一覧を表示する。
   table=<drive> プライマリパーティションテーブルを表示する。
           例: table=/dev/sda
   video - ブートローダが使用可能なグラフィックモードを表示する。
.fi
.TP
.BI "\-\^u " [device-name]
.\"O Uninstall \fIlilo\fP by copying the saved boot sector back.
保存されたブートセクタをコピーして \fIlilo\fP をアンインストールする。
.\"O The '-s' and '-C' switches may be used with this option.
'-s' と '-C' オプションを同時に指定できる。
.\"O The \fIdevice-name\fP is optional.  A time-stamp is checked.
\fIdevice-name\fP は指定しなくてもよい。
その際タイムスタンプをチェックする。
.TP
.BI "\-\^U " [device-name]
.\"O Idem, but do not check the time-stamp.
上のオプションと同様だがタイムスタンプをチェックしない。
.TP
.B "\-\^v"
.\"O Increase verbosity. Giving one to five \fB-v\fP options
.\"O will make lilo more verbose, or use, \fB-v\fP \fIn\fP (n=1..5) to
.\"O set verbosity level '\fIn\fP'.
より多くの情報を出力する。一つまたは複数の \fB-v\fP オプションを
与えることで lilo が出力する情報がより多くなる。
または、\fB-v\fP \fIn\fP (n=1..5) の形で
詳細度レベルを '\fIn\fP' にできる。
.TP
.B "\-\^V"
.\"O Print version number.
バージョン番号を表示する。
.TP
.B "\-\^w"
.\"O Suppress warning messages.
警告メッセージを表示させない。
.TP
.BI "\-\^x " option
.\"O For RAID installations only.  The option may be any of the keywords
.\"O .IR none ,
.\"O .IR auto ,
.\"O .IR mbr-only ,
.\"O or a comma separated list of additional boot devices (no spaces allowed in
.\"O the list).
RAID インストールの場合のみ。
option は
.IR none ,
.IR auto ,
.I mbr-only
のいずれか、もしくはその他のブートデバイスを
コンマで区切ってリストにしたものである
(リストに空白を入れてはならない)。
.TP
.B "\-\^z"
.\"O When used with the -M switch, clears the device serial number.  Usually used
.\"O in the following sequence to generate a new device serial number:
-M スイッチとともに使用すると、デバイスシリアル番号を消去する。
通常は次のようなやり方で、新しいデバイスシリアル番号を生成するのに使われる:
.nf
     lilo -z -M /dev/hda
     lilo -M /dev/hda
.fi
.br
.LP
.\"O The above command line options correspond to the key words
.\"O in the config file indicated below.
左のコマンドラインオプションは、右の設定ファイルでのキーワードと
同じ意味である。
.IP
.TS
l l.
-b bootdev	boot=bootdev
-c	compact
-d dsec	delay=dsec
-D label	default=label
-i boot-loader	install=boot-loader
-f file	disktab=file
-g	geometric
-l	linear
-L	lba32
-m mapfile	map=mapfile
-P fix	fix-table
-P ignore	ignore-table
-s file	backup=file
-S file	force-backup=file
-v [N]	verbose=level
.TE
.\"O .SH "BOOT OPTIONS"
.SH ブートオプション
.\"O The options described here may be specified at on the command line when a
.\"O kernel image is booted.  These options are processed by LILO, and are
.\"O removed from the command line passed to the kernel, unless otherwise noted.
ここで説明するオプションは、カーネルイメージがブートされるときに
コマンドラインで指定することができる。
特に記述がなければ、
これらのオプションは LILO によって処理され、
カーネルに渡されるコマンドラインから削除される。
.LP
.TP
.BI lock
.\"O Locks the command line, as though 'lock' had been specified in 'lilo.conf.'
\&'lilo.conf' で 'lock' が指定されたときのように、
コマンドラインをロックする。
.TP
.BI "mem=###[,K,M]"
.\"O Specifies the maximum memory in the system in bytes, kilobytes, or megabytes.
.\"O This option is not removed from the command line, and is always passed to
.\"O the kernel.
システムの最大メモリをバイト・キロバイト・メガバイト単位で指定する。
このオプションはコマンドラインから削除されず、常にカーネルに渡される。
.TP
.BI nobd
.\"O Suppresses collection of BIOS data.  This option is reserved for use with
.\"O non-IBM-compliant BIOS's which hang up with an "s" at the end of the line:
BIOS データを収集させない。
このオプションは、
(以下のように) 行の終りに "s" を表示してハングアップするような、
IBM 非互換の BIOS で使用するために予約されている。
.nf
     Loading.........s
.fi
.TP
.BI "vga=[ASK,EXT,EXTENDED,NORMAL]"
.\"O Allows overriding the default video mode upon kernel startup.
カーネルのスタートアップ時のデフォルトのビデオモードを上書きする。
.br
.\"O .SH INCOMPATIBILITIES
.SH 非互換性
.\"O .B lilo
.\"O is known to have problems with the
.\"O .I reiserfs
.\"O introduced with the 2.2.x kernels, unless the file system is
.\"O mounted with the 'notail' option.  This incompatibilty has been
.\"O resolved with reiserfs 3.6.18 and lilo 21.6.
.B lilo
を 2.2.x カーネルから導入された
.I reiserfs
と用いるときには、ファイルシステムを 'notail' オプションでマウントしないと
問題が生じることが知られている。
この非互換性は reiserfs 3.6.18 と lilo 21.6 で解決されている。
.sp
.\"O Beginning with version 22.0, RAID installations write the boot record to
.\"O the RAID partition. Conditional writing of MBRs may occur to aid in making
.\"O the RAID set bootable in a recovery situation, but all default actions may
.\"O be overridden. Action similar to previous versions is
.\"O achieved using the `-x mbr-only' switch.
バージョン 22.0 の最初の頃、RAID インストールでは
ブートレコードを RAID パーティションに書き込んでいた。
修復時に RAID セットをブート可能とするために、
条件つきで MBR への書き込みを行ってもよいはずだが、
実際にはすべてのデフォルト動作を変更されてしまう。
以前のバージョンと同じアクションは、
`-x mbr-only' スイッチを使って実行できる。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Configuration file options `backup' and `force-backup' are not yet correctly
.\"O implemented for RAID installations. Use of the default boot record backup
.\"O mechanism seems to work okay, and should be used.
設定ファイルのオプション `backup' と `force-backup' は、
RAID インストールではいまのところ正しく実装されていない。
デフォルトのブートレコードのバックアップ機構はうまく動作するようなので、
そちらを使うべきである。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
fdisk(8), lilo.conf(5), mkrescue(8), mkinitrd(8).
.sp
.\"O The lilo distribution comes with very extensive documentation.
lilo のディストリビューションには多くのドキュメントが含まれている。
(lilo 22.1)
.\"O .SH "AUTHORS"
.SH 著者
.\"O Werner Almesberger <almesber@lrc.epfl.ch> (to ver.21)
Werner Almesberger <almesber@lrc.epfl.ch> (ver.21 以前)
.br
.\"O John Coffman <johninsd@san.rr.com> (21.2 & later)
John Coffman <johninsd@san.rr.com> (ver.21.2 以降)
