'\" t
.\" @(#)mkrescue.8 1.0 20011031 jrc
.\" This page is part of the LILO package, which is released by
.\" the author(s) under a BSD license.  See the file COPYING
.\" in the LILO source directory for the License and Disclaimer.
.\"
.\" Original version, John Coffman 011031
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb  1 03:31:03 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH MKRESCUE 8 "31 Oct 2001"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mkrescue \- make rescue floppy
mkrescue \- レスキュー用フロッピーを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.LP
.B "/sbin/mkrescue"
.\"O \- make a bootable rescue floppy using the existing kernel and any initial
.\"O ramdisk.
\- 既存のカーネルと任意の初期 RAM ディスクを使って、
ブート可能なレスキュー用フロッピーを作成する。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.LP
.\"O .B mkrescue
.\"O assumes that the present running system was successfully booted using the
.\"O .B lilo
.\"O boot loader, and that the specification for the kernel and any initial
.\"O ramdisk are in \fB/etc/lilo.conf\fP. This command will make a bootable
.\"O 1.44M rescue floppy which uses the
.\"O current kernel, any initial ramdisk, and the "current" root directory.
.B mkrescue
は現在実行中のシステムがブートローダー
.B lilo
を用いて正常にブートされたものであると仮定する。
さらに、カーネルと初期 RAM ディスクの仕様が
\fB/etc/lilo.conf\fP に書かれていると仮定する。
このコマンドは、現在のカーネル・初期 RAM ディスク・
「カレントの」ルートディレクトリを使って、
ブート可能な 1.44M のレスキュー用フロッピーを作成する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.LP
.TP
.BI "--device <device>"
.\"O Make the floppy on a device other than /dev/fd0.  The floppy disk will
.\"O always be made to boot on BIOS device code 0x00 (A: drive), without
.\"O regard to the drive on which it is created.
/dev/fd0 以外のデバイスでフロッピーを作成する。
フロッピーは、それがどのデバイスで作成されたかに関わらず、
常に BIOS のデバイスコードが 0x00 のドライブ
(A: ドライブ) でブートするように作成される。
.TP
.BI "--fast"
.\"O Use a faster method of creating the boot floppy.  This involves first
.\"O creating a 1.44M file mounted using a loopback device, then copying
.\"O the file to the disk.  Currently, loopback device 'loop4' must be free for
.\"O this option to be used.
ブートフロッピーを作成するために、最速な方法を使う。
このために、まずループバックデバイスを使ってマウントされた
1.44M のファイルを作成し、つぎにそのファイルをディスクにコピーする。
現在のところ、このオプションを使うためには
ループバックデバイス 'loop4' を空けておかなければならない。
.TP
.BI "--fs [ ext2 | msdos | minix ]"
.\"O Specify the type of filesystem to create on the drive.
.\"O .B ext2
.\"O is the default, but "msdos" and "minix" allow slightly more disk sectors
.\"O for really big kernels.
ドライブ上に作成するファイルシステムのタイプを指定する。
.B ext2
がデフォルトであるが、非常に大きなカーネル用に
"msdos" や "minix" を使ってディスクセクタをいくらか大きくできる。
.TP
.BI "--help"
.\"O Print a short usage synopsis, including a list of command options.
コマンドラインオプションのリストを含めた使い方の簡単な概要を表示する。
.TP
.\"O .BI "--initrd <filepath>" "  and  " "--kernel <filepath>"
.BI "--initrd <filepath>" "  と  " "--kernel <filepath>"
.\"O These options, which must be used together, allow specification of an
.\"O arbitrary kernel file and initial ramdisk file to be used on the created
.\"O boot floppy.  Be sure you know what you are doing before you use these
.\"O options.
この 2 つのオプションは、一緒に使わなければならない。
ブートフロッピーの作成に使う任意のカーネルファイルと
初期 RAM ディスクを指定する。
このオプションを使う前に、自分が何をやっているのかを分かっておくこと。
.TP
.BI "--nocompact"
.\"O For faster kernel loading from a floppy, LILO map compaction is normally
.\"O enabled. This option will disable map compaction by omitting the
.\"O lilo "-c" switch.
フロッピーからのカーネル読み出しを速くするために、
通常は LILO マップのコンパクト化が有効になっている。
このオプションは lilo "-c" スイッチを省略することで、
マップのコンパクト化を無効にする。
.TP
.BI "--noformat"
.\"O Suppresses creation of a new filesystem on the boot floppy. This option may
.\"O be used
.\"O .B only
.\"O when you know that the floppy you will be writing upon is formatted with the
.\"O same filesystem as specified by "--fs XXX" (default is ext2).
ブートフロッピー上に新しいファイルシステムを作成しない。
このオプションは、書き込もうとしているフロッピーが
"--fs XXX" (デフォルトは ext2) で指定されたファイルシステムと
同じファイルシステムにフォーマットされている場合に\fBのみ\fR使うことができる。
.TP
.BI "--root <device>"
.\"O Specify the root filesystem for the kernel on the boot floppy. The currently
.\"O mounted root is the default, if this option is not specified.
ブートフロッピー上のカーネルが使うルートファイルシステムを指定する。
このオプションが指定されない場合、
現在マウントされているルートをデフォルトとして使う。
.TP
.BI "--version"
.\"O Print the version number of 'mkrescue', then terminate.
\&'mkrescue' のバージョン番号を表示し、終了する。
.TE
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
lilo(8), lilo.conf(5), mkfs(8), dd(1), mount(8), mkinitrd(8).
.\"O .SH "AUTHOR"
.SH 著者
John Coffman <johninsd@san.rr.com> (1.0)
