.\" Written Sat Mar  8 10:35:08 MEZ 1997 by
.\" J. "MUFTI" Scheurich (mufti@csv.ica.uni-stuttgart.de)
.\" This page is licensed under the GNU General Public License
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998-2000 ISHIOKA Takashi and NAKANO Takeo
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon May  25 10:45:50 1998
.\"         by ISHIOKA Takashi
.\" Updated Wed Sep 20 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	(floating-point) exception	(浮動小数点) 例外
.\"WORD:	rounding			丸め
.\"
.TH __SETFPUCW 3 1997-03-08 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O __setfpucw \- set FPU control word on i386 architecture (obsolete)
__setfpucw \- i386 アーキテクチャにおける FPU
のコントロールワードの設定 (obsolete)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <i386/fpu_control.h>
.sp
.BI "void __setfpucw(unsigned short " control_word );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR __setfpucw ()
.\"O transfers
.\"O .I control_word
.\"O to the registers of the FPU (floating-point unit) on the i386 architecture.
.\"O This was used to control floating-point precision,
.\"O rounding and floating-point exceptions.
.BR __setfpucw ()
は、i386アーキテクチャにおいて
.I control_word
を FPU (floating-point unit) のレジスタに転送する。
これは浮動小数点演算の精度、丸め方、
および浮動小数点例外を制御するのに使われる。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
.\"O This function was a nonstandard GNU extension.
この関数は非標準で GNU 拡張である。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O As of glibc 2.1 this function does not exist anymore.
.\"O There are new functions from C99, with prototypes in
.\"O .IR <fenv.h> ,
.\"O to control FPU rounding modes, like
.\"O .IR fegetround ,
.\"O .IR fesetround ,
.\"O and the floating-point environment, like
.\"O .IR fegetenv ,
.\"O .IR feholdexcept ,
.\"O .IR fesetenv ,
.\"O .I feupdateenv
.\"O and FPU exception handling, like
.\"O .IR feclearexcept ,
.\"O .IR fegetexceptflag ,
.\"O .IR feraiseexcept ,
.\"O .IR fesetexceptflag ,
.\"O .IR fetestexcept .
glibc 2.1 以降では、この関数は存在しない。
新たな関数群が C99 から導入された。これらのプロトタイプは
.I <fenv.h>
に置かれている。 FPU の丸めモードの制御には
.IR fegetround ,
.I fesetround
などが、浮動小数点関連の環境には
.IR fegetenv ,
.IR feholdexcept ,
.IR fesetenv ,
.I feupdateenv
などが、 FPU 例外処理には
.IR feclearexcept ,
.IR fegetexceptflag ,
.IR feraiseexcept ,
.IR fesetexceptflag ,
.I fetestexcept
などが導入された。
.PP
.\"O If direct access to the FPU control word is still needed, the
.\"O .B _FPU_GETCW
.\"O and
.\"O .B _FPU_SETCW
.\"O macros from
.\"O .I <fpu_control.h>
.\"O can be used.
FPU のコントロールワードへどうしても直接アクセスする必要がある場合には、
.I <fpu_control.h>
の
.B _FPU_GETCW
マクロと
.B _FPU_SETCW
マクロを用いることは可能である。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.B __setfpucw(0x1372)

.\"O Set FPU control word on the i386 architecture to
.\"O .br
.\"O      \- extended precision
.\"O .br
.\"O      \- rounding to nearest
.\"O .br
.\"O      \- exceptions on overflow, zero divide and NaN
は、i386アーキテクチャにおける FPU のコントロールワードを、
.br
     \- 拡張精度
.br
     \- 最も近い整数へ丸める、中間の場合は偶数を選択する。
.br
     \- 桁溢れ、0で除算、及び無効値(NaN)ときに例外を発生
.br
に設定する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR feclearexcept (3)
.br
.I <fpu_control.h>
