.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jul 01 02:44:30 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AIO_CANCEL 3 2003-11-14  "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O aio_cancel \- cancel an outstanding asynchronous I/O request
aio_cancel \- 完了していない非同期 I/O リクエストをキャンセルする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "#include <aio.h>"
.sp
.BI "int aio_cancel(int " fd ", struct aiocb *" aiocbp );
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lrt\fP.
\fI\-lrt\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR aio_cancel ()
.\"O function attempts to cancel outstanding asynchronous I/O requests
.\"O for the file descriptor
.\"O .IR fd .
.BR aio_cancel ()
関数は、ファイルディスクリプタ
.I fd
についての完了していない非同期 I/O リクエストをキャンセルしようとする。
.\"O If
.\"O .I aiocbp
.\"O is NULL, all such requests are canceled.
.\"O Otherwise, only the request
.\"O described by the control block pointed to by
.\"O .I aiocbp
.\"O is canceled.
.I aiocbp
が NULL の場合、そのような全てのリクエストがキャンセルされる。
.I aiocbp
が NULL でない場合、
.I aiocbp
で指された制御ブロックで記述されたリクエストのみがキャンセルされる。
.LP
.\"O Normal asynchronous notification occurs for canceled requests.
キャンセルされたリクエストに対して、通常の非同期通知が起こる。
.\"O The request return status is set to \-1, and the request error status
.\"O is set to
.\"O .BR ECANCELED .
リクエストの返り値は \-1 に設定され、
リクエストのエラー状態は
.B ECANCELED
に設定される。
.\"O The control block of requests that cannot be canceled is not changed.
キャンセルできなかったリクエストの制御ブロックは変更されない。
.LP
.\"O If
.\"O .I aiocbp
.\"O is not NULL, and
.\"O .I fd
.\"O differs from the file descriptor with which the asynchronous operation
.\"O was initiated, unspecified results occur.
.I aiocbp
が NULL でなく、かつ
.I fd
が非同期操作が開始されたファイルディスクリプタと異なる場合、
生じる結果は不定である。
.LP
.\"O Which operations are cancellable is implementation-defined.
どの操作をキャンセルできるかは、実装定義である。
.\"O .\" FreeBSD: not those on raw disk devices.
.\" FreeBSD: raw ディスクデバイスへのリクエストはキャンセルできない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O This function returns
.\"O .B AIO_CANCELED
.\"O if all requests were successfully
.\"O canceled.
.\"O It returns
.\"O .B AIO_NOTCANCELED
.\"O when at least one of the
.\"O requests specified was not canceled because it was in progress.
全てのリクエストのキャンセルが成功した場合、この関数は
.B AIO_CANCELED
を返す。
指定されたリクエストのうち少なくとも 1 つが進行中であるために
キャンセルできなかった場合は、
.B AIO_NOTCANCELED
が返される。
.\"O In this case one may check the status of individual requests using
.\"O .BR aio_error (3).
この場合は、
.BR aio_error (3)
を使って個々のリクエストの状態をチェックすることができる。
.\"O This function returns
.\"O .B AIO_ALLDONE
.\"O when all requests had
.\"O been completed already before this call.
呼び出される前に全てのリクエストが完了していた場合、
この関数は
.B AIO_ALLDONE
を返す。
.\"O When some error occurs, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
何らかのエラーが起こった場合は、\-1 が返されて、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
.\"O .I fd
.\"O is not a valid file descriptor.
.I fd
が有効なファイルディスクリプタでない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR aio_error (3),
.BR aio_fsync (3),
.BR aio_read (3),
.BR aio_return (3),
.BR aio_suspend (3),
.BR aio_write (3)
