.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Jul  9 05:07:19 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AIO_RETURN 3 2003-11-14  "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O aio_return \- get return status of asynchronous I/O operation
aio_return \- 非同期 I/O 操作の返り値 (return status) を取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "#include <aio.h>"
.sp
.BI "ssize_t aio_return(struct aiocb *" aiocbp );
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lrt\fP.
\fI\-lrt\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR aio_return ()
.\"O function returns the final return status for the asynchronous I/O request
.\"O with control block pointed to by
.\"O .IR aiocbp .
.BR aio_return ()
関数は
.I aiocbp
で指された制御ブロックにおける非同期 I/O リクエストの最終的な返り値を返す。
.LP
.\"O This function should be called only once for any given request, after
.\"O .BR aio_error (3)
.\"O returns something other than
.\"O .B EINPROGRESS.
この関数は、
.BR aio_error (3)
が
.B EINPROGRESS
以外を返した後で、
与えられたリクエストに対して 1 回だけ呼ばれるべきである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O If the asynchronous I/O operation has completed, this function returns
.\"O the value that would have been returned in case of a synchronous
.\"O .IR read ,
.\"O .IR write ,
.\"O or
.\"O .I fsync
.\"O request.
非同期 I/O 操作が完了した場合、この関数は同期
.IR read ,
.IR write ,
.I fsync
リクエストのときに返されるのと同じ値を返す。
.\"O Otherwise the return value is undefined.
それ以外の場合、返り値は未定義である。
.\"O On error, the error value is returned.
エラーの場合、エラー値が返される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I aiocbp
.\"O does not point at a control block for an asynchronous I/O request
.\"O of which the return status has not been retrieved yet.
.I aiocbp
が、返り値がまだ取得されていない非同期 I/O リクエストの
制御ブロックを指していない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR aio_cancel (3),
.BR aio_error (3),
.BR aio_fsync (3),
.BR aio_read (3),
.BR aio_suspend (3),
.BR aio_write (3)
