.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Jul 10 03:18:23 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH AIO_SUSPEND 3 2003-11-14  "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O aio_suspend \- wait for asynchronous I/O operation or timeout
aio_suspend \- 非同期 I/O 操作またはタイムアウトを待つ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.sp
.B "#include <aio.h>"
.sp
.BI "int aio_suspend(const struct aiocb * const " cblist [],
.br
.BI "                int " n ", const struct timespec *" timeout );
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lrt\fP.
\fI\-lrt\fP でリンクする。
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR aio_suspend ()
.\"O function suspends the calling process until at least one of the
.\"O asynchronous I/O requests in the list
.\"O .I cblist
.\"O of length
.\"O .I n
.\"O have completed, a signal is delivered, or
.\"O .I timeout
.\"O is not NULL and the time interval it indicates has passed.
.BR aio_suspend ()
関数は、長さ
.I n
のリスト
.I cblist
に含まれる非同期 I/O リクエストのうち少なくとも 1 つが完了するか、
シグナルが配送されるか、
.I timeout
が NULL でなく、かつその時間が過ぎるまで、
呼び出したプロセスを停止 (suspend) する。
.LP
.\"O Each item in the list must either be NULL (and then is ignored),
.\"O or a pointer to a control block on which I/O was initiated using
.\"O .BR aio_read (3),
.\"O .BR aio_write (3),
.\"O or
.\"O .BR lio_listio (3).
リストの各アイテムは、NULL (これは無視される) か、
.BR aio_read (3),
.BR aio_write (3),
.BR lio_listio (3)
を使って I/O が開始された制御ブロックへのポインタでなければならない。
.LP
.\"O If
.\"O .B CLOCK_MONOTONIC
.\"O is supported, this clock is used to measure
.\"O the timeout interval.
.B CLOCK_MONOTONIC
がサポートされる場合、
このクロックを使ってタイムアウトの間隔が計測される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O If this function returns after completion of one of the indicated
.\"O requests, it returns 0.
.\"O Otherwise it returns \-1 and sets
.\"O .I errno
.\"O appropriately.
指示されたリクエストの 1 つが完了した後にこの関数が返る場合は、0 を返す。
それ以外の場合は \-1 を返して、
.I errno
を適切に設定する。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EAGAIN
.\"O The call was ended by timeout, before any of the indicated operations
.\"O had completed.
指示された操作のどれも完了しないうちに、
この呼び出しがタイムアウトによって終了させられた。
.TP
.B EINTR
.\"O The call was ended by signal; see
.\"O .BR signal (7).
.\"O (Possibly the completion signal of one of the operations we were
.\"O waiting for.)
この呼び出しがシグナルによって終了させられた。
.BR signal (7)
参照。
(このシグナルは、完了を待っていた操作のいずれかの完了シグナルの可能性もある。)
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O One can achieve polling by using a non-NULL
.\"O .I timeout
.\"O that specifies a zero time interval.
時間間隔が 0 であることを指定する NULL ではない
.I timeout
を使って、ポーリングを行うこともできる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR aio_cancel (3),
.BR aio_error (3),
.BR aio_fsync (3),
.BR aio_read (3),
.BR aio_return (3),
.BR aio_write (3),
.BR time (7)
