.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat, 13 Jul 1996 17:58:16 JST
.\"         by Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\" Proof Reading: Takashi Yoshino
.\" Updated Tue Aug  5 23:16:48 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-14, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ASINH 3  2010-09-20 "GNU"  "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O asinh, asinhf, asinhl \- inverse hyperbolic sine function
asinh, asinhf, asinhl \- 逆双曲線正弦（inverse hyperbolic sine）関数
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double asinh(double " x );
.br
.BI "float asinhf(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double asinhl(long double " x );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR asinh ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.br
.BR asinhf (),
.BR asinhl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR asinh ()
.\"O function calculates the inverse hyperbolic sine of
.\"O \fIx\fP; that is the value whose hyperbolic sine is \fIx\fP.
.BR asinh ()
関数は \fIx\fP 逆双曲線正弦（inverse hyperbolic sine）を
計算する。すなわち、その双曲線正弦（hyperbolic sine）が \fIx\fP に
なるような値である。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, these functions return the inverse hyperbolic sine of
.\"O .IR x .
成功すると、これらの関数は
.I x
の逆双曲線正弦を返す。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is a NaN, a NaN is returned.
.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is +0 (\-0), +0 (\-0) is returned.
.I x
が +0 (\-0) の場合、+0 (\-0) が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is positive infinity (negative infinity),
.\"O positive infinity (negative infinity) is returned.
.I x
が正の無限大 (負の無限大) の場合、正の無限大 (負の無限大) が返される。
.\"
.\" POSIX.1-2001 documents an optional range error for subnormal x;
.\" glibc 2.8 does not do this.
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O No errors occur.
エラーは発生しない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O The variant returning
.\"O .I double
.\"O also conforms to
.\"O SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89 にも準拠している。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR acosh (3),
.BR atanh (3),
.BR casinh (3),
.BR cosh (3),
.BR sinh (3),
.BR tanh (3)
