.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:42:42 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 23:44:11 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Thu Jun  2 23:44:11 2016 by Nikos Mavrogiannopoulos <nmav@redhat.com>
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Kentaro OGAWA
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun, 14 Jul 1996 01:33:26 +0900
.\"         by Kentaro OGAWA <k_ogawa@oyna.cc.muroran-it.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri  6 Oct JST 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Thu 19 Sep JST 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH ASSERT 3 2017\-09\-15 GNU "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
assert \- 診断が偽の時にプログラムを中止する
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <assert.h>\fP
.PP
\fBvoid assert(scalar \fP\fIexpression\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.SH 説明
This macro can help programmers find bugs in their programs, or handle
exceptional cases via a crash that will produce limited debugging output.
.PP
If \fIexpression\fP is false (i.e., compares equal to zero), \fBassert\fP()
prints an error message to standard error and terminates the program by
calling \fBabort\fP(3).  The error message includes the name of the file and
function containing the \fBassert\fP()  call, the source code line number of
the call, and the text of the argument; something like:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
prog: some_file.c:16: some_func: Assertion \`val == 0\(aq failed.
.EE
.in
.PP
If the macro \fBNDEBUG\fP is defined at the moment \fI<assert.h>\fP was
last included, the macro \fBassert\fP()  generates no code, and hence does
nothing at all.  It is not recommended to define \fBNDEBUG\fP if using
\fBassert\fP()  to detect error conditions since the software may behave
non\-deterministically.
.SH 返り値
値は返されない。
.SH 属性
この節で使用されている用語の説明については、 \fBattributes\fP(7) を参照。
.TS
allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
インターフェース	属性	値
T{
\fBassert\fP()
T}	Thread safety	MT\-Safe
.TE
.sp 1
.SH 準拠
.\" See Defect Report 107 for more details.
POSIX.1\-2001, POSIX.1\-2008, C89, C99.  In C89, \fIexpression\fP is required to
be of type \fIint\fP and undefined behavior results if it is not, but in C99 it
may have any scalar type.
.SH バグ
\fBassert\fP()  は、マクロとして実装されている。すなわち、 試されている式が副作用を持っている場合には、 マクロ \fBNDEBUG\fP
が定義されているかどうかに依存して、プログラムの振舞いは異なるだろう。 これによって、バグ出しするときには消えてしまう
ハイゼンバグ(Heisenbugs)を生み出すだろう。
.SH 関連項目
\fBabort\fP(3), \fBassert_perror\fP(3), \fBexit\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 5.10 の一部である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
\%https://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
