.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:36:50 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 23:47:36 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.TH BCMP 3 2008\-08\-06 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
bcmp \- バイト列を比較する
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <strings.h>\fP
.sp
\fBint bcmp(const void *\fP\fIs1\fP\fB, const void *\fP\fIs2\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fIn\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.SH 説明
\fBbcmp\fP()  は、2 つのバイト列 \fIs1\fP と \fIs2\fP の先頭 \fIn\fP バイトを 比較する。2 つが等しいか、特に \fIn\fP が 0
の場合 \fBbcmp\fP()  は 0 を返す。 さもなければ 0 以外を返す。
.SH 返り値
バイト列が等しい場合は 0 、等しくない場合は 0 以外を返す。
.SH 準拠
4.3BSD.  この関数は廃止予定である (POSIX.1\-2001 では 過去の名残 (LEGACY) とされている)。新しいプログラムでは
\fBmemcmp\fP(3)  を使うべきである。 POSIX.1\-2008 では \fBbcmp\fP()  の仕様が削除されている。
.SH 関連項目
\fBmemcmp\fP(3), \fBstrcasecmp\fP(3), \fBstrcmp\fP(3), \fBstrcoll\fP(3),
\fBstrncasecmp\fP(3), \fBstrncmp\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.53 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
