.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HAYAKAWA Hitoshi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sep 11, 1999   HAYAKAWA Hitoshi <cz8cb01@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:    locale  ロケール
.\"WORD:    convert コンバート
.\"WORD:    single byte シングルバイト
.\"WORD:    wide character ワイドキャラクター
.\"WORD:    state 状態
.\"
.TH BTOWC 3 2009-02-04 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O btowc \- convert single byte to wide character
.SH 名前
btowc \- シングルバイトをワイド文字にコンバートする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t btowc(int " c );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR btowc ()
.\"O function converts \fIc\fP, interpreted as a multibyte sequence
.\"O of length 1, starting in the initial shift state, to a wide character and
.\"O returns it.
.\"O If \fIc\fP is
.\"O .B EOF
.\"O or not a valid multibyte sequence of length 1,
.\"O the
.\"O .BR btowc ()
.\"O function returns
.\"O .BR WEOF .
.BR btowc ()
関数は初期シフト状態から始まる長さ 1 のマルチバイトのシーケンスとして
解釈され、\fIc\fP をワイド文字にコンバートして返す。
\fIc\fP が
.B EOF
もしくは長さ 1 の無効なマルチバイトシーケンスの場合、
.BR btowc ()
関数は
.B WEOF
を返す。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR btowc ()
.\"O function returns the wide character
.\"O converted from the single byte \fIc\fP.
.\"O If \fIc\fP is
.\"O .B EOF
.\"O or not a valid multibyte sequence of length 1,
.\"O it returns
.\"O .BR WEOF .
.BR btowc ()
関数はシングルバイト \fIc\fP からコンバートされたワイド文字を返す。
\fIc\fP が
.B EOF
もしくは長さ 1 の無効なマルチバイトシーケンスの場合、
.BR btowc ()
関数は
.B WEOF
を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR btowc ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.\"O .PP
.\"O This function should never be used.
.\"O It does not work for encodings which have
.\"O state, and unnecessarily treats single bytes differently from multibyte
.\"O sequences.
.\"O Use the function
.\"O .BR mbtowc ()
.\"O instead.
.SH 注意
.BR btowc ()
の振る舞いは、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリーに依存する。
.PP
この関数は使用されるべきではない。状態(state)を持ったエンコードには使えず、
マルチバイトシーケンスとは違い、必ずしもシングルバイト
を取り扱えるとは限らない。
.BR mbtowc ()
を代わりとして使用しなさい。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR wctob (3),
.BR mbtowc (3)
