.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:29:05 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Thu Jul 26 14:06:20 2001 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1998-05-18, NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-11-04, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH BYTEORDER 3  2009-01-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O htonl, htons, ntohl, ntohs \- convert values between host and network
.\"O byte order
htonl, htons, ntohl, ntohs \- ホストバイトオーダーとネットワークバイトオーダーの間で値を変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <arpa/inet.h>
.sp
.BI "uint32_t htonl(uint32_t " hostlong );
.sp
.BI "uint16_t htons(uint16_t " hostshort );
.sp
.BI "uint32_t ntohl(uint32_t " netlong );
.sp
.BI "uint16_t ntohs(uint16_t " netshort );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR htonl ()
.\"O function converts the unsigned integer \fIhostlong\fP
.\"O from host byte order to network byte order.
.BR htonl ()
関数は unsigned integer \fIhostlong\fP を
ホストバイトオーダーからネットワークバイトオーダーに変換する。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR htons ()
.\"O function converts the unsigned short integer \fIhostshort\fP
.\"O from host byte order to network byte order.
.BR htons ()
関数は unsigned short integer \fIhostshort\fP を
ホストバイトオーダーからネットワークバイトオーダーに変換する。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR ntohl ()
.\"O function converts the unsigned integer \fInetlong\fP
.\"O from network byte order to host byte order.
.BR ntohl ()
関数は unsigned integer \fInetlong\fP を
ネットワークバイトオーダーからホストバイトオーダーに変換する。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR ntohs ()
.\"O function converts the unsigned short integer \fInetshort\fP
.\"O from network byte order to host byte order.
.BR ntohs ()
関数は unsigned short integer \fInetshort\fP を
ネットワークバイトオーダーからホストバイトオーダーに変換する。
.PP
.\"O On the i386 the host byte order is Least Significant Byte first,
.\"O whereas the network byte order, as used on the Internet, is Most
.\"O Significant Byte first.
i80x86 のホストバイトオーダーでは最下位バイトが若いアドレスに配置されるが、
インターネットで用いられるネットワークバイトオーダーでは最上位バイト
が先に配置される。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.

.\"O Some systems require the inclusion of
.\"O .I <netinet/in.h>
.\"O instead of
.\"O .IR <arpa/inet.h> .
いくつかのシステムでは、
.I <arpa/inet.h>
の代わりに
.I <netinet/in.h>
をインクルードする必要がある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR endian (3),
.BR gethostbyname (3),
.BR getservent (3)
