.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" and Copyright (C) 2011 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gamil.com>
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jul 24 00:26:52 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	hyperbolic	双曲(線の)
.\"WORD:	arc sine	逆正弦
.\"WORD:	arc cosine	逆余弦
.\"WORD:	arc tangent	逆正接
.\"WORD:	real part	実部
.\"WORD:	imaginary part	虚部
.\"
.TH CACOSH 3 2011-09-15 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O cacosh, cacoshf, cacoshl \- complex arc hyperbolic cosine
cacosh, cacoshf, cacoshl \- 複素数の逆双曲線余弦 (arc hyperbolic cosine)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <complex.h>
.sp
.BI "double complex cacosh(double complex " z );
.br
.BI "float complex cacoshf(float complex " z );
.br
.BI "long double complex cacoshl(long double complex " z );
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR cacosh ()
.\"O function calculates the complex arc hyperpolic cosine of
.\"O .IR z .
.\"O If \fIy\ =\ cacosh(z)\fP, then \fIz\ =\ ccosh(y)\fP.
.\"O The imaginary part of
.\"O .I y
.\"O is chosen in the interval [\-pi,pi].
.\"O The real part of
.\"O .I y
.\"O is chosen nonnegative.
.BR cacosh ()
関数は複素数
.I z
の逆双曲線余弦 (arc hyperbolic cosine) を計算する。
\fIy\ =\ cacosh(z)\fP ならば、
\fIz\ =\ ccosh(y)\fP が成立する。
.I y
の虚部の値は区間 [\-pi,pi] から選択され、
.I y
の実部の値は非負の値が選択される。
.LP
.\"O One has:
次の関係が成立する:
.nf

    cacosh(z) = 2 * clog(csqrt((z + 1) / 2) + csqrt((z \- 1) / 2))
.fi
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.nf
/* Link with "\-lm" */

#include <complex.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    double complex z, c, f;

    if (argc != 3) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s <real> <imag>\\n", argv[0]);
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    z = atof(argv[1]) + atof(argv[2]) * I;

    c = cacosh(z);
    printf("cacosh() = %6.3f %6.3f*i\\n", creal(c), cimag(c));

    f = 2 * clog(csqrt((z + 1)/2) + csqrt((z \- 1)/2));
    printf("formula  = %6.3f %6.3f*i\\n", creal(f2), cimag(f2));

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
.fi
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR acosh (3),
.BR cabs (3),
.BR ccosh (3),
.BR cimag (3),
.BR complex (7)
