.\" Copyright 1993 Mitchum DSouza <m.dsouza@mrc-applied-psychology.cambridge.ac.uk>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Thu Dec 13 22:51:19 2001 by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.org>
.\" Modified 2001-12-14 aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Dec 16 19:43:18 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Jan 14 06:48:39 JST 2002
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH CATOPEN 3 2001-12-14 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O catopen, catclose \- open/close a message catalog
catopen, catclose \- メッセージカタログのオープン/クローズ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <nl_types.h>
.sp
.BI "nl_catd catopen(const char *" name ", int " flag );

.BI "int catclose(nl_catd " catalog );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR catopen ()
.\"O opens a message catalog and returns a catalog descriptor.
関数
.BR catopen ()
はメッセージカタログをオープンし、カタログディスクリプタを返す。
.\"O The descriptor remains valid until
.\"O .BR catclose ()
.\"O or
.\"O .BR execve (2).
.\"O If a file descriptor is used to implement catalog descriptors
.\"O then the
.\"O .B FD_CLOEXEC
.\"O flag will be set.
このディスクリプタは
.BR catclose ()
または
.BR execve (2)
が呼び出されるまで有効である。
カタログディスクリプタを実装するために
ファイルディスクリプタを使用すると、
.B FD_CLOEXEC
フラグが設定される。
.LP
.\"O The argument
.\"O .I name
.\"O specifies the name of the message catalog to be opened.
引き数
.I name
はオープンするメッセージカタログの名前を指定する。
.\"O If
.\"O .I name
.\"O specifies and absolute path (i.e., contains a \(aq/\(aq),
.\"O then
.\"O .I name
.\"O specifies a pathname for the message catalog.
.I name
が絶対パスで指定されている場合 (すなわち \(aq/\(aq を含んでいる場合)、
.I name
はメッセージカタログへのパス名である。
.\"O Otherwise, the environment variable
.\"O .B NLSPATH
.\"O is used with
.\"O .I name
.\"O substituted for
.\"O .B %N
.\"O (see
.\"O .BR locale (7)).
それ以外の場合、環境変数
.B NLSPATH
が
.I name
とともに使用され
.B %N
を置き換える
.RB ( locale (7)
参照)。
.\"O It is unspecified whether
.\"O .B NLSPATH
.\"O will be used when the process has root privileges.
プロセスが root 権限を持っているときに
.B NLSPATH
が使われるかどうかは指定されていない。
.\"O If
.\"O .B NLSPATH
.\"O does not exist in the environment,
.\"O or if a message catalog cannot be opened
.\"O in any of the paths specified by it,
.\"O then an implementation defined path is used.
.B NLSPATH
環境変数が存在しないか、
.B NLSPATH
で指定されたパスの中の
どのパスにおいてもメッセージカタログをオープンできない場合、
実装で定義されているパスが使われる。
.\"O This latter default path may depend on the
.\"O .B LC_MESSAGES
.\"O locale setting when the
.\"O .I flag
.\"O argument is
.\"O .B NL_CAT_LOCALE
.\"O and on the
.\"O .B LANG
.\"O environment variable when the
.\"O .I flag
.\"O argument is 0.
後者のデフォルトパスは、
.I flag
引き数が
.B NL_CAT_LOCALE
の場合には
.B LC_MESSAGES
のロケール設定に依存し、
.I flag
引き数が 0 の場合には
.B LANG
環境変数に依存する。
.\"O Changing the
.\"O .B LC_MESSAGES
.\"O part of the locale may invalidate
.\"O open catalog descriptors.
ロケールの
.B LC_MESSAGES
を変更すると、
オープンされているカタログディスクリプタが無効になるかもしれない。
.LP
.\"O The
.\"O .I flag
.\"O argument to
.\"O .BR catopen ()
.\"O is used to indicate the source for the language to use.
.BR catopen ()
の
.I flag
引き数は、使用される言語のソースを示すために使われる。
.\"O If it is set to
.\"O .B NL_CAT_LOCALE
.\"O then it will use the current locale setting for
.\"O .BR LC_MESSAGES .
.B NL_CAT_LOCALE
に設定されると、
.B LC_MESSAGES
の現在のロケール設定が使われる。
.\"O Otherwise it will use the
.\"O .B LANG
.\"O environment variable.
それ以外の場合は
.B LANG
環境変数が使われる。
.LP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR catclose ()
.\"O closes the message catalog identified by
.\"O .IR catalog .
関数
.BR catclose ()
は
.I catalog
で指定されたメッセージカタログをクローズする。
.\"O It invalidates any subsequent references to the message catalog
.\"O defined by
.\"O .IR catalog .
これは、以降の
.I catalog
で指定されるメッセージカタログへの全ての参照を無効にする。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR catopen ()
.\"O returns a message catalog descriptor of type
.\"O .I nl_catd
.\"O on success.
関数
.BR catopen ()
が成功すると、
.I nl_catd
型のメッセージカタログディスクリプタを返す。
.\"O On failure, it returns \fI(nl_catd)\ \-1\fP
.\"O and sets
.\"O .I errno
.\"O to indicate the error.
.\"O The possible error values include all
.\"O possible values for the
.\"O .BR open (2)
.\"O call.
失敗した場合は \fI(nl_catdv) \-1\fP を返し、
.I errno
を設定してエラーを示す。
ここで起こり得るエラーの値には、
.BR open (2)
の呼び出しの際に起こり得る全てのエラーの値が含まれる。
.LP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR catclose ()
.\"O returns 0 on success, or \-1 on failure.
関数
.BR catclose ()
は、成功した場合 0 を、失敗した場合 \-1 を返す。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.TP
.B LC_MESSAGES
.\"O May be the source of the
.\"O .B LC_MESSAGES
.\"O locale setting, and thus
.\"O determine the language to use if
.\"O .I flag
.\"O is set to
.\"O .BR NL_CAT_LOCALE .
.B LC_MESSAGES
ロケール設定のソースになることも可能なので、
.I flag
が
.B NL_CAT_LOCALE
に設定されている場合は、使用する言語を決定するのに使われる。
.TP
.B LANG
.\"O The language to use if
.\"O .I flag
.\"O is 0.
.I flag
が 0 の場合、使用する言語を決定する。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .\" In XPG 1987, Vol. 3 it says:
.\"O .\" .I "The flag argument of catopen is reserved for future use"
.\"O .\" .IR "and should be set to 0" .
.\"O It is unclear what the source was for the constants
.\"O .B MCLoadBySet
.\"O and
.\"O .B MCLoadAll
.\"O (see below).
.\" XPG 1987, Vol. 3 には、「\fIcatopen の flag 引き数は
.\" 将来使用するために予約されているので、
.\" 0 に設定しておくべきである。\fR」と書かれている。
定数
.B MCLoadBySet
と
.B MCLoadAll
に対応するソースが何であるのかがはっきりしていない (下記参照)。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The above is the POSIX.1-2001 description.
.\"O The glibc value for
.\"O .B NL_CAT_LOCALE
.\"O is 1.
.\"O (Compare
.\"O .B MCLoadAll
.\"O below.)
.\"O The default path varies, but usually looks at a number of places below
.\"O .IR /usr/share/locale .
以上は POSIX.1-2001 における説明である。
glibc では
.B NL_CAT_LOCALE
の値は 1 である
(以下の
.B MCLoadAll
と比較のこと)。
デフォルトのパスは場合によって様々であるが、通常は
.I /usr/share/locale
以下のファイルが調べられる。
.\"O .SS Linux Notes
.SS Linux における注意
.\"O These functions are available for Linux since libc 4.4.4c.
これらの関数は libc.so.4.4.4c 以降で使用可能である。
.\"O In the case of linux libc4 and libc5, the catalog descriptor
.\"O .I nl_catd
.\"O is a
.\"O .BR mmap (2)'ed
.\"O area of memory and not a file descriptor.
linux の libc4 と libc5 においては、カタログディスクリプタ
.I nl_catd
は
.BR mmap (2)
されたメモリの領域であってファイルディスクリプタではない。
.\"O The
.\"O .I flag
.\"O argument to
.\"O .BR catopen ()
.\"O should be either
.\"O .B MCLoadBySet
.\"O (=0) or
.\"O .B MCLoadAll
.\"O (=1).
.BR catopen ()
の
.I flag
は、
.B MCLoadBySet
(=0) か
.B MCLoadAll
(=1) のどちらかである。
.\"O The former value indicates that a set from the catalog is to be
.\"O loaded when needed, whereas the latter causes the initial call to
.\"O .BR catopen ()
.\"O to load the entire catalog into memory.
前者の場合、カタログのセットは必要時にロードされる。
後者の場合、最初の
.BR catopen ()
の呼び出しのときに全てのカタログがメモリ内にロードされる。
.\"O The default search path varies, but usually looks at a number of places below
.\"O .I /etc/locale
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /usr/lib/locale .
デフォルトのパスは場合によって様々であるが、通常は
.I /etc/locale
と
.I /usr/share/locale
以下のファイルが調べられる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR catgets (3),
.BR setlocale (3)
