.\" Copyright 1995 Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" changed `square root' into `cube root' - aeb, 950919
.\"
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 Walter Harms
.\" (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 20 17:29:27 JST 1997
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi Yoshino <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Jul 25 22:03:54 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-15, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:	cube root	立方根
.\" WORD:	GNU extension	GNU による拡張
.\"
.TH CBRT 3  2008-08-05 "GNU"  "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O cbrt, cbrtf, cbrtl \- cube root function
.SH 名前
cbrt, cbrtf, cbrtl \- 立方根を計算する関数
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double cbrt(double " x );
.br
.BI "float cbrtf(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double cbrtl(long double " x );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR cbrt ():
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 || _ISOC99_SOURCE; or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.br
.BR cbrtf (),
.BR cbrtl ():
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE; or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR cbrt ()
.\"O function returns the (real) cube root of \fIx\fP.
.\"O This function cannot fail; every representable real value has a
.\"O representable real cube root.
.BR cbrt ()
関数は \fIx\fP の (実数)立方根を返す。
この関数が失敗することはない。なぜなら、
すべての内部表現可能な (representable) 実数は
必ず内部表現可能な立方根を持つためである。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O These functions return the cube root of
.\"O .IR x .
これらの関数は
.I x
の立方根を返す。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is +0, -0, positive infinity, negative infinity, or NaN,
.\"O .I x
.\"O is returned.
.I x
が +0、-0、正の無限大、負の無限大、NaN のいずれかの場合、
.I x
が返される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O No errors occur.
エラーは発生しない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .\" .BR cbrt ()
.\"O .\" was a GNU extension. It is now a C99 requirement.
.\" .BR cbrt ()
.\" は以前は GNU による拡張であった。
.\" 現在は C99 で必須の関数である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR pow (3),
.BR sqrt (3)
