.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2003-07-24, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-02-26, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2007-01-05, Akihiro MOTOKI, catch up to LDP v2.43
.\"
.\"WORD:	logarithm	対数
.\"WORD:	base		底
.\"
.TH CLOG10 3 2008-08-11 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O clog10, clog10f, clog10l \- base-10 logarithm of a complex number
clog10, clog10f, clog10l \- 底が 10 の複素数の対数
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */"
.br
.B #include <complex.h>
.sp
.BI "double complex clog10(double complex " z );
.br
.BI "float complex clog10f(float complex " z );
.br
.BI "long double complex clog10l(long double complex " z );
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The call
.\"O .I clog10(z)
.\"O is equivalent to
.\"O .IR clog(z)/log(10) .
.I clog10(z)
の呼び出しは
.I clog(z)/log(10)
と等価である。
.\"O The other functions perform the same task for
.\"O .I float
.\"O and
.\"O .IR "long double" .
他の関数は同じ機能を持つ
.I float
版と
.I "long double"
版である。

.\"O Note that
.\"O .I z
.\"O close to zero will cause an overflow.
.I z
として 0 に近い値を入れると、オーバーフローを起こすため、
注意が必要である。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O This function is a GNU extension.
.\"O It is reserved for future use in C99.
この関数は GNU による拡張である。
C99 では今後のために予約されている。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR cabs (3),
.BR cexp (3),
.BR clog (3),
.BR clog2 (3),
.BR complex (7)
