.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2003-07-24, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-02-26, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2007-01-05, Akihiro MOTOKI, catch up to LDP v2.43
.\"
.\"WORD:	logarithm	自然対数
.\"WORD:	base		底
.\"
.TH CLOG2 3 2008-08-11 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O clog2, clog2f, clog2l \- base-2 logarithm of a complex number
clog2, clog2f, clog2l \- 底が 2 の複素数の対数
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <complex.h>
.sp
.BI "double complex clog2(double complex " z );
.br
.BI "float complex clog2f(float complex " z );
.br
.BI "long double complex clog2l(long double complex " z );
.\" .sp
.\"O .\" Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
.\" \fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The call
.\"O .I clog2(z)
.\"O is equivalent to
.\"O .IR clog(z)/log(2) .
.I clog2(z)
の呼び出しは
.I clog(z)/log(2)
と等価である。

.\"O The other functions perform the same task for
.\"O .I float
.\"O and
.\"O .IR "long double" .
他の関数は同じ機能を持つ
.I float
版と
.I "long double"
版である。

.\"O Note that
.\"O .I z
.\"O close to zero will cause an overflow.
.I z
として 0 に近い値を入れると、オーバーフローを起こすため、
注意が必要である。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O These function names are reserved for future use in C99.
これらの関数名は C99 で今後使用するために予約されている。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 可用性
.\"O Not yet in glibc, as at version 2.8.
.\"O .\" But reserved in NAMESPACE.
バージョン 2.8 時点では、glibc にはまだ実装されていない。
.\" しかし、名前空間は予約済である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR cabs (3),
.BR cexp (3),
.BR clog (3),
.BR clog10 (3),
.BR complex (7)
