.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jul 24 01:47:42 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	natural logarithm	自然対数
.\"WORD:	logarithm		対数
.\"WORD:	exponential		指数
.\"WORD:	inverse function	逆関数
.\"
.TH CLOG 3 2008-08-11 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O clog, clogf, clogl \- natural logarithm of a complex number
clog, clogf, clogl \- 複素数の自然対数
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <complex.h>
.sp
.BI "double complex clog(double complex " z );
.br
.BI "float complex clogf(float complex " z );
.br
.BI "long double complex clogl(long double complex " z );
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The logarithm
.\"O .BR clog ()
.\"O is the inverse function of the exponential
.\"O .BR cexp (3).
.\"O Thus, if \fIy = clog(z)\fP, then \fIz = cexp(y)\fP.
.\"O The imaginary part of
.\"O .I y
.\"O is chosen in the interval [\-pi,pi].
対数
.BR clog ()
は指数関数
.BR cexp ()
の逆関数である。
したがって、 \fIy = clog(z)\fP ならば、 \fIz = cexp(y)\fP が成立する。
.I y
の虚数部の値は区間 [\-pi,pi] から選択される。
.LP
.\"O One has:
次の関係が成立する:
.nf

    clog(z) = log(cabs(z)) + I * carg(z)
.fi
.LP
.\"O Note that
.\"O .I z
.\"O close to zero will cause an overflow.
.I z
として 0 に近い値を入れると、オーバーフローを起こすため、
注意が必要である。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR cabs (3),
.BR cexp (3),
.BR clog10 (3),
.BR clog2 (3),
.BR complex (7)
