.\" Copyright (C) 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:25:52 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 11 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 20 17:49:23 JST 1997
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi Yoshino <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Feb 15 04:01:41 JST 2005
.\"       by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: directory stream descriptor  ディレクトリストリームディスクリプター
.\"
.TH CLOSEDIR 3  2008-09-23 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O closedir \- close a directory
closedir \- ディレクトリをクローズする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.sp
.B #include <dirent.h>
.sp
.BI "int closedir(DIR *" dirp );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR closedir ()
.\"O function closes the directory stream associated with
.\"O \fIdirp\fP.
.\"O A successful call to
.\"O .BR closedir ()
.\"O also closes the underlying file descriptor associated with
.\"O .IR dirp .
.\"O The directory stream descriptor \fIdirp\fP is not available
.\"O after this call.
.BR closedir ()
関数は \fIdirp\fP  に関連付けられた
ディレクトリストリームをクローズする。
.BR closedir ()
の呼び出しが成功すると、
.I dirp
に関連付けられたファイルディスクリプターもクローズされる。
ディレクトリストリームディスクリプター
(directory stream descriptor) \fIdirp\fP は、
この呼び出しの後では使用することができない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR closedir ()
.\"O function returns 0 on success.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
.BR closedir ()
関数は成功時に 0 を返す。
エラーの場合は、\-1 が返されて、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
.\"O Invalid directory stream descriptor \fIdirp\fP.
ディレクトリストリームディスクリプター \fIdirp\fP が無効である。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SVr4, POSIX.1-2001, 4.3BSD.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR close (2),
.BR opendir (3),
.BR readdir (3),
.BR rewinddir (3),
.BR scandir (3),
.BR seekdir (3),
.BR telldir (3)
