.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 1996-06-08 by aeb
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat, 13 Jul 1996 17:54:30 JST
.\"         by Kenji Kajiwara and Kentaro Ogawa
.\" Updated Tue Aug  5 23:16:48 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Feb 15 04:28:36 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-15, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH COSH 3 2008-08-10 ""  "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O cosh, coshf, coshl \- hyperbolic cosine function
cosh, coshf, coshl \- 双曲線余弦 (ハイパボリックコサイン) 関数
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double cosh(double " x );
.br
.BI "float coshf(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double coshl(long double " x );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR coshf (),
.BR coshl ():
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE; or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR cosh ()
.\"O function returns the hyperbolic cosine of \fIx\fP, which
.\"O is defined mathematically as:
.BR cosh ()
関数は双曲線余弦 (ハイパボリックコサイン) の値を返す。
数学的には以下のように定義される.
.nf

    cosh(x) = (exp(x) + exp(\-x)) / 2
.fi
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, these functions return the hyperbolic cosine of
.\"O .IR x .
成功すると、これらの関数は
.I x
の双曲線余弦を返す。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is a NaN, a NaN is returned.
.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is +0 or \-0, 1 is returned.
.I x
が +0 か \-0 の場合、 1 が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is positive infinity or negative infinity,
.\"O positive infinity is returned.
.I x
が正の無限大か負の無限大の場合、正の無限大が返される。

.\"O If the result overflows,
.\"O a range error occurs,
.\"O and the functions return
.\"O .RB + HUGE_VAL ,
.\"O .RB + HUGE_VALF ,
.\"O or
.\"O .RB + HUGE_VALL ,
.\"O respectively.
結果がオーバーフローする場合、範囲エラーが発生し、
各関数はそれぞれ
.RB + HUGE_VAL ,
.RB + HUGE_VALF ,
.RB + HUGE_VALL
を返す。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O See
.\"O .BR math_error (7)
.\"O for information on how to determine whether an error has occurred
.\"O when calling these functions.
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は
.BR math_error (7)
を参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O The following errors can occur:
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP
.\"O Range error: result overflow
範囲エラー (range error): 結果がオーバーフローした
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to
.\"O .BR ERANGE .
.\"O An overflow floating-point exception
.\"O .RB ( FE_OVERFLOW )
.\"O is raised.
.I errno
に
.B ERANGE
が設定される。
オーバーフロー浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_OVERFLOW )
が上がる。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O The variant returning
.\"O .I double
.\"O also conforms to
.\"O SVr4, 4.3BSD.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD にも準拠している。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O In glibc version 2.3.4 and earlier,
.\"O an overflow floating-point
.\"O .RB ( FE_OVERFLOW  )
.\"O exception is not raised when an overflow occurs.
glibc バージョン 2.3.4 以前では、オーバーフローが発生したときに、
オーバーフロー浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_OVERFLOW )
が上がらなかった。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR acosh (3),
.BR asinh (3),
.BR atanh (3),
.BR ccos (3),
.BR sinh (3),
.BR tanh (3)
