.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2003-07-24, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-02-21, Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"
.\"WORD:	Riemann Sphere	リーマン球面
.\"WORD:	project		射影
.\"WORD:	complex plane	複素平面
.\"WORD:	compactification	コンパクト(完全連続)になる(の名詞形)
.\"
.TH CPROJ 3 2010-06-10 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O cproj, cprojf, cprojl \- project into Riemann Sphere
cproj, cprojf, cprojl \- リーマン球面への射影
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <complex.h>
.sp
.BI "double complex cproj(double complex " z ");"
.br
.BI "float complex cprojf(float complex " z ");"
.br
.BI "long double complex cprojl(long double complex " z ");"
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This function projects a point in the plane onto the surface of a
.\"O Riemann Sphere, the one-point compactification of the complex plane.
.\"O Each finite point
.\"O .I z
.\"O projects to
.\"O .I z
.\"O itself.
.\"O Every complex infinite value is projected to a single infinite value,
.\"O namely to positive infinity on the real axis.
この関数は、平面上の点をリーマン球の表面に射影する、つまり
複素平面の一つの軸へのコンパクト化 (one-point compactification) を行う。
有限な点
.I z
はいずれも
.I z
自身へ射影される。
無限の値を持つ全ての複素数は、一つの無限値に射影される。
もっと詳しく言うと、実数軸の正の無限大に射影される。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O In glibc 2.11 and earlier, the implementation does something different
.\"O (a \fIstereographic\fP projection onto a Riemann Sphere).
.\" http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=10401
バージョン 2.11 以前の glibc の実装は違った動作
(リーマン球面への「立体」写像) を行う。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR cabs (3),
.BR complex (7)
