.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jul 24 00:47:23 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	square root	平方根
.\"WORD:	branch cut	分枝切断
.\"
.TH CSQRT 3 2008-08-11 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O csqrt, csqrtf, csqrtl \- complex square root
csqrt, csqrtf, csqrtl \- 複素数の平方根
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <complex.h>
.sp
.BI "double complex csqrt(double complex " z ");"
.br
.BI "float complex csqrtf(float complex " z ");"
.br
.BI "long double complex csqrtl(long double complex " z ");"
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Calculate the square root of a given complex number,
.\"O with nonnegative real part, and
.\"O with a branch cut along the negative real axis.
.\"O (That means that \fIcsqrt(\-1+eps*I)\fP will be close to I while
.\"O \fIcsqrt(\-1\-eps*I)\fP will be close to \-I, \fIif eps\fP is a small positive
.\"O real number.)
与えられた複素数の平方根を計算する。
但し、平方根のうち実数部が非負の値を返す。
実軸の負の部分に沿って分枝切断 (branch cut) がある。
(つまり、 \fIeps\fP を小さな正の実数とした場合、
\fIcsqrt(\-1+eps*I)\fP が I に近付いていき、
一方 \fIcsqrt(\-1\-eps*I)\fP は \-I に近付いていく、
ということである。)
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR cabs (3),
.BR cexp (3),
.BR complex (7)
