.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:51:06 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Hiroaki Nagoya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Feb 10 1997 by Hiroaki Nagoya <nagoya@is.titech.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH CTERMID 3  2007-07-26 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ctermid \- get controlling terminal name
ctermid \- 制御端末名の取得
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.\" POSIX also requires this function to be declared in <unistd.h>,
.\" and glibc does so if suitable feature test macros are defined.
.sp
.BI "char *ctermid(char *" "s" );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR ctermid ():
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 1 || _XOPEN_SOURCE || _POSIX_SOURCE
.\" From <unistd.h>: _XOPEN_SOURCE
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR ctermid ()
.\"O returns a string which is the pathname for the current
.\"O controlling terminal for this process.
.\"O If
.\"O .I s
.\"O is NULL,
.\"O a static buffer is used, otherwise
.\"O .I s
.\"O points to a buffer used to hold the terminal pathname.
.\"O The symbolic constant
.\"O .B L_ctermid
.\"O is the maximum number of characters in the returned pathname.
.BR ctermid ()
はプロセスの現在の制御端末のパス名を返す。
.I s
が NULL の場合、静的なバッファを用いる。それ以外の場合、
.I s
は端末パス名を保持するのに使用されるバッファへのポインタとなる。
シンボル定数
.B L_ctermid
は返されるパス名の最大文字数である。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The pointer to the pathname.
パス名へのポインタ。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SVr4, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The path returned may not uniquely identify the controlling
.\"O terminal; it may, for example, be
.\"O .IR /dev/tty .
返されたパスはたぶん制御端末を一意には特定できない。
たとえば
.I /dev/tty
のように。
.PP
.\"O It is not assured that the program can open the terminal.
プログラムが端末をオープンできることは保証されていない。
.\" in glibc 2.3.x, x >= 4, the glibc headers threw an error
.\" if ctermid() was given an argument; fixed in 2.4.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ttyname (3)
