.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:40:39 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Fri Jun 25 12:10:47 1999 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Hiroaki Nagoya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Feb 10 1997 by Hiroaki Nagoya <nagoya@is.titech.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 2000-01-08 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2009-04-22 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH ECVT 3 2010-09-20 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ecvt, fcvt \- convert a floating-point number to a string
ecvt, fcvt \- 浮動小数点数の文字列への変換
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "char *ecvt(double " number ", int " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "int *" sign );
.sp
.BI "char *fcvt(double " number ", int " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "int *" sign );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR ecvt (),
.BR fcvt ():
.ad l
.RS 4
.PD 0
.TP 4
.\"O Since glibc 2.12:
glibc 2.12 以降:
.nf
_SVID_SOURCE ||
    (_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
        _XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED) &&
    !(_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600)
.fi
.TP 4
.\"O Before glibc 2.12:
glibc 2.12 より前:
_SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500 ||
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED
.PD
.RE
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR ecvt ()
.\"O function converts \fInumber\fP to a null-terminated
.\"O string of \fIndigits\fP digits (where \fIndigits\fP is reduced to a
.\"O system-specific limit determined by the precision of a
.\"O .IR double ),
.\"O and returns a pointer to the string.
.\"O The high-order digit is nonzero, unless
.\"O .I number
.\"O is zero.
.\"O The low order digit is rounded.
関数
.BR ecvt ()
は \fInumber\fP を NUL 文字で終端された
\fIndigits\fP 文字の文字列へ変換し、その文字列へのポインタを返す
(\fIndigits\fP が
.I double
の精度によって決定されるシステム依存の上限値より大きい場合は、
その条件値が \fIndigits\fP の値となる)。
.I number
が 0 でなければ、最上位の桁は 0 以外である。
最下位の桁は丸められる。
.\"O The string itself does not contain a decimal point; however,
.\"O the position of the decimal point relative to the start of the string
.\"O is stored in \fI*decpt\fP.
.\"O A negative value for \fI*decpt\fP means that
.\"O the decimal point is to the left of the start of the string.
.\"O If the sign of
.\"O \fInumber\fP is negative, \fI*sign\fP is set to a nonzero value,
.\"O otherwise it's set to 0.
.\"O If
.\"O .I number
.\"O is zero, it is unspecified whether \fI*decpt\fP is 0 or 1.
文字列には小数点は含まれない。そのかわりに、文字列の先頭からの小数点の
位置が \fI*decpt\fP に保持される。
\fI*decpt\fP が負の値の場合、小数点が文字列の先頭の左側にあることを意味する。
もし(\fInumber\fPの)符号が負ならば \fI*sign\fP は 0 以外の値に、
そうでなければ 0 に設定される。
.I number
が 0 なら、\fI*decpt\fP が 0 か 1 かは未規定である。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR fcvt ()
.\"O function is identical to
.\"O .BR ecvt (),
.\"O except that
.\"O \fIndigits\fP specifies the number of digits after the decimal point.
関数
.BR fcvt ()
は
.BR ecvt ()
と同じ機能を持つが、\fIndigits\fP は小数点以下の文字数を指定する。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O Both the
.\"O .BR ecvt ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR fcvt ()
.\"O functions return a pointer to a
.\"O static string containing the ASCII representation of \fInumber\fP.
関数
.BR ecvt ()
と
.BR fcvt ()
は \fInumber\fP の ASCII 表現を含む
静的な領域内の文字列へのポインタを返す。
.\"O The static string is overwritten by each call to
.\"O .BR ecvt ()
.\"O or
.\"O .BR fcvt ().
この文字列は
.BR ecvt ()
や
.BR fcvt ()
の呼び出しのたびに上書きされる。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O SVr2;
.\"O marked as LEGACY in POSIX.1-2001.
SVr2。
POSIX.1-2001 では「過去の名残 (LEGACY)」と位置付けられている。
.\"O POSIX.1-2008 removes the specifications of
.\"O .BR ecvt ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR fcvt (),
.\"O recommending the use of
.\"O .BR sprintf (3)
.\"O instead (though
.\"O .BR snprintf (3)
.\"O may be preferable).
POSIX.1-2008 では
.BR ecvt ()
と
.BR fcvt ()
の仕様が削除され、代わりに
.BR sprintf (3)
の使用が推奨されている(しかし
.BR snprintf (3)
がより適切かもしれない)。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Linux libc4 and libc5 specified the type of
.\"O .I ndigits
.\"O as
.\"O .IR size_t .
Linux libc4 と libc5 では
.I ndigits
の型は
.I size_t
となっていた。
.\"O Not all locales use a point as the radix character ("decimal point").
小数点にピリオドを使わないロケールもある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ecvt_r (3),
.BR gcvt (3),
.BR qecvt (3),
.BR setlocale (3),
.BR sprintf (3)
