.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" This replaces an earlier man page written by Walter Harms
.\" <walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de>.
.\"
.\" Corrected return types; from Fabian; 2004-10-05
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Sep 22 09:46:55 2002
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	obsolete	廃止された
.\"
.TH ECVT_R 3  2007-07-26 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ecvt_r, fcvt_r, qecvt_r, qfcvt_r \- convert a floating-point number to a string
ecvt_r, fcvt_r, qecvt_r, qfcvt_r \- 浮動小数点数の文字列への変換
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "int ecvt_r(double " number ", int " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "           int *" sign ", char *" buf ", size_t " len );
.sp
.BI "int fcvt_r(double " number ", int " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "           int *" sign ", char *" buf ", size_t " len );
.sp
.BI "int qecvt_r(long double " number ", int " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "           int *" sign ", char *" buf ", size_t " len );
.sp
.BI "int qfcvt_r(long double " number ", int " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "           int *" sign ", char *" buf ", size_t " len );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR ecvt_r (),
.BR fcvt_r (),
.BR qecvt_r (),
.BR qfcvt_r ():
_SVID_SOURCE || _BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The functions
.\"O .BR ecvt_r (),
.\"O .BR fcvt_r (),
.\"O .BR qecvt_r ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR qfcvt_r ()
.\"O are identical to
.\"O .BR ecvt (3),
.\"O .BR fcvt (3),
.\"O .BR qecvt (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR qfcvt (3),
.\"O respectively, except that they do not return their result in a static
.\"O buffer, but instead use the supplied
.\"O .I buf
.\"O of size
.\"O .IR len .
.\"O See
.\"O .BR ecvt (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR qecvt (3).
関数
.BR ecvt_r (),
.BR fcvt_r (),
.BR qecvt_r (),
.BR qfcvt_r ()
は、それぞれ
.BR ecvt (3),
.BR fcvt (3),
.BR qecvt (3),
.BR qfcvt (3)
と同じであるが、
静的バッファの代わりに、長さ
.I len
の指定された
.I buf
に結果を格納する点が異なる。
.BR ecvt (3),
.BR qecvt (3)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O These functions return 0 on success, and \-1 otherwise.
これらの関数は成功すると 0 を、それ以外は \-1 を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.\"O These functions are GNU extensions.
.SH 準拠
これらの関数は GNU による拡張である。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O These functions are obsolete.
.\"O Instead,
.\"O .BR sprintf (3)
.\"O is recommended.
これらの関数は廃止された。代わりに
.BR sprintf (3)
の使用を推奨する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ecvt (3),
.BR qecvt (3),
.BR sprintf (3)
