.\" Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2008  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2008-09-15, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" 
.\"WORD:	subnormal	非正規化の
.\" 
.TH ERFC 3  2010-09-20 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O erfc, erfcf, erfcl \- complementary error function
erfc, erfcf, erfcl \- 相補誤差関数
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>

.BI "double erfc(double " x );
.BI "float erfcf(float " x );
.BI "long double erfcl(long double " x );

.fi
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR erfc ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.br
.BR erfcf (),
.BR erfcl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR erfc ()
.\"O function returns the complementary error function of
.\"O .IR x ,
.\"O that is, 1.0 \- erf(x).
.BR erfc ()
関数は
.I x
の相補誤差関数、つまり 1.0 \- erf(x) を返す。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, these functions return the complementary error function of
.\"O .IR x ,
.\"O a value in the range [0,2].
成功すると、これらの関数は
.I x
の相補誤差関数を返す。
返り値は [0,2] の範囲となる。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is a NaN, a NaN is returned.
.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is +0 or \-0, 1 is returned.
.I x
が +0 か \-0 の場合、1 が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is positive infinity,
.\"O +0 is returned.
.I x
が正の無限大の場合、+0 が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is negative infinity,
.\"O +2 is returned.
.I x
が負の無限大の場合、+2 が返される。

.\"O If the function result underflows and produces an unrepresentable value,
.\"O the return value is 0.0.
関数の結果がアンダーフローし、表現できない値となる場合は、
返り値は 0.0 となる。

.\"O If the function result underflows but produces a representable
.\"O (i.e., subnormal) value,
.\"O .\" e.g., erfc(27) on x86-32
.\"O that value is returned, and
.\"O a range error occurs.
関数の結果がアンダーフローするが、
表現できる値 (つまり非正規化数 (subnormal)) となる場合は、
.\" 例えば x86-32 での erfc(27)
その値が返され、範囲エラー (range error) が発生する。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O See
.\"O .BR math_error (7)
.\"O for information on how to determine whether an error has occurred
.\"O when calling these functions.
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は
.BR math_error (7)
を参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O The following errors can occur:
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP
.\"O Range error: result underflow (result is subnormal)
範囲エラー: 結果のアンダーフロー (結果が非正規化数)
.\" .I errno
.\" is set to
.\" .BR ERANGE .
.\"O An underflow floating-point exception
.\"O .RB ( FE_UNDERFLOW )
.\"O is raised.
アンダーフロー浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_UNDERFLOW )
が上がる。
.PP
.\"O These functions do not set
.\"O .IR errno .
これらの関数は
.I errno
を設定しない。
.\" FIXME . Is it intentional that these functions do not set errno?
.\" Bug raised: http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6785
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O The variant returning
.\"O .I double
.\"O also conforms to
.\"O SVr4, 4.3BSD.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD にも準拠している。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The
.\"O .BR erfc ()
.\"O functions are provided to avoid the loss accuracy that
.\"O would occur for the calculation 1-erf(x) for large values of
.\"O .IR x
.\"O (for which the value of erf(x) approaches 1).
.BR erfc ()
関数が提供されているのは、
.I x
が大きな値の場合に (erf(x) の値は 1 に近付いていくことで)
1-erf(x) の計算において精度が失われるのを避けるためである。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR cerf (3),
.BR erf (3),
.BR exp (3)
