.\" Copyright (c) 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	From: @(#)err.3	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/9/93
.\" $FreeBSD: src/lib/libc/gen/err.3,v 1.11.2.5 2001/08/17 15:42:32 ru Exp $
.\"
.\" 2011-09-10, mtk, Converted from mdoc to man macros
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2003-03-10, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ERR 3 2011-09-15 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O err, verr, errx, verrx, warn, vwarn, warnx, vwarnx \- formatted error messages
.SH 名前
err, verr, errx, verrx, warn, vwarn, warnx, vwarnx \- エラーメッセージを整形する
.Nd 
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <err.h>
.sp
.BI "void err(int " eval ", const char *" fmt ", ...);"
.sp
.BI "void errx(int " eval ", const char *" fmt ", ...);"
.sp
.BI "void warn(const char *" fmt ", ...);"
.sp
.BI "void warnx(const char *" fmt ", ...);"
.sp
.B #include <stdarg.h>
.sp
.BI "void verr(int " eval ", const char *" fmt ", va_list " args );
.sp
.BI "void verrx(int " eval ", const char *" fmt ", va_list " args );
.sp
.BI "void vwarn(const char *" fmt ", va_list " args );
.sp
.BI "void vwarnx(const char *" fmt ", va_list " args );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR err ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR warn ()
.\"O family of functions display a formatted error message on the standard
.\"O error output.
.BR err ()
関数群と
.BR warn ()
関数群は、エラーメッセージを整形して標準エラー出力に表示する。
.\"O In all cases, the last component of the program name, a colon character,
.\"O and a space are output.
どの関数の場合も、(ディレクトリ部分を省いた)プログラム名、
コロン 1個、スペース 1個が出力される。
.\"O If the
.\"O .I fmt
.\"O argument is not NULL, the
.\"O .BR printf (3)-like
.\"O formatted error message is output.
.I fmt
引き数が NULL でない場合、
.BR printf (3)
と同様に整形が行われ、エラーメッセージが出力される。
.\"O The output is terminated by a newline character.
出力は改行文字で終わる。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR err (),
.\"O .BR verr (),
.\"O .BR warn (),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR vwarn ()
.\"O functions append an error message obtained from
.\"O .BR strerror (3)
.\"O based on the global variable
.\"O .IR errno ,
.\"O preceded by another colon and space unless the
.\"O .I fmt
.\"O argument is
.\"O NULL.
\"O motoki: based on a code or 〜 の「a code」とは？
関数
.BR err (),
.BR verr (),
.BR warn (),
.BR vwarn ()
は、グローバル変数
.I errno
に基づいて
.BR strerror (3)
から得たエラーメッセージを出力する。
.I fmt
引き数が NULL
でない場合は、一個ずつのコロンとスペースに続けて出力する。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR errx ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR warnx ()
.\"O functions do not append an error message.
関数
.BR errx (),
.BR warnx ()
はエラーメッセージを付け加えない。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR err (),
.\"O .BR verr (),
.\"O .BR errx (),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR verrx ()
.\"O functions do not return, but exit with the value of the argument
.\"O .I eval .
関数
.BR err (),
.BR verr (),
.BR errx (),
.BR verrx ()
は返り値を返さないが、引き数
.I eval
の値を exit status に設定し終了する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O Display the current
.\"O .I errno
.\"O information string and exit:
現在の
.I errno
の情報を表示し、終了する:
.in +4n
.nf

if ((p = malloc(size)) == NULL)
    err(1, NULL);
if ((fd = open(file_name, O_RDONLY, 0)) == \-1)
    err(1, "%s", file_name);
.fi
.in
.PP
.\"O Display an error message and exit:
エラーメッセージを表示し、終了する:
.in +4n
.nf

if (tm.tm_hour < START_TIME)
    errx(1, "too early, wait until %s", start_time_string);
.fi
.in
.PP
.\"O Warn of an error:
エラーを警告表示する:
.in +4n
.nf

if ((fd = open(raw_device, O_RDONLY, 0)) == \-1)
    warnx("%s: %s: trying the block device",
            raw_device, strerror(errno));
if ((fd = open(block_device, O_RDONLY, 0)) == \-1)
    err(1, "%s", block_device);
.fi
.in
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O These functions are nonstandard BSD extensions.
これらの関数は非標準の BSD 拡張である。
.\"O .\" .SH HISTORY
.\" .SH 歴史
.\"O .\" The
.\"O .\" .BR err ()
.\"O .\" and
.\"O .\" .BR warn ()
.\"O .\" functions first appeared in
.\"O .\" 4.4BSD.
.\" 関数
.\" .BR err ()
.\" と
.\" .BR warn ()
.\" は
.\" 4.4BSD
.\" で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR error (3),
.BR exit (3),
.BR perror (3),
.BR printf (3),
.BR strerror (3)
