.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2007 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2007  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2007-06-02, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH EUIDACCESS 3 2010-09-10 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O euidaccess, eaccess \- check effective user's permissions for a file
euidaccess, eaccess \- ファイルへのアクセス権を実効ユーザでチェックする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.\"O .BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "             /* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "             /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int euidaccess(const char *" pathname ", int " mode );
.BI "int eaccess(const char *" pathname ", int " mode );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Like
.\"O .BR access (2),
.\"O .BR euidaccess ()
.\"O checks permissions and existence of the file identified by its argument
.\"O .IR pathname .
.\"O However, whereas
.\"O .BR access (2),
.\"O performs checks using the real user and group identifiers of the process,
.\"O .BR euidaccess ()
.\"O uses the effective identifiers.
.BR access (2)
と同様、
.BR euidaccess ()
は引き数
.I pathname
で指定されたファイルの許可 (permission) と存在のチェックを行う。
.BR access (2)
はプロセスの実 (real) ユーザID / 実グループID を用いてチェックを行うのに対し、
.BR euidaccess ()
は実効 (effective) ID を用いる。

.\"O .I mode
.\"O is a mask consisting of one or more of
.\"O .BR R_OK ", " W_OK ", " X_OK " and " F_OK ,
.\"O with the same meanings as for
.\"O .BR access (2).
.I mode
は
.BR R_OK ", " W_OK ", " X_OK ", " F_OK
の一つ以上から構成されるマスクである。
.BR R_OK ", " W_OK ", " X_OK ", " F_OK
は
.BR access (2)
と同じ意味を持つ。

.\"O .BR eaccess ()
.\"O is a synonym for
.\"O .BR euidaccess (),
.\"O provided for compatibility with some other systems.
.BR eaccess ()
は
.BR euidaccess ()
の同義語であり、他のいくつかのシステムとの互換性のために提供されている。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success (all requested permissions granted), zero is returned.
.\"O On error (at least one bit in
.\"O .I mode
.\"O asked for a permission that is denied, or some other error occurred),
.\"O \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合 (要求した全てについての許可が得られたら)、ゼロが返される。
エラーの場合
.RI ( mode
の少なくとも一つのビットで要求した許可がなかった場合や、
他のエラーが起こった場合)、\-1 が返され、
.I errno
が適切に設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O As for
.\"O .BR access (2).
.BR access (2)
と同じ。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O The
.\"O .BR eaccess ()
.\"O function was added to glibc in version 2.4.
.BR eaccess ()
関数は glibc のバージョン 2.4 で追加された。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O These functions are nonstandard.
.\"O Some other systems have an
.\"O .\" e.g., FreeBSD 6.1.
.\"O .BR eaccess ()
.\"O function.
これらの関数は非標準である。
他のいくつかのシステムには
.\" 例えば、FreeBSD 6.1.
.BR eaccess ()
関数がある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR access (2),
.BR chmod (2),
.BR chown (2),
.BR faccessat (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR setgid (2),
.BR setuid (2),
.BR stat (2),
.BR credentials (7),
.BR path_resolution (7)
