.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:42:04 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Added fabsl, fabsf, aeb, 2001-06-07
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 20 20:29:27 JST 1997
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jul  1 10:59:51 JST 2001
.\"       by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Jan 10 07:44:31 JST 2005
.\"       by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH FABS 3  2008-08-05 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O fabs, fabsf, fabsl \- absolute value of floating-point number
fabs, fabsf, fabsl \- 浮動小数点実数の絶対値
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double fabs(double " x );
.br
.BI "float fabsf(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double fabsl(long double " x );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR fabsf (),
.BR fabsl ():
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE; or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR fabs ()
.\"O functions return the absolute value of the floating-point
.\"O number \fIx\fP.
.BR fabs ()
関数群は浮動小数点実数 \fIx\fP の絶対値を返す。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O These functions return the absolute value of
.\"O .IR x .
これらの関数は
.I x
の絶対値を返す。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is a NaN, a NaN is returned.
.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is \-0, +0 is returned.
.I x
が \-0 の場合、+0 が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is negative infinity or positive infinity, positive infinity is returned.
.I x
が負の無限大か正の無限大の場合、正の無限大が返される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O No errors occur.
エラーは起こらない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O The variant returning
.\"O .I double
.\"O also conforms to
.\"O SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89 にも準拠している。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR abs (3),
.BR cabs (3),
.BR ceil (3),
.BR floor (3),
.BR labs (3),
.BR rint (3)
