.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Chris Torek and the American National Standards Committee X3,
.\" on Information Processing Systems.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)ferror.3	6.8 (Berkeley) 6/29/91
.\"
.\"
.\" Converted for Linux, Mon Nov 29 14:24:40 1993, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Added remark on EBADF for fileno, aeb, 2001-03-22
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Dec 26 10:49:26 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated Sat May 19 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Fri Nov  2 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH FERROR 3  2008-08-29 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O clearerr, feof, ferror, fileno \- check and reset stream status
clearerr, feof, ferror, fileno \- ストリームステータスのチェックとリセット
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <stdio.h>
.sp
.BI "void clearerr(FILE *" stream );

.BI "int feof(FILE *" stream );

.BI "int ferror(FILE *" stream );

.BI "int fileno(FILE *" stream );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR fileno ():
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 1 || _XOPEN_SOURCE || _POSIX_SOURCE
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR clearerr ()
.\"O clears the end-of-file and error indicators for the stream pointed to by
.\"O .IR stream .
関数
.BR clearerr ()
は
.I stream
で示されるストリームの EOF(end-of-file) 指示子とエラー指示子をクリアする。
.PP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR feof ()
.\"O tests the end-of-file indicator for the stream pointed to by
.\"O .IR stream ,
.\"O returning nonzero if it is set.
.\"O The end-of-file indicator can only be
.\"O cleared by the function
.\"O .BR clearerr ().
関数
.BR feof ()
は
.I stream
で示されるストリームの EOF 指示子をテストし、
セットされていれば 0 以外の数を返す。
EOF 指示子は、関数
.BR clearerr ()
によってのみクリアすることができる。
.PP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR ferror ()
.\"O tests the error indicator for the stream pointed to by
.\"O .IR stream ,
.\"O returning nonzero if it is set.
.\"O The error indicator can only be reset by the
.\"O .BR clearerr ()
.\"O function.
関数
.BR ferror ()
は
.I stream
で示されるストリームのエラー指示子をテストし、
セットされていれば 0 以外の数を返す。
エラー指示子は、関数
.BR clearerr ()
によってのみリセットすることができる。
.PP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR fileno ()
.\"O examines the argument
.\"O .I stream
.\"O and returns its integer descriptor.
関数
.BR fileno ()
は、引数
.I stream
を調べ、その整数のディスクリプターを返す。
.PP
.\"O For nonlocking counterparts, see
.\"O .BR unlocked_stdio (3).
ロックせずにこれらの処理を行いたいときは、
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O These functions should not fail and do not set the external variable
.\"O .IR errno .
これらの関数は失敗すべきではなく、また、外部変数
.I errno
に値をセットしない。
.\"O (However, in case
.\"O .BR fileno ()
.\"O detects that its argument is not a valid stream, it must
.\"O return \-1 and set
.\"O .I errno
.\"O to
.\"O .BR EBADF .)
(しかし、
.BR fileno ()
関数の場合で、引数が有効なストリームでなかった場合、
関数は \-1 を返し、
.I errno
に
.B EBADF
を設定しなければならない。)
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O The functions
.\"O .BR clearerr (),
.\"O .BR feof (),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ferror ()
.\"O conform to C89 and C99.
関数
.BR clearerr (),
.BR feof (),
.BR ferror ()
は C89 と C99 に準拠している。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR open (2),
.BR fdopen (3),
.BR stdio (3),
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
