.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Jul 24 10:45:05 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Jan 10 10:11:00 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH FMAX 3 2010-09-20 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O fmax, fmaxf, fmaxl \- determine maximum of two floating-point numbers
fmax, fmaxf, fmaxl \- 二つの浮動小数点数の最大値を求める
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double fmax(double " x ", double " y );
.br
.BI "float fmaxf(float " x ", float " y );
.br
.BI "long double fmaxl(long double " x ", long double " y );
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR fmax (),
.BR fmaxf (),
.BR fmaxl ():
.RS 4
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O These functions return the larger value of
.\"O .I x
.\"O and
.\"O .IR y .
これらの関数は
.I x
と
.I y
のうち大きい方の値を返す。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O These functions return the maximum of
.\"O .I x
.\"O and
.\"O .IR y .
これらの関数は
.I x
と
.I y
の最大値を返す。

.\"O If one argument is a NaN, the other argument is returned.
一方の引き数が NaN の場合、もう一方の値が返される。

.\"O If both arguments are NaN, a NaN is returned.
両方の引き数が NaN の場合、NaN が返される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O No errors occur.
エラーは発生しない。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fmin (3)
