.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sun Aug 29 15:03:11 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jan  8 JST 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Fri Nov  2 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH FPUTWC 3  1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O fputwc, putwc \- write a wide character to a FILE stream
fputwc, putwc \- ワイド文字を FILE ストリームに書き込む
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.br
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t fputwc(wchar_t " wc ", FILE *" stream );
.BI "wint_t putwc(wchar_t " wc ", FILE *" stream );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR fputwc ()
.\"O function is the wide-character
.\"O equivalent of the
.\"O .BR fputc (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It writes the wide character \fIwc\fP to \fIstream\fP.
.\"O If
.\"O \fIferror(stream)\fP becomes true, it returns
.\"O .BR WEOF .
.\"O If a wide character conversion error occurs,
.\"O it sets \fIerrno\fP to \fBEILSEQ\fP and returns
.\"O .BR WEOF .
.\"O Otherwise it returns \fIwc\fP.
.BR fputwc ()
関数は、
.BR fputc (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。この
関数は、ワイド文字 \fIwc\fP を \fIstream\fP に書き込む。
\fIferror(stream)\fP が真になると、この関数は
.B WEOF
を返す。
ワイド文字変換でエラーが発生した場合は、
\fIerrno\fP に \fBEILSEQ\fP をセットし、
.B WEOF
を返す。
それ以外の場合では、この関数は \fIwc\fP を返す。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR putwc ()
.\"O function or macro functions identically to
.\"O .BR fputwc ().
.\"O It may be implemented as a macro, and may evaluate its argument
.\"O more than once.
.\"O There is no reason ever to use it.
.BR putwc ()
関数あるいはマクロは、
.BR fputwc ()
と全く同じ動作をする。
この関数はマクロとして実装されるかもしれないので、引き数が複数回評価さ
れるかもしれない。この関数を使う理由はもはや存在しない。
.PP
.\"O For nonlocking counterparts, see
.\"O .BR unlocked_stdio (3).
これらの処理を停止せずに行いたいときは、
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR fputwc ()
.\"O function returns \fIwc\fP if no error occurred, or
.\"O .B WEOF
.\"O to indicate an error.
.BR fputwc ()
関数は、エラーが起きなければ \fIwc\fP を返す。エラーの場合には
.B WEOF
を返す。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O Apart from the usual ones, there is
普通のものの他に、以下のものがある。
.TP
.B EILSEQ
.\"O Conversion of \fIwc\fP to the stream's encoding fails.
\fIwc\fP からストリームの符号への変換に失敗した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR fputwc ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR fputwc ()
の動作は現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.PP
.\"O In the absence of additional information passed to the
.\"O .BR fopen (3)
.\"O call, it is
.\"O reasonable to expect that
.\"O .BR fputwc ()
.\"O will actually write the multibyte
.\"O sequence corresponding to the wide character \fIwc\fP.
.BR fopen (3)
システムコールに渡す追加情報がない場合には、
.BR fputwc ()
は
実際にはワイド文字 \fIwc\fP に対応するマルチバイトシーケンスを書き込むと
期待してよい。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fgetwc (3),
.BR fputws (3),
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
