.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sun Aug 29 15:09:40 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Nov  2 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH FPUTWS 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O fputws \- write a wide-character string to a FILE stream
fputws \- ワイド文字の文字列を FILE ストリームに書き込む
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int fputws(const wchar_t *" ws ", FILE *" stream );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR fputws ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of
.\"O the
.\"O .BR fputs (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It writes the wide character string starting at \fIws\fP, up to but
.\"O not including the terminating null wide character (L\(aq\\0\(aq), to \fIstream\fP.
.BR fputws ()
関数は、
.BR fputs (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIws\fP から始まるワイド文字列を終端の L'\\0'
まで \fIstream\fP に書き出す。ただし終端の NULL ワイド文字
(L\(aq\\0\(aq) は含まれない。
.PP
.\"O For nonlocking counterparts, see
.\"O .BR unlocked_stdio (3).
これらの処理を停止せずに行いたいときは、
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR fputws ()
.\"O function returns a
.\"O nonnegative integer if the operation was
.\"O successful, or \-1 to indicate an error.
.BR fputws ()
は、操作が成功した時には負でない整数値を返す。エラーの時
には \-1 を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR fputws ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR fputws ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.PP
.\"O In the absence of additional information passed to the
.\"O .BR fopen (3)
.\"O call, it is
.\"O reasonable to expect that
.\"O .BR fputws ()
.\"O will actually write the multibyte
.\"O string corresponding to the wide-character string \fIws\fP.
.BR fopen (3)
システムコールに渡す追加情報がない場合には、
.BR fputws ()
が実際
にはワイド文字の文字列である \fIws\fP に対応するマルチバイトシーケンス
を書き込むと期待することは適切である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fputwc (3),
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
