.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" and Copyright (c) 2020 Arkadiusz Drabczyk <arkadiusz@drabczyk.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Chris Torek and the American National Standards Committee X3,
.\" on Information Processing Systems.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_4_CLAUSE_UCB)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"     @(#)fread.3	6.6 (Berkeley) 6/29/91
.\"
.\" Converted for Linux, Mon Nov 29 15:37:33 1993, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Sun Feb 19 21:26:54 1995 by faith, return values
.\" Modified Thu Apr 20 20:43:53 1995 by Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com>
.\" Modified Fri May 17 10:21:51 1996 by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.north.de>
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jan 21 21:57:33 JST 1997
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Mar 1 1999
.\"       by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Nov  3 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2012-04-30, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@gmail.com>
.\"
.TH FREAD 3 2020\-08\-13 GNU "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
fread, fwrite \- バイナリストリームの入出力
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <stdio.h>\fP
.PP
\fBsize_t fread(void *\fP\fIptr\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fIsize\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fInmemb\fP\fB, FILE *\fP\fIstream\fP\fB);\fP
.PP
\fBsize_t fwrite(const void *\fP\fIptr\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fIsize\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fInmemb\fP\fB,\fP
\fB              FILE *\fP\fIstream\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.SH 説明
The function \fBfread\fP()  reads \fInmemb\fP items of data, each \fIsize\fP bytes
long, from the stream pointed to by \fIstream\fP, storing them at the location
given by \fIptr\fP.
.PP
The function \fBfwrite\fP()  writes \fInmemb\fP items of data, each \fIsize\fP bytes
long, to the stream pointed to by \fIstream\fP, obtaining them from the
location given by \fIptr\fP.
.PP
これらの処理を停止せずに行いたいときは、 \fBunlocked_stdio\fP(3)  を参照のこと。
.SH 返り値
On success, \fBfread\fP()  and \fBfwrite\fP()  return the number of items read or
written.  This number equals the number of bytes transferred only when
\fIsize\fP is 1.  If an error occurs, or the end of the file is reached, the
return value is a short item count (or zero).
.PP
The file position indicator for the stream is advanced by the number of
bytes successfully read or written.
.PP
\fBfread\fP()  は end\-of\-file とエラーを区別しないので、 どちらが生じたかを判断するためには、 呼び出し側で \fBfeof\fP(3)
と \fBferror\fP(3)  とを使用しなければならない。
.SH 属性
この節で使用されている用語の説明については、 \fBattributes\fP(7) を参照。
.TS
allbox;
lbw17 lb lb
l l l.
インターフェース	属性	値
T{
\fBfread\fP(),
\fBfwrite\fP()
T}	Thread safety	MT\-Safe
.TE
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1\-2001, POSIX.1\-2008, C89.
.SH 例
The program below demonstrates the use of \fBfread\fP()  by parsing /bin/sh ELF
executable in binary mode and printing its magic and class:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \fB./a.out\fP
ELF magic: 0x7f454c46
Class: 0x02
.EE
.in
.SS プログラムのソース
\&
.EX
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

#define ARRAY_SIZE(arr) (sizeof(arr) / sizeof((arr)[0]))

int
main(void)
{
    FILE *fp = fopen("/bin/sh", "rb");
    if (!fp) {
        perror("fopen");
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    }

    unsigned char buffer[4];

    size_t ret = fread(buffer, ARRAY_SIZE(buffer), sizeof(*buffer), fp);
    if (ret != sizeof(*buffer)) {
        fprintf(stderr, "fread() failed: %zu\en", ret);
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    printf("ELF magic: %#04x%02x%02x%02x\en", buffer[0], buffer[1],
           buffer[2], buffer[3]);

    ret = fread(buffer, 1, 1, fp);
    if (ret != 1) {
        fprintf(stderr, "fread() failed: %zu\en", ret);
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    printf("Class: %#04x\en", buffer[0]);

    fclose(fp);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
.EE
.SH 関連項目
\fBread\fP(2), \fBwrite\fP(2), \fBfeof\fP(3), \fBferror\fP(3), \fBunlocked_stdio\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 5.10 の一部である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
\%https://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
