.\" Copyright 2001 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2002-01-06, NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 2006-01-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH FSEEKO 3  2001-11-05 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O fseeko, ftello \- seek to or report file position
.SH 名前
fseeko, ftello \- ファイル位置を探す/報告する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.sp
.BI "int fseeko(FILE *" stream ", off_t " offset ", int " whence );
.sp
.BI "off_t ftello(FILE *" stream );
.BI
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR fseeko ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ftello ()
.\"O functions are identical to
.\"O .BR fseek (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ftell (3)
.\"O (see
.\"O .BR fseek (3)),
.\"O respectively, except that the \fIoffset\fP argument of
.\"O .BR fseeko ()
.\"O and the return value of
.\"O .BR ftello ()
.\"O is of type \fIoff_t\fP
.\"O instead of \fIlong\fP.
.BR fseeko ()
関数および
.BR ftello ()
関数は、
それぞれ
.BR fseek (3)
および
.BR ftell (3)
と同一の機能を持つ
.RB ( fseek (3)
を見よ) が、ただし
.BR fseeko ()
関数の \fIoffset\fP 引数と
.BR ftello ()
の返り値が、
\fIlong\fP ではなく \fIoff_t\fP になっている。
.LP
.\"O On many architectures both \fIoff_t\fP and \fIlong\fP are 32-bit types,
.\"O but compilation with
多くのアーキテクチャでは
\fIoff_t\fP も \fIlong\fP も共に 32 ビットの型であるが、
.RS
.nf

#define _FILE_OFFSET_BITS 64

.fi
.RE
.\"O .PP
.\"O will turn \fIoff_t\fP into a 64-bit type.
でコンパイルすると \fIoff_t\fP は 64 ビット型となる。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O On successful completion,
.\"O .BR fseeko ()
.\"O returns 0, while
.\"O .BR ftello ()
.\"O returns the current offset.
.\"O Otherwise, \-1 is returned and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to indicate the error.
成功した場合、
.BR fseeko ()
は 0 を、
.BR ftello ()
は現在のオフセットを返す。
失敗した場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値をセットする。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O See the ERRORS in
.\"O .BR fseek (3).
.BR fseek (3)
の「エラー」の節を参照。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SUSv2, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O These functions are found on System V-like systems.
.\"O They are not present in libc4, libc5, glibc 2.0
.\"O but are available since glibc 2.1.
これらの関数は System V 的なシステムにある。
libc4, libc5, glibc 2.0 にはなかったが、
glibc 2.1 から使えるようになった。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fseek (3)
