.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:32:25 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Hiroaki Nagoya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Feb 10 1997 by Hiroaki Nagoya <nagoya@is.titech.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Wed Feb 16 23:43:45 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2009-04-24, Akihiro MOTOKI, LDP v3.20
.\"
.TH GCVT 3 2009-03-15 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O gcvt \- convert a floating-point number to a string
gcvt \- 浮動小数点数を文字列へ変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "char *gcvt(double " number ", size_t " ndigit ", char *" buf );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR gcvt ():
_SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR gcvt ()
.\"O function converts \fInumber\fP to a minimal length null-terminated
.\"O ASCII string and stores the result in \fIbuf\fP.
.\"O It produces \fIndigit\fP significant digits in either
.\"O .BR printf (3)
.\"O F format or E format.
関数
.BR gcvt ()
は、 \fInumber\fP を、最短の長さの NULL 終端された ASCII
文字列へ変換し、変換後の文字列を \fIbuf\fP に格納する。
.BR printf (3)
の F フォーマットや E フォーマットのように \fIndigit\fP 桁の
有効数字を生成する。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR gcvt ()
.\"O function returns the address of the string pointed to
.\"O by \fIbuf\fP.
関数
.BR gcvt ()
は文字列 \fIbuf\fP へのポインタを返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O Marked as LEGACY in POSIX.1-2001.
POSIX.1-2001 では、
この関数は「過去の名残 (LEGACY)」と位置付けられている。
.\"O POSIX.1-2008 removes the specification of
.\"O .BR gcvt (),
.\"O recommending the use of
.\"O .BR sprintf (3)
.\"O instead (though
.\"O .BR snprintf (3)
.\"O may be preferable).
POSIX.1-2008 では、
.BR gcvt ()
の仕様は削除され、
代わりに
.BR sprintf (3)
を使用することが推奨されている
.RB ( snprintf (3)
の方が適切かもしれないが)。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ecvt (3),
.BR fcvt (3),
.BR sprintf (3)
