.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from /usr/include/dirent.h are:
.\"                    Copyright 1991, 1992 Free Software Foundation
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Apr 30 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH GETDIRENTRIES 3 2007-07-26 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O getdirentries \- get directory entries in a file system-independent format
.SH 名前
getdirentries \- ディレクトリのエントリをファイルシステムに依存しない形式で取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR getdirentries ():
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.B #include <dirent.h>
.sp
.BI "ssize_t getdirentries(int " fd ", char *" buf ", size_t " nbytes
.BI ", off_t *" basep );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Read directory entries from the directory specified by
.\"O .I fd
.\"O into
.\"O .IR buf .
.\"O At most
.\"O .I nbytes
.\"O are read.
.\"O Reading starts at offset
.\"O .IR *basep ,
.\"O and
.\"O .I *basep
.\"O is updated with the new position after reading.
.I fd
で指定されたディレクトリからエントリを読み、
.I buf
に格納する。最大で
.I nbytes
が読み込まれる。読み込みはオフセット
.I *basep
から開始され、読み込み終了時には
.I *basep
は新しい位置に更新される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR getdirentries ()
.\"O returns the number of bytes read or zero when at the end of the directory.
.\"O If an error occurs, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
.BR getdirentries ()
は読み込んだバイト数を返すか、ディレクトリの最後にきた場合は 0 を返す。
エラーが起こったら \-1 を返し、
.I errno
をエラーに対応する値にセットする。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O See the Linux library source code for details.
詳細は Linux のライブラリソースコードを読んでほしい。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O Not in POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O Present on the BSDs, and a few other systems.
.\"O Use
.\"O .BR opendir (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR readdir (3)
.\"O instead.
POSIX.1-2001 にはない。
BSD に存在し、他にもいくつかのシステムにもある。
代わりに
.BR opendir (3)
と
.BR readdir (3)
を使用すること。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR lseek (2),
.BR open (2)
