.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Inspired by a page written by Walter Harms.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed 7 Aug 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH GETFSENT 3 2002-02-28 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O getfsent, getfsspec, getfsfile, setfsent, endfsent \- handle fstab entries
.SH 名前
getfsent, getfsspec, getfsfile, setfsent, endfsent \- fstab エントリの処理
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <fstab.h>
.sp
.B "void endfsent(void);"
.sp
.B "struct fstab *getfsent(void);"
.sp
.BI "struct fstab *getfsfile(const char *" mount_point );
.sp
.BI "struct fstab *getfsspec(const char *" special_file );
.sp
.B "int setfsent(void);"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O These functions read from the file
.\"O .IR /etc/fstab .
.\"O The \fIstruct fstab\fP is defined by:
これらの関数は
.I /etc/fstab
ファイルから情報を読み込む。\fIfstab\fP 構造体は次のように定義されている。
.LP
.in +4n
.nf
struct fstab {
    char       *fs_spec;       /* block device name */
    char       *fs_file;       /* mount point */
    char       *fs_vfstype;    /* file-system type */
    char       *fs_mntops;     /* mount options */
    const char *fs_type;       /* rw/rq/ro/sw/xx option */
    int         fs_freq;       /* dump frequency, in days */
    int         fs_passno;     /* pass number on parallel dump */
};
.fi
.in
.PP
.\"O Here the field
.\"O .I fs_type
.\"O contains (on a *BSD system)
.\"O one of the five strings "rw", "rq", "ro", "sw", "xx"
.\"O (read-write, read-write with quota, read-only, swap, ignore).
*BSD システムの場合、
.I fs_type
フィールドには、5 つの文字列
"rw", "rq", "ro", "sw", "xx"
のいずれかが入る
(それぞれ read-write, quota 付き read-write, read-only, swap, ignore)。

.\"O The function
.\"O .BR setfsent ()
.\"O opens the file when required and positions it at the first line.
関数
.BR setfsent ()
は呼び出されると fstab ファイルをオープンし、
最初の行に移動する。
.LP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR getfsent ()
.\"O parses the next line from the file.
.\"O (After opening it when required.)
関数
.BR getfsent ()
は fstab ファイルから次の行をパースする
(必要な場合はファイルをオープンする)。
.LP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR endfsent ()
.\"O closes the file when required.
関数
.BR endfsent ()
は呼び出されると fstab ファイルをクローズする。
.LP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR getfsspec ()
.\"O searches the file from the start and returns the first entry found
.\"O for which the
.\"O .I fs_spec
.\"O field matches the
.\"O .I special_file
.\"O argument.
関数
.BR getfsspec ()
は fstab ファイルを先頭から検索し、
.I fs_spec
フィールドが
.I special_file
引数にマッチするエントリが見つかったら、その最初のものを返す。
.LP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR getfsfile ()
.\"O searches the file from the start and returns the first entry found
.\"O for which the
.\"O .I fs_file
.\"O field matches the
.\"O .I mount_point
.\"O argument.
関数
.BR getfsfile ()
は fstab ファイルを先頭から検索し、
.I fs_file
フィールドが
.I mount_point
引数にマッチするエントリが見つかったら、その最初のものを返す。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O Upon success, the functions
.\"O .BR getfsent (),
.\"O .BR getfsfile (),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR getfsspec ()
.\"O return a pointer to a \fIstruct fstab\fP, while
.\"O .BR setfsent ()
.\"O returns 1.
.\"O Upon failure or end-of-file, these functions return NULL and 0, respectively.
成功すると、
.BR getfsent (),
.BR getfsfile (),
.BR getfsspec ()
の各関数は \fIfstab\fP 構造体へのポインタを返し、
.BR setfsent ()
関数は 1 を返す。
失敗するとこれらの関数は NULL を返し、
end-of-file になったら 0 を返す。
.\"O .\" .SH HISTORY
.\" .SH 履歴
.\"O .\" The
.\"O .\" .BR getfsent ()
.\"O .\" function appeared in 4.0BSD; the other four functions appeared in 4.3BSD.
.\" .BR getfsent ()
.\" 関数は 4.0BSD で登場した。
.\" 他の 4 つの関数は 4.3BSD で登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O These functions are not in POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O Several operating systems have them,
.\"O e.g., *BSD, SunOS, Digital Unix, AIX (which also has a
.\"O .BR getfstype ()).
.\"O HP-UX has functions of the same names,
.\"O that however use a \fIstruct checklist\fP
.\"O instead of a \fIstruct fstab\fP,
.\"O and calls these functions obsolete, superseded by
.\"O .BR getmntent (3).
POSIX.1-2001 にはこれらの関数は存在しない。
これらの関数をもつ OS はいくつかあり、
*BSD, SunOS, Digital Unix, AIX 等である
(AIX には
.BR getfstype ()
もある)。
HP-UX にも同名の関数群があるが、
HP-UX のものは \fIfstab\fP 構造体ではなく \fIchecklist\fP 構造体を用いる。
またこれらの関数の呼び出しは obsolete で、
.BR getmntent (3)
に取って代わられている。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O These functions are not thread-safe.
これらの関数はスレッドセーフではない。
.LP
.\"O Since Linux allows mounting a block special device in several places,
.\"O and since several devices can have the same mount point, where the
.\"O last device with a given mount point is the interesting one,
.\"O while
.\"O .BR getfsfile ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR getfsspec ()
.\"O only return the first occurrence, these two functions are not suitable
.\"O for use under Linux.
Linux ではブロックスペシャルデバイスを複数の場所にマウントでき、
また複数のデバイスが同じマウントポイントを共有できる
(この場合はそのマウントポイントに最後にマウントされたデバイスが意味を持つ)
が、
.BR getfsfile ()
と
.BR getfsspec ()
はマッチした最初のエントリしか返さないので、
これらの 2 つの関数は Linux での利用には適していない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR getmntent (3),
.BR fstab (5)
