.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:48:06 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1998-03-01, NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified 1998-06-22, NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated 2008-09-19, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH GETNETENT 3  2008-08-19 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O getnetent, getnetbyname, getnetbyaddr, setnetent, endnetent \-
.\"O get network entry
getnetent, getnetbyname, getnetbyaddr, setnetent, endnetent \- ネットワークエントリを取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <netdb.h>
.sp
.B struct netent *getnetent(void);
.sp
.BI "struct netent *getnetbyname(const char *" name );
.sp
.BI "struct netent *getnetbyaddr(uint32_t " net ", int " type );
.sp
.BI "void setnetent(int " stayopen );
.sp
.B void endnetent(void);
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR getnetent ()
.\"O function reads the next entry from the networks database
.\"O and returns a \fInetent\fP structure containing
.\"O the broken-out fields from the entry.
.\"O A connection is opened to the database if necessary.
.BR getnetent ()
関数はネットワークデータベースから次のエントリを読み込み、
そのエントリを \fInetent\fP 構造体の要素別のフィールドに格納し、
その構造体を返す。
必要であれば、データベースへの接続がオープンされる。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR getnetbyname ()
.\"O function returns a \fInetent\fP structure
.\"O for the entry from the database
.\"O that matches the network \fIname\fP.
.BR getnetbyname ()
関数は、ネットワーク名 \fIname\fP にマッチするエントリを
データベースから探し、そのエントリを収めた \fInetent\fP 構造体を返す。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR getnetbyaddr ()
.\"O function returns a \fInetent\fP structure
.\"O for the entry from the database
.\"O that matches the network number \fInet\fP of type
.\"O \fItype\fP.
.\"O The
.\"O .I net
.\"O argument must be in host byte order.
.BR getnetbyaddr ()
関数は、\fItype\fP 型のネットワーク番号 \fInet\fP にマッチするエントリを
データベースから探し、そのエントリを収めた \fInetent\fP 構造体を返す。
.I net
引き数はホスト・バイトオーダでなければならない。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR setnetent ()
.\"O function opens a connection to the database,
.\"O and sets the next entry to the first entry.
.\"O If \fIstayopen\fP is nonzero,
.\"O then the connection to the database
.\"O will not be closed between calls to one of the
.\"O .BR getnet* ()
.\"O functions.
.BR setnetent ()
関数はデータベースへの接続をオープンし、
次の読み込みエントリを先頭のエントリに設定する。
\fIstayopen\fP が 0 でない場合、
一つ一つの
.BR getnet* ()
関数の呼び出し間でデータベースへの接続をクローズしない。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR endnetent ()
.\"O function closes the connection to the database.
.BR endnetent ()
関数はデータベースへの接続をクローズする。
.PP
.\"O The \fInetent\fP structure is defined in \fI<netdb.h>\fP as follows:
\fInetent\fP 構造体は \fI<netdb.h>\fP で以下のように定義されている。
.sp
.in +4n
.nf
struct netent {
    char      *n_name;     /* official network name */
    char     **n_aliases;  /* alias list */
    int        n_addrtype; /* net address type */
    uint32_t   n_net;      /* network number */
}
.fi
.in
.PP
.\"O The members of the \fInetent\fP structure are:
\fInetent\fP 構造体のメンバは以下の通り。
.RS
.TP 12
.I n_name
.\"O The official name of the network.
ネットワークの正式名 (official name)。
.TP
.I n_aliases
.\"O A NULL-terminated list of alternative names for the network.
ネットワークの別名からなるリスト。
リストは NULL で終端される。
.TP
.I n_addrtype
.\"O The type of the network number; always
.\"O .BR AF_INET .
ネットワーク番号の形式。現在は
.B AF_INET
のみ。
.TP
.I n_net
.\"O The network number in host byte order.
ホスト・バイトオーダ形式のネットワーク番号。
.RE
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR getnetent (),
.\"O .BR getnetbyname ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR getnetbyaddr ()
.\"O functions return a pointer to a
.\"O statically allocated \fInetent\fP structure, or a NULL pointer if an
.\"O error occurs or the end of the file is reached.
.BR getnetent (),
.BR getnetbyname (),
.BR getnetbyaddr ()
関数は、静的に割り当てられた \fInetent\fP 構造体へのポインタを返す。
エラーが起こったり、ファイルの末尾に達した場合は NULL ポインタを返す。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.\"O .I /etc/networks
.\"O networks database file
.I /etc/networks
ネットワークデータベースファイル
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O In glibc versions before 2.2, the
.\"O .I net
.\"O argument of
.\"O .BR getnetbyaddr ()
.\"O was of type
.\"O .IR long .
バージョン 2.2 より前の glibc では、
.BR getnetbyaddr ()
の引き数
.I net
は
.I long
型だった。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR getnetent_r (3),
.BR getprotoent (3),
.BR getservent (3)
.\" .BR networks (5)
.br
RFC\ 1101
