.\" This page was taken from the 4.4BSD-Lite CDROM (BSD license)
.\"
.\" @(#)getrpcent.3n	2.2 88/08/02 4.0 RPCSRC; from 1.11 88/03/14 SMI
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2000-01-11, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-19, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH GETRPCENT 3 2008-08-19 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O getrpcent, getrpcbyname, getrpcbynumber, setrpcent, endrpcent \- get
.\"O RPC entry
getrpcent, getrpcbyname, getrpcbynumber, setrpcent, endrpcent \-
RPC エントリを取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <netdb.h>

.BI "struct rpcent *getrpcent(void);"

.BI "struct rpcent *getrpcbyname(char *" name );

.BI "struct rpcent *getrpcbynumber(int " number );

.BI "void setrpcent(int " stayopen );

.BI "void endrpcent(void);"
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.LP
.BR getrpcent (),
.BR getrpcbyname (),
.\"O and
.BR getrpcbynumber ()
.\"O each return a pointer to an object with the
.\"O following structure containing the broken-out
.\"O fields of an entry in the RPC program number data base.
はそれぞれ以下の構造体へのポインタを返す。
この構造体は RPC プログラム番号データベース
の各行のフィールドを含んでいる。
.in +4n
.nf

struct rpcent {
    char  *r_name;     /* name of server for this RPC program */
    char **r_aliases;  /* alias list */
    long   r_number;   /* RPC program number */
};
.fi
.in
.LP
.\"O The members of this structure are:
この構造体のメンバーは以下の通り。
.RS 4
.TP 12
.I r_name
.\"O The name of the server for this RPC program.
この RPC プログラムのサーバの名前
.TP
.I r_aliases
.\"O A zero terminated list of alternate names for the RPC program.
RPC プログラムの別名のリスト。ゼロで終端されている。
.TP
.I r_number
.\"O The RPC program number for this service.
このサービスの RPC プログラム番号。
.RE
.LP
.\"O .BR getrpcent ()
.\"O reads the next entry from the database.
.\"O A connection is opened to the database if necessary.
.BR getrpcent ()
はファイルの次のエントリを読み込む。
必要ならばデータベースへの接続がオープンされる。
.LP
.\"O .BR setrpcent ()
.\"O function opens a connection to the database,
.\"O and sets the next entry to the first entry.
.\"O If \fIstayopen\fP is nonzero,
.\"O then the connection to the database
.\"O will not be closed between calls to one of the
.\"O .BR getrpc* ()
.\"O functions.
.BR setrpcent ()
はデータベースへの接続をオープンし、
次の読み込みエントリを先頭のエントリに設定する。
\fIstayopen\fP が 0 でない場合、
一つ一つの
.BR getrpc* ()
関数の呼び出し間でデータベースへの接続をクローズしない。
.LP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR endrpcent ()
.\"O function closes the connection to the database.
.BR endrpcent ()
はデータベースへの接続をクローズする。
.LP
.\"O .BR getrpcbyname ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR getrpcbynumber ()
.\"O sequentially search from the beginning
.\"O of the file until a matching RPC program name or
.\"O program number is found, or until end-of-file is encountered.
.BR getrpcbyname ()
と
.BR getrpcbynumber ()
はファイルの最初から一致する RPC プログラム名かプログラム番号が
見つかるか、ファイルの最後 (end-of-file) に到達するまで、順番に
探していく。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success,
.\"O .BR getrpcent (),
.\"O .BR getrpcbyname (),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR getrpcbynumber ()
.\"O return a pointer to a statically allocated
.\"O .I rpcent
.\"O structure.
成功すると、
.BR getrpcent (),
.BR getrpcbyname (),
.BR getrpcbynumber ()
は、静的に割り当てられた
.I rpcent
構造体へのポインタを返す。
.\"O A NULL pointer is returned on EOF or error.
EOF か エラーに遭遇した場合には NULL ポインタを返す。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.I /etc/rpc
.\"O RPC program number database.
RPC プログラム番号データベース
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O Not in POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O Present on the BSDs, Solaris, and many other systems.
POSIX.1-2001 にはない。
BSD 系、Solaris や他の多くのシステムに存在する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O All information
.\"O is contained in a static area
.\"O so it must be copied if it is
.\"O to be saved.
全ての情報は静的領域に格納される。
保存するためには全てをコピーする必要がある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR getrpcent_r (3),
.BR rpc (5),
.BR rpcinfo (8),
.BR ypserv (8)
