.\" This page was taken from the 4.4BSD-Lite CDROM (BSD license)
.\"
.\" @(#)getrpcport.3r	2.2 88/08/02 4.0 RPCSRC; from 1.12 88/02/26 SMI
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jan 11 00:56:31 JST 2000
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH GETRPCPORT 3 2007-12-23 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O getrpcport \- get RPC port number
getrpcport \- RPC ポート番号を取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.BI "int getrpcport(char *" host ", int " prognum ", int " versnum \
", int " proto );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.BR getrpcport ()
.\"O returns the port number for version
.\"O .I versnum
.\"O of the RPC program
.\"O .I prognum
.\"O running on
.\"O .I host
.\"O and using protocol
.\"O .IR proto .
は
.I host
上で
.I proto
プロトコルを使用しているバージョン
.I versnum
の RPC プログラム
.I prognum
のポート番号を返す。
.\"O It returns 0 if it cannot contact the portmapper, or if
.\"O .I prognum
.\"O is not registered.
.\"O If
.\"O .I prognum
.\"O is registered but not with version
.\"O .IR versnum ,
.\"O it will still return a port number (for some version of the program)
.\"O indicating that the program is indeed registered.
.\"O The version mismatch will be detected upon the first call to the service.
ポートマッパーと連絡が取れない場合や
.I prognum
が登録されていない場合には 0 を返す。
.I prognum
が登録されているが、バージョン
.I versnum
でない場合にも、そのプログラムが実際に登録されていることを示すために
(そのプログラムのバージョンの)ポート番号を返す。
バージョンの不一致は最初にそのサービスを呼び出した時に検出される。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O Not in POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O Present on the BSDs, Solaris, and many other systems.
POSIX.1-2001 にはない。
BSD 系、Solaris や他の多くのシステムに存在する。
