.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification
.\"      http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jan 11 00:56:29 JST 2000
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Nov  3 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH GETWCHAR 3  1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O getwchar \- read a wide character from standard input
getwchar \- 標準入力よりワイド文字を読み込む
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.B "wint_t getwchar(void);"
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR getwchar ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR getchar (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It reads a wide character from \fIstdin\fP and returns
.\"O it.
.\"O If the end of stream is reached, or if \fIferror(stdin)\fP becomes
.\"O true, it returns
.\"O .BR WEOF .
.\"O If a wide character conversion error occurs, it sets
.\"O \fIerrno\fP to \fBEILSEQ\fP and returns
.\"O .BR WEOF .
.BR getwchar ()
関数は
.BR getchar (3)
関数のワイド文字版である。
\fBstdin\fP からワイド文字を読み込んでそれを返す。
ストリームの最後に達している場合や \fIferror(stdin)\fP が真の場合には
.B WEOF
を返す。ワイド文字変換でエラーが起こった場合には \fIerrno\fP に
\fBEILSEQ\fP を設定して
.B WEOF
を返す。
.PP
.\"O For nonlocking counterparts, see
.\"O .BR unlocked_stdio (3).
これらの処理をロックせずに行いたいときは、
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR getwchar ()
.\"O function returns the next wide-character from
.\"O standard input, or
.\"O .BR WEOF .
.BR getwchar ()
関数は標準入力の次のワイド文字を返すか、
.B WEOF
を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR getwchar ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR getwchar ()
の動作は現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存している。
.PP
.\"O It is reasonable to expect that
.\"O .BR getwchar ()
.\"O will actually read a multibyte
.\"O sequence from standard input and then convert it to a wide character.
.BR getwchar ()
が実際には標準入力からマルチバイト列を読み込んで
ワイド文字に変換することを期待しても良い。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fgetwc (3),
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
