.\" Copyright (c) 1995 by Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec 24 12:33:19 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jun 18 16:38:02 JST 2000
.\"	by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.TH GETW 3  2010-09-26 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O getw, putw \- input and output of words (ints)
getw, putw \- ワード(int)の入出力
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.sp
.BI "int getw(FILE *" stream );

.BI "int putw(int " w ", FILE *" stream );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR getw (),
.BR putw ():
.ad l
.PD 0
.RS 4
.TP 4
.\"O Since glibc 2.3.3:
glibc 2.3.3 以降:
_SVID_SOURCE || _BSD_SOURCE ||
.br
(_XOPEN_SOURCE &&
    !(_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600))
.TP
.\"O Before glibc 2.3.3:
glibc 2.3.3 より前:
_SVID_SOURCE || _BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE
.RE
.PD
.ad
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR getw ()
.\"O reads a word (that is, an \fIint\fP) from \fIstream\fP.
.\"O It's provided for compatibility with SVr4.
.\"O We recommend you use
.\"O .BR fread (3)
.\"O instead.
.BR getw ()
は \fIstream\fP からワード (\fIint\fP型) を読み込む。
この関数は、SVr4 との互換性のために提供されている。
この関数の代わりに
.BR fread (3)
を使用することを勧める。
.P
.\"O .BR putw ()
.\"O writes the word \fIw\fP (that is,
.\"O an \fIint\fP) to \fIstream\fP.
.\"O It is provided for compatibility with SVr4, but we recommend you use
.\"O .BR fwrite (3)
.\"O instead.
.BR putw ()
は \fIstream\fP にワード \fIw\fP (\fIint\fP型) を書き込む。
この関数は SVr4 との互換性のために提供されているが、この関数の代わりに
.BR fwrite (3)
を使用することを勧める。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUES"
.SH 返り値
.\"O Normally,
.\"O .BR getw ()
.\"O returns the word read, and
.\"O .BR putw ()
.\"O returns 0.
通常、
.BR getw ()
は読み込んだワードを返し、
.BR putw ()
は 0 を返す。
.\"O On error, they return \fBEOF\fP.
エラーが発生した場合、これらの関数は \fBEOF\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O SVr4, SUSv2.  Not present in POSIX.1-2001.
SVr4, SUSv2.  POSIX.1-2001 には存在しない。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The value returned on error is also a legitimate data value.
エラーの時に返される値は、正しいデータとして返されることもある。
.\"O .BR ferror (3)
.\"O can be used to distinguish between the two cases.
.BR ferror (3)
を用いると、この二つの場合を区別することが出来る。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ferror (3),
.BR fread (3),
.BR fwrite (3),
.BR getc (3),
.BR putc (3)
