.\" Copyright (c) 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2008  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2008-08-21, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.04
.\" 
.TH GNU_GET_LIBC_VERSION 3 2008-07-02 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O gnu_get_libc_version, gnu_get_libc_release \- get glibc version and release
gnu_get_libc_version, gnu_get_libc_release \- glibc のバージョンと
リリース状態を取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #define _GNU_SOURCE
.B #include <gnu/libc-version.h>

.B const char *gnu_get_libc_version(void);
.B const char *gnu_get_libc_release(void);
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR gnu_get_libc_version ()
.\"O returns a string that identifies the glibc version available on the system.
.BR gnu_get_libc_version ()
関数は、システムで利用可能な glibc のバージョンを特定する文字列を返す。

.\"O The function
.\"O .BR gnu_get_libc_release ()
.\"O returns a string indicates the release status of the glibc version
.\"O available on the system.
.\"O This will be a string such as
.\"O .IR "stable" .
.BR gnu_get_libc_release ()
関数は、システムで利用可能な glibc バージョンのリリース状態を示す
文字列を返す。
.I "stable"
といった文字列が返される。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
.\"O These functions are glibc-specific.
これらの関数は glibc 固有である。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O When run, the program below will produce output such as the following:
下記のプログラムを実行すると、次のような出力が得られる。
.in +4n
.nf

.RB "$" " ./a.out"
GNU libc version: 2.8
GNU libc release: stable
.fi
.in
.\"O .SS Program source
.SS プログラムのソース
\&
.nf
#include <gnu/libc-version.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    printf("GNU libc version: %s\\n", gnu_get_libc_version());
    printf("GNU libc release: %s\\n", gnu_get_libc_release());
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
.fi
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR confstr (3)
