.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" This replaces an earlier man page written by Walter Harms
.\" <walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de>.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Akihiro MOTOKI, all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Feb  2 2003 by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        broken          正しく実装されていない
.\"
.TH GSIGNAL 3  2007-07-26 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O gsignal, ssignal \- software signal facility
.SH 名前
gsignal, ssignal \- ソフトウェア・シグナル機能
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.B typedef void (*sighandler_t)(int);
.sp
.BI "int gsignal(int " signum );
.sp
.BI "sighandler_t ssignal(int " signum ", sighandler_t " action );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR gsignal (),
.BR ssignal ():
_SVID_SOURCE
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Don't use these functions under Linux.
Linux ではこれらの関数を使用しないこと。
.\"O Due to a historical mistake, under Linux these functions are
.\"O aliases for
.\"O .BR raise (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR signal (2),
.\"O respectively.
過去に間違いがあり、Linux では
.BR gsignal ()
と
.BR ssignal ()
はそれぞれ
.BR raise (3)
と
.BR signal (2)
の別名になっている。
.LP
.\"O Elsewhere, on System V-like systems, these functions implement
.\"O software signaling, entirely independent of the classical
.\"O .BR signal (2)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR kill (2)
.\"O functions.
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR ssignal ()
.\"O defines the action to take when the software signal with
.\"O number
.\"O .I signum
.\"O is raised using the function
.\"O .BR gsignal (),
.\"O and returns the previous such action or
.\"O .BR SIG_DFL .
一方、System V 風のシステムでは、これらの関数で、
従来の
.BR signal (2)
や
.BR kill (2)
の関数群とは完全に独立な、
ソフトウェア・シグナリングを実現している。
.BR ssignal ()
関数は、番号
.I signum
のソフトウェア・シグナルが
.BR gsignal ()
関数を使って発生された時にとるべきアクションを定義する。
.BR gsignal ()
の返り値は、一つ前に指定されていたアクション、もしくは
.B SIG_DFL
である。
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR gsignal ()
.\"O does the following: if no action (or the action
.\"O .BR SIG_DFL )
.\"O was
.\"O specified for
.\"O .IR signum ,
.\"O then it does nothing and returns 0.
.\"O If the action
.\"O .B SIG_IGN
.\"O was specified for
.\"O .IR signum ,
.\"O then it does nothing and returns 1.
.\"O Otherwise, it resets the action to
.\"O .B SIG_DFL
.\"O and calls
.\"O the action function with argument
.\"O .IR signum ,
.\"O and returns the value returned by that function.
.\"O The range of possible values
.\"O .I signum
.\"O varies (often 1-15 or 1-17).
.BR gsignal ()
は以下のような動作を行う:
.I signum
に対してアクションが指定されていないか、アクション
.B SIG_DFL
が指定されていた場合、何もせずに 0 を返す。
.I signum
に対して アクション
.B SIG_IGN
が指定されていた場合、何もせずに 1 を返す。
それ以外の場合、アクションを
.B SIG_DFL
にリセットし、引き数に
.I signum
を指定してアクション関数を呼び出して、アクション関数の返り値を返す。
.I signum
がとり得る値の範囲は実装により異なる (多くの場合 1〜15 か 1〜17 である)。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O These functions are available under AIX, DG/UX, HP-UX, SCO, Solaris, Tru64.
.\"O They are called obsolete under most of these systems, and are
.\"O broken under Linux libc and glibc.
これらの関数は、AIX, DG/UX, HP-UX, SCO, Solaris, Tru64 で使用可能である。
これらのシステムのほとんどで廃止されたことになっており、
Linux の libc および glibc では正しく実装されていない。
.\"O Some systems also have
.\"O .BR gsignal_r ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ssignal_r ().
.BR gsignal_r ()
と
.BR ssignal_r ()
が実装されているシステムもある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR kill (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR raise (3)
