.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Tue Jul 11 19:02:58 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	conversion	変換
.\"WORD:	deallocate	解放する
.\"WORD:	descriptor	ディスクリプター
.\"WORD:	
.\"
.TH ICONV_CLOSE 3 2008-08-11 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O iconv_close \- deallocate descriptor for character set conversion
iconv_close \- 文字セット変換のためのディスクリプターを解放する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <iconv.h>
.sp
.BI "int iconv_close(iconv_t " cd );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iconv_close ()
.\"O function deallocates a conversion descriptor \fIcd\fP
.\"O previously allocated using
.\"O .BR iconv_open (3).
.BR iconv_close ()
関数は、
.BR iconv_open (3)
を使って以前に割り当てられた
変換ディスクリプター \fIcd\fP を解放する。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O When successful, the
.\"O .BR iconv_close ()
.\"O function returns 0.
.\"O In case of error, it sets
.\"O .I errno
.\"O and returns \-1.
成功した場合、
.BR iconv_close ()
関数は 0 を返す。
エラーの場合、この関数は 
.I errno
を設定し \-1 を返す。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O This function is available in glibc since version 2.1.
この関数はバージョン 2.1 以降の glibc で利用可能である。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
UNIX98, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR iconv (3),
.BR iconv_open (3)
