.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:11:11 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2004-11-12 as per suggestion by Fabian Kreutz/AEB
.\"	to note that this function is not available in glibc2.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 ISHIOKA Takashi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon May  25 10:45:50 1998
.\"         by ISHIOKA Takashi
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Feb 17 00:01:20 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH INFNAN 3  1993-06-02 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O infnan \- deal with infinite or not-a-number (NaN) result
infnan \- 無限大と無効値 (NaN) を取扱う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.B #include <errno.h>
.sp
.BI "double infnan(int " error );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR infnan ()
.\"O function returns a suitable value for infinity and
.\"O "not-a-number" (NaN) results.
.\"O The value of \fIerror\fP can be
.\"O .B ERANGE
.\"O to represent infinity or anything else to represent NaN.
.\"O \fIerrno\fP
.\"O is also set.
関数
.BR infnan ()
は無限大と無効値 (NaN) の結果に対する適切な値を返す。
\fIerror\fP の値は、無限大を表す
.B ERANGE
か NaN を表すそれ以外の値である。
\fIerrno\fP も同様に設定される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O If \fIerror\fP is
.\"O .B ERANGE
.\"O (Infinity),
.\"O .B HUGE_VAL
.\"O is returned.
\fIerror\fP が
.B ERANGE
(無限大) の場合、
.B HUGE_VAL
が返される。
.PP
.\"O If \fIerror\fP is \-\fBERANGE\fP (\-Infinity), \-\fBHUGE_VAL\fP is returned.
\fIerror\fP が \-\fBERANGE\fP (負の無限大) の場合、
\-\fBHUGE_VAL\fP が返される。
.PP
.\"O If \fIerror\fP is anything else, NAN is returned.
\fIerror\fP がそれ以外の値の場合、NaN が返される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EDOM
.\"O The value of \fIerror\fP is "not-a-number" (NaN).
\fIerror\fP の値が無効値 (NaN) である。
.TP
.B ERANGE
.\"O The value of \fIerror\fP is positive infinity or negative infinity.
\fIerror\fP の値が正の無限大もしくは負の無限大である。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
4.3BSD.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O This obsolete function was provided in
.\"O libc4 and libc5, but is not available in glibc2.
この廃止された (obsolete) 関数は、
libc4 と libc5 で提供されていたが、 glibc2 では提供されていない。
