.\" Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Hiroaki Nagoya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Feb 10 1997 by Hiroaki Nagoya <nagoya@is.titech.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ISATTY 3 2008-12-03 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O isatty \- test whether a file descriptor refers to a terminal
isatty \- ファイルディスクリプタが端末を参照しているかをチェックする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int isatty(int " fd );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR isatty ()
.\"O function tests whether
.\"O .I fd
.\"O is an open file descriptor referring to a terminal.
.BR isatty ()
関数は、
.I fd
が端末を参照するオープンされたファイルディスクリプタかどうかを
チェックする。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR isatty ()
.\"O returns 1 if
.\"O .I fd
.\"O is an open file descriptor referring to a terminal;
.\"O otherwise 0 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to indicate the error.
.BR isatty ()
は、
.I fd
が端末を参照するオープンされたファイルディスクリプタであれば 1 を返す。
そうでなければ 0 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値を設定する。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
.\"O .I fd
.\"O is not a valid file descriptor.
.I fd
が有効なファイルディスクリプタではない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I fd
.\"O refers to a file other than a terminal.
.\"O POSIX.1-2001 specifies the error
.\"O .BR ENOTTY
.\" FIXME File a bug for this?
.\"O for this case.
.I fd
が端末以外のファイルを参照している。
POSIX.1-2001 では、この場合にエラー
.B ENOTTY
を返すと規定されている。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fstat (2),
.BR ttyname (3)
