.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Wed Sep  1 22:51:30 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ISWCNTRL 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O iswcntrl \- test for control wide character
iswcntrl \- ワイド制御文字かどうかを調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswcntrl(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswcntrl ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR iscntrl (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It tests whether \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "cntrl".
.BR iswcntrl ()
関数は、
.BR iscntrl (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "cntrl" に属するワイド文字かど
うかを調べる。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "cntrl" is disjoint from the wide-character class
.\"O "print" and therefore also disjoint from its subclasses "graph", "alpha",
.\"O "upper", "lower", "digit", "xdigit", "punct".
ワイド文字クラス "cntrl" はワイド文字クラス "print" とは共通部分を持た
ず、したがってそのサブクラスである "graph", "alpha", "upper", "lower",
"digit", "xdigit", "punct" とも共通部分を持たない。
.PP
.\"O For an unsigned char \fIc\fP, \fIiscntrl(c)\fP
.\"O implies \fIiswcntrl(btowc(c))\fP,
.\"O but not vice versa.
unsigned char 型である \fIc\fP に対しては、\fIiscntrl(c)\fP は暗黙的に
\fIiswcntrl(btowc(c))\fP を行う。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswcntrl ()
.\"O function returns nonzero if \fIwc\fP is a
.\"O wide character belonging to the wide-character class "cntrl".
.\"O Otherwise it returns zero.
関数
.BR iswcntrl ()
は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "cntrl" に属する
ワイド文字ならば 0 でない値を返す。そうでない場合には 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR iswcntrl ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR iswcntrl ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR iscntrl (3),
.BR iswctype (3)
