.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Thu Sep  2 21:47:20 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD: character property descriptor	文字属性指示子
.\"
.TH ISWCTYPE 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O iswctype \- wide-character classification
iswctype \- ワイド文字の分類
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswctype(wint_t " wc ", wctype_t " desc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O If \fIwc\fP is a wide character having the character property designated by
.\"O \fIdesc\fP (or in other words: belongs to the character class designated by
.\"O \fIdesc\fP), the
.\"O .BR iswctype ()
.\"O function returns nonzero.
.\"O Otherwise it
.\"O returns zero.
.\"O If \fIwc\fP is
.\"O .BR WEOF ,
.\"O zero is returned.
\fIwc\fP が
\fIdesc\fP で指示された文字属性を持つ (言い換えると、\fIdesc\fP で指示
された文字クラスに属する) ワイド文字ならば、
.BR iswctype ()
関数は 0 で
ない値を返す。それ以外の場合にはこの関数は 0 を返す。\fIwc\fP が
.B WEOF
ならば 0 が返される。
.PP
.\"O \fIdesc\fP must be a character property descriptor
.\"O returned by the
.\"O .BR wctype ()
.\"O function.
\fIdesc\fP は
.BR wctype ()
関数が返す文字属性指示子でなければならない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswctype ()
.\"O function returns nonzero if
.\"O the \fIwc\fP has the designated
.\"O property.
.\"O Otherwise it returns 0.
.BR iswctype ()
関数は、\fIwc\fP が指示された属性を持つならば 0 でない
値を返す。そうでなければ 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR iswctype ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR iswctype ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR iswalnum (3),
.BR iswalpha (3),
.BR iswblank (3),
.BR iswcntrl (3),
.BR iswdigit (3),
.BR iswgraph (3),
.BR iswlower (3),
.BR iswprint (3),
.BR iswpunct (3),
.BR iswspace (3),
.BR iswupper (3),
.BR iswxdigit (3),
.BR wctype (3)
