.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Thu Sep  2 21:56:46 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Dec 26 19:31:32 JST 1999
.\"           by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ISWDIGIT 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O iswdigit \- test for decimal digit wide character
iswdigit \- 数字ワイド文字であるかどうかを調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswdigit(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswdigit ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR isdigit (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It tests whether \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "digit".
.BR iswdigit ()
関数は、
.BR isdigit (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "digit" に属するワイド文字かど
うかを調べる。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "digit" is a subclass of the wide-character class
.\"O "xdigit", and therefore also a subclass
.\"O of the wide-character class "alnum", of
.\"O the wide-character class "graph" and of the wide-character class "print".
ワイド文字クラス "digit" はワイド文字クラス "xdigit" のサブクラスであ
る。したがってワイド文字クラス "alnum" や、その親クラスである "graph",
さらにその親クラスである "print" のサブクラスでもある。
.PP
.\"O Being a subclass of the wide-character
.\"O class "print", the wide-character class
.\"O "digit" is disjoint from the wide-character class "cntrl".
ワイド文字クラス "print" のサブクラスなので、ワイド文字クラス "digit"
はワイド文字クラス "cntrl" と共通部分を持たない。
.PP
.\"O Being a subclass of the wide-character class "graph",
.\"O the wide-character class
.\"O "digit" is disjoint from the wide-character class "space" and its subclass
.\"O "blank".
ワイド文字クラス "graph" のサブクラスなので、ワイド文字クラス "digit"
はワイド文字クラス "space" とそのサブクラスである "blank" と共通
部分を持たない。
.PP
.\"O Being a subclass of the wide-character
.\"O class "alnum", the wide-character class
.\"O "digit" is disjoint from the wide-character class "punct".
ワイド文字クラス "alnum" のサブクラスなので、ワイド文字クラス "digit"
はワイド文字クラス "punct" と共通部分を持たない。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "digit" is
.\"O disjoint from the wide-character class
.\"O "alpha" and therefore also disjoint from its subclasses "lower", "upper".
ワイド文字クラス "digit" は、ワイド文字クラス "alpha" と共通部分を持た
ない。したがって、そのサブクラスである "lower", "upper" とも共通部分を
持たない。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "digit" always
.\"O contains exactly the digits \(aq0\(aq to \(aq9\(aq.
ワイド文字クラス "digit" は必ず、\(aq0\(aq から \(aq9\(aq までの
数字だけからなる。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswdigit ()
.\"O function returns nonzero
.\"O if \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "digit".
.\"O Otherwise it returns zero.
.BR iswdigit ()
関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "digit" に属するワ
イド文字ならば 0 でない値を返す。それ以外の場合には 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR iswdigit ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR iswdigit ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR isdigit (3),
.BR iswctype (3)
