.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sat Sep  4 21:22:34 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Dec 26 19:31:38 JST 1999
.\"           by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ISWGRAPH 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O iswgraph \- test for graphic wide character
iswgraph \- グラフィックワイド文字かどうかを調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswgraph(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswgraph ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR isgraph (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It tests whether \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "graph".
.BR iswgraph ()
関数は、
.BR isgraph (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "graph" に属するワイド文字かど
うかを調べる。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "graph" is disjoint from the wide-character class
.\"O "space" and therefore also disjoint from its subclass "blank".
ワイド文字クラス "graph" は、ワイド文字クラス "space" と共通部分を持た
ない。したがって、そのサブクラスである "blank" とも共通部分を
持たない。
.\" Note: UNIX98 (susv2/xbd/locale.html) says that "graph" and "space" may
.\" have characters in common, except U+0020. But C99 (ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\" section 7.25.2.1.10) says that "space" and "graph" are disjoint.
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "graph" is a subclass of the wide-character class
.\"O "print".
ワイド文字クラス "graph" は、ワイド文字クラス "print" のサブクラスであ
る。
.PP
.\"O Being a subclass of the wide-character class "print",
.\"O the wide-character class
.\"O "graph" is disjoint from the wide-character class "cntrl".
ワイド文字クラス "print" のサブクラスなので、ワイド文字クラス "graph"
はワイド文字クラス "cntrl" とは共通部分を持たない。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "graph" contains all the wide characters from the
.\"O wide-character class "print" except the space character.
.\"O It therefore contains
.\"O the wide-character classes "alnum" and "punct".
ワイド文字クラス "graph" は、ワイド文字クラス "print" に属する文字のう
ち空白文字を除く全てのワイド文字を含んでいる。したがって、
ワイド文字クラス "graph" にはワイド文字クラス "almun" と "punct" が含
まれる。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswgraph ()
.\"O function returns nonzero
.\"O if \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "graph".
.\"O Otherwise it returns zero.
.BR iswgraph ()
関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "graph" に属するワ
イド文字ならば 0 でない値を返す。そうでなければ 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR iswgraph ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR iswgraph ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR isgraph (3),
.BR iswctype (3)
