.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sat Sep  4 21:40:16 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jan  8 01:52:20 JST 2000
.\"           by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ISWLOWER 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O iswlower \- test for lowercase wide character
iswlower \- 小文字ワイド文字かどうかを調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswlower(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswlower ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR islower (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It tests whether \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "lower".
.BR iswlower ()
関数は、
.BR islower (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwc\fP が文字クラス "lower" に属するワイド文字かどうかを
調べる。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "lower" is a subclass of the wide-character class
.\"O "alpha", and therefore also a subclass
.\"O of the wide-character class "alnum", of
.\"O the wide-character class "graph" and of the wide-character class "print".
ワイド文字クラス "lower" はワイド文字クラス "alpha" のサブクラスであり、
したがってワイド文字クラス "alnum" とその親クラスである "graph", さらに
その親クラスである "print" のサブクラスでもある。
.PP
.\"O Being a subclass of the wide-character class "print",
.\"O the wide-character class
.\"O "lower" is disjoint from the wide-character class "cntrl".
ワイド文字クラス "print" のサブクラスなので、ワイド文字クラス "lower"
はワイド文字クラス "cntrl" と共通部分を持たない。
.PP
.\"O Being a subclass of the wide-character class "graph",
.\"O the wide-character class "lower" is disjoint from the
.\"O wide-character class "space" and its subclass
.\"O "blank".
ワイド文字クラス "graph" のサブクラスなので、ワイド文字クラス "lower"
はワイド文字クラス "space" とそのサブクラスである "blank" と共通
部分を持たない。
.PP
.\"O Being a subclass of the wide-character class "alnum",
.\"O the wide-character class
.\"O "lower" is disjoint from the wide-character class "punct".
ワイド文字クラス "alnum" のサブクラスなので、ワイド文字クラス "lower"
はワイド文字クラス "punct" と共通部分を持たない。
.PP
.\"O Being a subclass of the wide-character class "alpha",
.\"O the wide-character class
.\"O "lower" is disjoint from the wide-character class "digit".
ワイド文字クラス "alpha" のサブクラスなので、ワイド文字クラス "lower"
はワイド文字クラス "digit" と共通部分を持たない。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "lower" contains at least
.\"O those characters \fIwc\fP
.\"O which are equal to \fItowlower(wc)\fP and different
.\"O from \fItowupper(wc)\fP.
ワイド文字クラス "lower" は少なくとも、\fIwc\fP と \fItowlower(wc)\fP
が等しくなり、かつ \fItowupper(wc)\fP と異なるような文字を含む。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "lower" always contains
.\"O at least the letters \(aqa\(aq to \(aqz\(aq.
ワイド文字クラス "lower" は少なくとも \(aqa\(aq から \(aqz\(aq を必ず含む。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswlower ()
.\"O function returns nonzero
.\"O if \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "lower".
.\"O Otherwise it returns zero.
.BR iswlower ()
関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "lower" に属するワ
イド文字ならば 0 でない値を返す。そうでなければ 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR iswlower ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR iswlower ()
の動作は現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.PP
.\"O This function is not very appropriate for dealing with Unicode characters,
.\"O because Unicode knows about three cases: upper, lower and title case.
この関数で Unicode を扱うのはあまり適切でない。
なぜなら、Unicode には
大文字 (upper case)・小文字 (lower case)・タイトル文字 (title case)
の 3 つが含まれているからである。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR islower (3),
.BR iswctype (3),
.BR towlower (3)
