.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sat Sep  4 23:03:32 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ISWPRINT 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O iswprint \- test for printing wide character
iswprint \- 印字可能ワイド文字かどうかを調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswprint(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswprint ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR isprint (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It tests whether \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "print".
.BR iswprint ()
関数は、
.BR isprint (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "print" に属するワイド文字かど
うかを調べる。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "print" is disjoint from the wide-character class
.\"O "cntrl".
ワイド文字クラス "print" は、ワイド文字クラス "cntrl" と共通部分を持た
ない。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "print" contains the wide-character class "graph".
ワイド文字クラス "print" は、ワイド文字クラス "graph" を含む。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswprint ()
.\"O function returns nonzero if \fIwc\fP is a
.\"O wide character belonging to the wide-character class "print".
.\"O Otherwise it returns zero.
.BR iswprint ()
関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "print" に属するワ
イド文字ならば 0 でない値を返す。そうでなければ 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR iswprint ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR iswprint ()
の動作は現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR isprint (3),
.BR iswctype (3)
