.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sun Sep  5 22:05:50 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Dec 26 19:31:58 JST 1999
.\"           by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH ISWSPACE 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O iswspace \- test for whitespace wide character
iswspace \- 空白ワイド文字かどうかを調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswspace(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswspace ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR isspace (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It tests whether \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "space".
.BR iswspace ()
関数は、
.BR isspace (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "space" に属するワイド文字かど
うかを調べる。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "space" is disjoint from the wide-character class
.\"O "graph" and therefore also disjoint from its subclasses "alnum", "alpha",
.\"O "upper", "lower", "digit", "xdigit", "punct".
ワイド文字クラス "space" はワイド文字クラス "graph" と共通部分を持たない。
したがって、そのサブクラスである "alnum", "alpha", "upper", "lower",
"digit", "xdigit", "punct" とも共通部分を持たない。
.\" Note: UNIX98 (susv2/xbd/locale.html) says that "space" and "graph" may
.\" have characters in common, except U+0020. But C99 (ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\" section 7.25.2.1.10) says that "space" and "graph" are disjoint.
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "space" contains the wide-character class "blank".
ワイド文字クラス "space" はワイド文字クラス "blank" を含む。
.PP
.\"O The wide-character class "space" always contains at least the space character
.\"O and the control
.\"O characters \(aq\\f\(aq, \(aq\\n\(aq, \(aq\\r\(aq, \(aq\\t\(aq, \(aq\\v\(aq.
ワイド文字クラス "space" は少なくとも、空白文字および制御文字 \(aq\\f\(aq,
\(aq\\n\(aq, \(aq\\r\(aq, \(aq\\t\(aq, \(aq\\v\(aq を必ず含む。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iswspace ()
.\"O function returns nonzero if \fIwc\fP is a wide character
.\"O belonging to the wide-character class "space".
.\"O Otherwise it returns zero.
.BR iswspace ()
関数は、\fIwc\fP がワイド文字クラス "space" に含まれる
ならば 0 でない値を返す。そうでなければ 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR iswspace ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR iswspace ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR isspace (3),
.BR iswctype (3)
