.\"  Copyright 2002 walter harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"  Distributed under GPL
.\"  I had no way the check the functions out
.\"  be careful
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 27 2003 by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	authentication	認証
.\"WORD:	asymmetric	非対称鍵(暗号)
.\"WORD:	symmetric	対称鍵(暗号)
.\"
.TH KEY_SETSECRET 3 2002-07-18 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O key_decryptsession, key_encryptsession, key_setsecret, key_gendes,
.\"O key_secretkey_is_set \- interfaces to rpc keyserver daemon
key_decryptsession, key_encryptsession, key_setsecret, key_gendes,
key_secretkey_is_set \- rpc 鍵サーバ・デーモンとのインタフェース
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "#include <rpc/rpc.h>"
.sp
.BI "int key_decryptsession(const char *" remotename ,
.BI "des_block *" deskey );
.sp
.BI "int key_encryptsession(const char *" remotename ,
.BI "des_block *" deskey );
.sp
.BI "int key_gendes(des_block *" deskey );
.sp
.BI "int key_setsecret(const char *" key );
.sp
.B "int key_secretkey_is_set(void);"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The functions here are used within the RPC's secure authentication
.\"O mechanism (AUTH_DES).
.\"O There should be no need for user programs to
.\"O use this functions.
これらの関数は RPC の安全な認証機構 (AUTH_DES) で使用される。
ユーザ・プログラムでこれらの関数を使用する必要はない。

.\"O The function
.\"O .BR key_decryptsession ()
.\"O uses the (remote) server netname and takes the DES key
.\"O for decrypting.
.\"O It uses the public key of the server and the
.\"O secret key associated with the effective UID of the calling process.
関数
.BR key_decryptsession ()
は(リモート)サーバのネット名を用いて、復号用の DES 鍵を取得する。
サーバの公開鍵と、呼び出し元プロセスの実効 UID に対応する秘密鍵が使用される。

.\"O The function
.\"O .BR key_encryptsession ()
.\"O is the inverse of
.\"O .BR key_decryptsession ().
.\"O It encrypts the DES keys with the public key of the server and
.\"O the secret key associated with the effective UID of the calling process.
関数
.BR key_encryptsession ()
は
.BR key_decryptsession ()
の逆の処理を行う。
サーバの公開鍵と、呼び出し元プロセスの実効 UID に対応する秘密鍵で
DES 鍵を暗号する。

.\"O The function
.\"O .BR key_gendes ()
.\"O is used to ask the keyserver for a secure conversation key.
関数
.BR key_gendes ()
は、鍵サーバに安全な通信を行うための鍵を要求するために使用される。

.\"O The function
.\"O .BR key_setsecret ()
.\"O is used to set the key for the effective UID of the calling process.
関数
.BR key_setsecret ()
は、呼び出し元プロセスの実効 UID に対して鍵を設定するために使用される。

.\"O The function
.\"O .BR key_secretkey_is_set ()
.\"O can be used to determine whether a key has been
.\"O set for the effective UID of the calling process.
関数
.BR key_secretkey_is_set ()
は、呼び出し元プロセスの実効 UID に対して鍵が設定されているかどうかを
調べるために使用される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O These functions return 1 on success and 0 on failure.
これらの関数は成功した場合 1 を、失敗した場合 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Note that we talk about two types of encryption here.
.\"O One is asymmetric using a public and secret key.
.\"O The other is symmetric, the
.\"O 64-bit DES.
ここでは 2 種類の暗号方式が登場することに注意すること。
一つは公開鍵と秘密鍵を使用する非対称鍵暗号であり、
もう一つは対称鍵暗号である 64 ビット DES である。
.PP
.\"O These routines were part of the Linux/Doors-project, abandoned by now.
これらの関数は Linux/Doors-project の成果の一部だったが、
現在までに該当箇所はすべて破棄された。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR crypt (3)
