.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_4_CLAUSE_UCB)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"     @(#)killpg.2	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Fri Jul 23 21:55:01 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 08:11:14 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2004-06-16 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"     Added notes on CAP_KILL
.\" Modified 2004-06-21 by aeb
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.TH KILLPG 3 2020\-06\-09 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
killpg \- シグナルをプロセスグループに送る
.SH 書式
\fB#include <signal.h>\fP
.PP
\fBint killpg(int \fP\fIpgrp\fP\fB, int \fP\fIsig\fP\fB);\fP
.PP
.RS -4
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件 (\fBfeature_test_macros\fP(7)  参照):
.RE
.ad l
.TP  4
\fBkillpg\fP():
.\"    || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500
    || /* Since glibc 2.19: */ _DEFAULT_SOURCE
    || /* Glibc versions <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE
.ad
.SH 説明
\fBkillpg\fP()  は \fIsig\fP で指定したシグナルを \fIpgrp\fP で指定したプロセスグループに送る。 シグナルの定義の一覧は
\fBsignal\fP(7)  を参照のこと。
.PP
引数 \fIpgrp\fP に 0 を指定した場合には \fBkillpg\fP()  は呼び出し元のプロセスが属しているプロセスグループに対してシグナルを送る。
(POSIX では以下のように記述されている: \fIpgrp\fP が 1 以下である場合、動作は未定義である。)
.PP
For the permissions required to send a signal to another process, see
\fBkill\fP(2).
.SH 返り値
成功した場合、0 が返される。エラーが発生した場合、\-1 が返され、 \fIerrno\fP が適切に設定される。
.SH エラー
.TP 
\fBEINVAL\fP
\fIsig\fP で指定された値は無効なシグナル番号である。
.TP 
\fBEPERM\fP
The process does not have permission to send the signal to any of the target
processes.  For the required permissions, see \fBkill\fP(2).
.TP 
\fBESRCH\fP
\fIpgrp\fP で指定されたプロセスグループに属するプロセスが存在しなかった。
.TP 
\fBESRCH\fP
プロセスグループとして 0 が指定されたが、送信プロセスは プロセスグループを持っていない。
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1\-2001, POSIX.1\-2008, SVr4, 4.4BSD (\fBkillpg\fP() は 4BSD で初めて登場した).
.SH 注意
BSD 系システムと System\ V 系システムでは、 許可のチェックに様々な違いがある。 \fBkill\fP(3p) の POSIX の原理
(rationale) を参照すること。 POSIX で記述されていない違いとしては、返り値 \fBEPERM\fP がある。 BSD
では「送信先プロセスの許可のチェックが 1 つでも失敗した場合は、 シグナルが送信されず、 \fBEPERM\fP が返される」と記述されている。 POSIX
では「送信先プロセスの許可のチェックが全て失敗した場合にのみ、 \fBEPERM\fP が返される」と記述されている。
.SS "C ライブラリとカーネルの違い"
Linux では、 \fBkillpg\fP()  はライブラリ関数として実装されており、 \fIkill(\-pgrp,\ sig)\fP の呼び出しが行われる。
.SH 関連項目
\fBgetpgrp\fP(2), \fBkill\fP(2), \fBsignal\fP(2), \fBcredentials\fP(7),
\fBcapabilities\fP(7)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 5.10 の一部である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
\%https://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
