.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 1995-08-14 by Arnt Gulbrandsen <agulbra@troll.no>
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2004-08-20, Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified 2005-01-16, Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified 2005-09-06, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH LOG2 3 2017\-09\-15 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
log2, log2f, log2l \- 底が 2 の対数関数
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <math.h>\fP
.PP
\fBdouble log2(double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
\fBfloat log2f(float \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
\fBlong double log2l(long double \fP\fIx\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.PP
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.PP
.RS -4
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件 (\fBfeature_test_macros\fP(7)  参照):
.RE
.PP
.ad l
\fBlog2\fP(), \fBlog2f\fP(), \fBlog2l\fP():
.RS 4
_ISOC99_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L
.RE
.ad b
.SH 説明
These functions return the base 2 logarithm of \fIx\fP.
.SH 返り値
成功すると、これらの関数は \fIx\fP の底を 2 とする対数を返す。
.PP
\fIx\fP が 0、1、負、無限大、NaN などのさまざまな特別な状況については、 \fBlog\fP(3)  を参照のこと。
.SH エラー
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は \fBmath_error\fP(7)  を参照のこと。
.PP
これらの関数で発生するエラーについては、 \fBlog\fP(3)  を参照のこと。
.SH バージョン
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.SH 属性
この節で使用されている用語の説明については、 \fBattributes\fP(7) を参照。
.TS
allbox;
lbw24 lb lb
l l l.
インターフェース	属性	値
T{
\fBlog2\fP(),
\fBlog2f\fP(),
\fBlog2l\fP()
T}	Thread safety	MT\-Safe
.TE
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1\-2001, POSIX.1\-2008.
.PP
The variant returning \fIdouble\fP also conforms to SVr4, 4.3BSD.
.SH 関連項目
\fBcbrt\fP(3), \fBclog2\fP(3), \fBlog\fP(3), \fBlog10\fP(3), \fBsqrt\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 5.10 の一部である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
\%https://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
