.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.\" Modified, aeb, 990824
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HAYAKAWA Hitoshi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sep 11, 1999   HAYAKAWA Hitoshi <cz8cb01@linux.or.jp>
.\" 
.\"WORD:    multibyte   マルチバイト
.\"WORD:    locale  ロケール
.\"
.TH MB_CUR_MAX 3 1999-07-04 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O MB_CUR_MAX \- maximum length of a multibyte character in the current locale
MB_CUR_MAX \- 現在のロケールでのマルチバイト文字の最大長
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B MB_CUR_MAX
.\"O macro defines an integer expression giving
.\"O the maximum number of bytes needed to represent a single
.\"O wide character in the current locale.
.\"O It is locale dependent and therefore not a compile-time constant.
.B MB_CUR_MAX
マクロは、現在のロケールで一つのワイド文字を表現するために必要な
最大バイト数を表す整数表現を定義する。
これはロケール依存であり、コンパイル時に決まる定数ではない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O An integer in the range [1,
.\"O .BR MB_LEN_MAX ].
.\"O The value 1 denotes traditional 8-bit encoded characters.
[1,
.BR MB_LEN_MAX ]
の範囲の整数を返す。
1 という値は伝統的な (traditional) 8-bit エンコードされた文字を意味する。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR MB_LEN_MAX (3),
.BR mblen (3),
.BR mbstowcs (3),
.BR mbtowc (3),
.BR wcstombs (3),
.BR wctomb (3)
