.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.\" Modified, aeb, 990824
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HAYAKAWA Hitoshi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sep 11 1999, HAYAKAWA Hitoshi <cz8cb01@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:    locale  ロケール
.\"
.TH MB_LEN_MAX 3 1999-07-04 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O MB_LEN_MAX \- maximum multibyte length of a character across all locales
MB_LEN_MAX \- 全てのロケールでの１文字の最大マルチバイト長
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <limits.h>
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B MB_LEN_MAX
.\"O macro is the upper bound for the number of bytes needed to represent a single
.\"O wide character, across all locales.
.B MB_LEN_MAX
マクロは、全てのロケールで一つのワイド文字を表現するために必要となる
最大バイト数である。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O A constant integer greater than zero.
0 より大きいの整数型の定数。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.\"O The entities
.\"O .B MB_LEN_MAX
.\"O and
.\"O .I sizeof(wchar_t)
.\"O are totally unrelated.
.\"O In glibc,
.\"O .B MB_LEN_MAX
.\"O is typically 6 while
.\"O .I sizeof(wchar_t)
.\"O is 4.
.SH 注意
.B MB_LEN_MAX
と
.I sizeof(wchar_t)
の値にはなんの関係もない。
glibc では
.B MB_LEN_MAX
は通常は 6 で、
.I sizeof(wchar_t)
は 4 である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR MB_CUR_MAX (3)
