.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 YOSHINO Takashi
.\"       all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 17 11:01:38 JST 1998
.\"       by YOSHINO Takashi <yoshino@civil.jcn.nihon-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Sep 14 JST 2003 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH MODF 3  2010-09-20 ""  "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
.\"O modf, modff, modfl \- extract signed integral and fractional values from
.\"O floating-point number
modf, modff, modfl \- 浮動小数点実数から、符号付き整数と小数部分を取り出す関数
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double modf(double " x ", double *" iptr );
.br
.BI "float modff(float " x ", float *" iptr );
.br
.BI "long double modfl(long double " x ", long double *" iptr );
.fi
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR modf (),
.BR modfl ():
.RS 4
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR modf ()
.\"O function breaks the argument \fIx\fP into an integral
.\"O part and a fractional part, each of which has the same sign as \fIx\fP.
.\"O The integral part is stored in the location pointed to by \fIiptr\fP.
.BR modf ()
関数は、引数 \fIx\fP を整数部分と小数部分に分割する。
このとき、ふたつの値はともに \fIx\fP と同じ符号を持つ。
整数部分は \fIiptr\fP が指す場所に格納される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR modf ()
.\"O function returns the fractional part of \fIx\fP.
.BR modf ()
関数は \fIx\fP の小数部分を返す。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is a NaN, a NaN is returned, and
.\"O .IR *iptr
.\"O is set to a NaN.
.I x
が NaN の場合、NaN が返され、
.IR *iptr
に NaN が設定される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is positive infinity (negative infinity), +0 (\-0) is returned, and
.\"O .IR *iptr
.\"O is set to positive infinity (negative infinity).
.I x
が正の無限大 (負の無限大) の場合、
+0 (\-0) が返され、
.IR *iptr
に正の無限大 (負の無限大) が設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O No errors occur.
エラーは発生しない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O The variant returning
.\"O .I double
.\"O also conforms to
.\"O SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89.
.I double
版の関数は SVr4, 4.3BSD, C89 にも準拠している。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR frexp (3),
.BR ldexp (3)
