'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-23, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH MQ_UNLINK 3 2010-08-29 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mq_unlink \- remove a message queue
mq_unlink \- メッセージキューを削除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <mqueue.h>
.sp
.BI "int mq_unlink(const char *" name );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lrt\fP.
\fI\-lrt\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR mq_unlink ()
.\"O removes the specified message queue
.\"O .IR name .
.\"O The message queue name is removed immediately.
.\"O The queue itself is destroyed once any other processes that have
.\"O the queue open close their descriptors referring to the queue.
.BR mq_unlink ()
は指定されたメッセージキュー
.I name
を削除する。
メッセージキュー名は直ちに削除される。
キュー自体は、そのキューをオープンした他のすべてのプロセスが
そのキューを参照する記述子をクローズした時点で破棄される。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success
.\"O .BR mq_unlink ()
.\"O returns 0; on error, \-1 is returned, with
.\"O .I errno
.\"O set to indicate the error.
成功すると、
.BR mq_unlink ()
は 0 を返す。エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値を設定する。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EACCES
.\"O The caller does not have permission to unlink this message queue.
呼び出し元プロセスがこのメッセージキューを削除 (unlink) する
許可を持たない。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.\"O .I name
.\"O was too long.
.I name
が長過ぎる。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O There is no message queue with the given
.\"O .IR name .
指定された名前
.I name
を持つメッセージキューが存在しない。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR mq_close (3),
.BR mq_getattr (3),
.BR mq_notify (3),
.BR mq_open (3),
.BR mq_receive (3),
.BR mq_send (3),
.BR mq_overview (7)
