.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\" Based on glibc infopages
.\"
.\" Corrections by aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu 05 Dec 2002 by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	NaN		無効値
.\"WORD:	quiet NaN	SIGFPE シグナルなしの無効値
.\"
.TH NAN 3 2010-09-20 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O nan, nanf, nanl \- return 'Not a Number'
.SH 名前
nan, nanf, nanl \- 無効値 ('Not a Number') を返す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double nan(const char *" tagp );
.br
.BI "float nanf(const char *" tagp );
.br
.BI "long double nanl(const char *" tagp );
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR nan (),
.BR nanf (),
.BR nanl ():
.RS 4
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O These functions return a representation (determined by
.\"O .IR tagp )
.\"O of a quiet NaN.
.\"O If the implementation does not support
.\"O quiet NaNs, these functions return zero.
.\" motoki: quiet NaN とは何だろう？
これらの関数は、SIGFPE シグナルなしの無効値 (NaN) を示す表現を返す
(どの表現を使用するかは
.I tagp
で指定する)。SIGFPE シグナルなしの NaN をサポートしていない実装では 0 を返す。
.LP
.\"O The call
.\"O .I nan("char-sequence")
.\"O is equivalent to:
.\"O .nf
.\"O 
.\"O     strtod("NAN(char-sequence)", NULL);
.\"O .fi
.I nan("char-sequence")
を呼び出すのは、
.nf

    strtod("NAN(char-sequence)", NULL);

.fi
と等価である。
.PP
.\"O Similarly, calls to
.\"O .BR nanf ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR nanl ()
.\"O are equivalent to analogous calls to
.\"O .BR strtof (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR strtold (3).
同様に、
.BR nanf ()
や
.BR nanl ()
を呼び出すのは、
.BR strtof ()
や
.BR strtold ()
を呼ぶのと同じである。
.PP
.\"O The argument
.\"O .I tagp
.\"O is used in an unspecified manner.
.\"O On IEEE 754 systems, there are
.\"O many representations of NaN, and
.\"O .I tagp
.\"O selects one.
.\"O On other systems it may do nothing.
引き数
.I tagp
の使い方は規定されていない。
IEEE 754 準拠のシステムでは、NaN にも複数の表現が存在し、
.I tagp
はその選択に使用される。
他のシステムでは、何の意味もないかもしれない。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O See also IEC 559 and the appendix with
.\"O recommended functions in IEEE 754/IEEE 854.
IEC 559 や推奨関数になっている IEEE 754/IEEE 854
の付録も参照すること。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR isnan (3),
.BR strtod (3),
.BR math_error (7)
