.\" This manpage copyright 1998 by Andi Kleen. Subject to the GPL.
.\" Based on the original comments from Alexey Kuznetsov
.\" $Id: netlink.3,v 1.4 2000/09/07 07:21:43 hanataka Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 Shouichi Saito
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jul 26 12:18:39 JST 1999
.\"	by Shouichi Saito <ss236rx@ymg.urban.ne.jp>
.\" Proofed Fri Aug 20 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	payload		格納領域
.\"WORD:	lvalue		左辺値
.\"
.TH NETLINK 3 1999-05-14 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
.\"O netlink \- Netlink macros
netlink \- netlink マクロ
.SH 書式
.nf
.\" FIXME . what will glibc 2.1 use here?
.\" May 2007: glibc 2.5, things look to be unchanged -- the header file
.\" is still linux/netlink.h -- mtk
.B #include <asm/types.h>
.br
.B #include <linux/netlink.h>
.sp
.BI "int NLMSG_ALIGN(size_t " len );
.br
.BI "int NLMSG_LENGTH(size_t " len );
.br
.BI "int NLMSG_SPACE(size_t " len );
.br
.BI "void *NLMSG_DATA(struct nlmsghdr *" nlh );
.br
.BI "struct nlmsghdr *NLMSG_NEXT(struct nlmsghdr *" nlh ", int " len );
.br
.BI "int NLMSG_OK(struct nlmsghdr *" nlh ", int " len );
.br
.BI "int NLMSG_PAYLOAD(struct nlmsghdr *" nlh ", int " len );
.fi
.SH 説明
.\"O .I <linux/netlink.h>
.\"O defines several standard macros to access or create a netlink datagram.
.\"O They are similar in spirit to the macros defined in
.\"O .BR cmsg (3)
.\"O for auxiliary data.
.\"O The buffer passed to and from a netlink socket should
.\"O only be accessed using these macros.
.I <linux/netlink.h>
では、 netlink データグラムにアクセスしたり、これを作成するための
標準マクロがいくつか定義されている。
これらは
.BR cmsg (3)
で定義されている補助データ (auxiliary data) 用のマクロと、
その精神において似ているものである。
netlink ソケットに対してやりとりされるバッファには、
必ずこれらのマクロを使ってアクセスすべきである。
.TP
.B NLMSG_ALIGN
.\"O Round the length of a netlink message up to align it properly.
netlink メッセージの長さを丸めて正しく揃える。
.TP
.B NLMSG_LENGTH
.\"O Given the payload length,
.\"O .IR len ,
.\"O this macro returns the aligned length to store in the
.\"O .I nlmsg_len
.\"O field of the
.\"O .IR nlmsghdr .
格納領域 (payload) の長さ
.I len
を引数にとり、
.I nlmsghdr
の
.I nlmsg_len
フィールドに代入できる
揃えられた長さ (aligned length) を返す。
.TP
.B NLMSG_SPACE
.\"O Return the number of bytes that a netlink message with payload of
.\"O .I len
.\"O would occupy.
ペイロードの長さが
.I len
の netlink メッセージのバイト数を返す。
.TP
.B NLMSG_DATA
.\"O Return a pointer to the payload associated with the passed
.\"O .IR nlmsghdr .
与えた
.I nlmsghdr
に関連づけられた格納領域へのポインタを返す。
.TP
.\" this is bizarre, maybe the interface should be fixed.
.B NLMSG_NEXT
.\"O Get the next
.\"O .I nlmsghdr
.\"O in a multipart message.
.\"O The caller must check if the current nlmsghdr didn't have the NLMSG_DONE
.\"O set\(emthis function doesn't return NULL on end.
.\"O The
.\"O .I len
.\"O argument is an lvalue containing the remaining length
.\"O of the message buffer.
.\"O This macro decrements it by the length of the message header.
マルチパートメッセージにおいて、次の
.I nlmsghdr
を入手する。これを呼び出すときには、
現在の nlmsghdr で NLMSG_DONE がセットされていないことを
確認しなければならない。この関数は終端で NULL を返さないからである。
.I len
引数はメッセージバッファの残り長さが入った左辺値である。
このマクロはこの引数からメッセージヘッダの長さ分を差し引く。
.TP
.B NLMSG_OK
.\"O Return true if the netlink message is not truncated and
.\"O is in a form suitable for parsing.
Netlink メッセージが途切れておらず、かつ解釈可能な形の場合であれば真を返す。
.TP
.B NLMSG_PAYLOAD
.\"O Return the length of the payload associated with the
.\"O .IR nlmsghdr .
.I nlmsghdr
に関連づけられた格納領域の長さを返す。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
.\"O These macros are nonstandard Linux extensions.
これらのマクロは非標準で Linux での拡張である。
.SH 注意
.\"O It is often better to use netlink via
.\"O .I libnetlink
.\"O than via the low-level kernel interface.
通常はカーネルの低レベルインターフェイスよりも、
.I libnetlink
経由で netlink を用いるほうが良い。
.SH 関連項目
.BR netlink (7)
.br
.\"O and ftp://ftp.inr.ac.ru/ip-routing/iproute2* for libnetlink
および libnetlink に関しては ftp://ftp.inr.ac.ru/ip-routing/iproute2*
