.\" Copyright 2004 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 30 14:07:37 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH POW10 3  2008-08-11 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pow10, pow10f, pow10l \- base-10 power functions
pow10, pow10f, pow10l \- 底が 10 の累乗関数
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #define _GNU_SOURCE
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double pow10(double " x );
.br
.BI "float pow10f(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double pow10l(long double " x );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR pow10 ()
.\"O function returns the value of 10 raised to the
.\"O power \fIx\fP.
.BR pow10 ()
関数は 10 の \fIx\fP 乗の値を返す。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O This is a GNU extension.
これは GNU による拡張である。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O These functions are identical to the functions listed under
.\"O .BR exp10 (3).
これらの関数は
.BR exp10 (3)
でリストされている関数と同一である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR exp10 (3),
.BR pow (3),
.BR feature_test_macros (7)
