.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:45:17 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" FIXME glibc 2.10 adds psiginfo(), specified in SUSv4.  This function
.\" should be documented, probably on this page.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Dec 26 13:19:15 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\"
.TH PSIGNAL 3  2008-08-21 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O psignal \- print signal message
psignal \- シグナルメッセージを表示
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "void psignal(int " sig ", const char *" s );
.sp
.BI "extern const char *const " sys_siglist [];
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR psignal ():
_SVID_SOURCE || _BSD_SOURCE
.br
.IR sys_siglist :
_BSD_SOURCE
\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR psignal ()
.\"O function displays a message on \fIstderr\fP
.\"O consisting of the string \fIs\fP, a colon, a space, and a string
.\"O describing the signal number \fIsig\fP.
.\"O If \fIsig\fP is invalid,
.\"O the message displayed will indicate an unknown signal.
.BR psignal ()
関数は、文字列 \fIs\fP、コロン、スペース、
シグナル番号 \fIsig\fP を説明する文字列から構成されるメッセージを
\fIstderr\fP に表示する。もし \fIsig\fP が不正ならば、表示される
メッセージは未知のシグナルを示す。
.PP
.\"O The array \fIsys_siglist\fP holds the signal description strings
.\"O indexed by signal number.
配列 \fIsys_siglist\fP はシグナルを説明する文字列を保持しており、
配列へのアクセスにはシグナル番号を添え字として用いる事ができる。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR psignal ()
.\"O function returns no value.
.BR psignal ()
関数は、値を返さない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2008, 4.3BSD.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR perror (3),
.BR strsignal (3)
