.\" Copyright 2003 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Aug 28 14:07:20 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH PUTGRENT 3 2003-09-09 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O putgrent \- write a group database entry to a file
putgrent \- グループデータベースエントリをファイルに書き込む
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */"
.br
.B #include <grp.h>
.sp
.BI "int putgrent(const struct group *" grp ", FILE *" fp );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR putgrent ()
.\"O function is the counterpart for
.\"O .BR fgetgrent (3).
.BR putgrent ()
関数は
.BR fgetgrent (3)
の逆である。
.\"O The function writes the content of the provided \fIstruct group\fP into the
.\"O file pointed to by
.\"O .IR fp .
この関数は与えられた \fIstruct group\fP を
.I fp
で指されるファイルに書き込む。
.\"O The list of group members must be NULL-terminated or NULL-initialized.
グループメンバのリストは、NULL で終端されるか、
NULL で初期化されなければならない。
.sp
.\"O The \fIstruct group\fP is defined as follows:
\fIstruct group\fP は以下のように定義される:
.sp
.in +4n
.nf
struct group {
.\"O     char   *gr_name;      /* group name */
.\"O     char   *gr_passwd;    /* group password */
.\"O     gid_t   gr_gid;       /* group ID */
.\"O     char  **gr_mem;       /* group members */
    char   *gr_name;      /* グループ名 */
    char   *gr_passwd;    /* グループパスワード */
    gid_t   gr_gid;       /* グループ ID */
    char  **gr_mem;       /* グループメンバ */
};
.fi
.in
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The function returns zero on success, and a nonzero value on error.
この関数は、成功した場合は 0 を返し、エラーの場合は 0 以外の値を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O This function is a GNU extension.
この関数は GNU による拡張である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fgetgrent (3),
.BR getgrent (3),
.BR group (5)
