.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification
.\"      http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jan 11 00:55:58 JST 2000
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Nov  3 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH PUTWCHAR 3  1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O putwchar \- write a wide character to standard output
putwchar \- ワイド文字を標準出力へ書き出す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t putwchar(wchar_t " wc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR putwchar ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR putchar (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It writes the wide character \fIwc\fP to \fIstdout\fP.
.\"O If \fIferror(stdout)\fP becomes true, it returns
.\"O .BR WEOF .
.\"O If a wide character
.\"O conversion error occurs, it sets \fIerrno\fP to \fBEILSEQ\fP and returns
.\"O .BR WEOF .
.\"O Otherwise it returns \fIwc\fP.
.BR putwchar ()
関数は
.BR putchar ()
のワイド文字版である。
この関数は \fIwc\fP を \fIstdout\fP へと書き出す。\fIferror(stdout)\fP が
真ならば
.B WEOF
を返す。ワイド文字の変換に失敗した場合には \fIerrno\fP に
\fBEILSEQ\fP を設定して
.B WEOF
を返す。それ以外の場合は \fIwc\fP を返す。
.PP
.\"O For nonlocking counterparts, see
.\"O .BR unlocked_stdio (3).
これらの処理をロックせずに行いたいときは、
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR putwchar ()
.\"O function returns \fIwc\fP if no error occurred, or
.\"O .B WEOF
.\"O to indicate an error.
エラーが起きなかった場合、
.BR putwchar ()
関数は \fIwc\fP を返す。
エラーが起きた場合は
.B WEOF
を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR putwchar ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR putwchar ()
の動作は現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存している。
.PP
.\"O It is reasonable to expect that
.\"O .BR putwchar ()
.\"O will actually write
.\"O the multibyte sequence corresponding to the wide character \fIwc\fP.
.BR putwchar ()
が実際にはワイド文字 \fIwc\fP と等価なマルチバイト文字を
書き出すことを期待してもよい。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fputwc (3),
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
