.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" This replaces an earlier man page written by Walter Harms
.\" <walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de>.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Sep 22 10:42:23 2002
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH QECVT 3  2010-09-20 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O qecvt, qfcvt, qgcvt \- convert a floating-point number to a string
qecvt, qfcvt, qgcvt \- 浮動小数点数の文字列への変換
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "char *qecvt(long double " number ", int " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "int *" sign );
.sp
.BI "char *qfcvt(long double " number ", int " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "int *" sign );
.sp
.BI "char *qgcvt(long double " number ", int " ndigit ", char *" buf );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR qecvt (),
.BR qfcvt (),
.BR qgcvt ():
_SVID_SOURCE
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The functions
.\"O .BR qecvt (),
.\"O .BR qfcvt ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR qgcvt ()
.\"O are identical to
.\"O .BR ecvt (3),
.\"O .BR fcvt (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR gcvt (3)
.\"O respectively, except that they use a
.\"O .I "long double"
.\"O argument
.\"O .IR number .
.\"O See
.\"O .BR ecvt (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR gcvt (3).
関数
.BR qecvt (),
.BR qfcvt (),
.BR  qgcvt ()
は、それぞれ
.BR ecvt (3),
.BR fcvt (3),
.BR gcvt (3)
と同じである。
引き数
.I number
が
.I "long double"
型である点だけが異なる。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SVr4.
.\"O Not seen in most common UNIX implementations,
.\"O but occurs in SunOS.
.\"O Not supported by libc4 and libc5.
.\"O Supported by glibc.
多くの一般的な UNIX には実装されていないが、SunOS には実装されている。
libc4 と libc5 ではサポートされていないが、
glibc ではサポートされている。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O These functions are obsolete.
.\"O Instead,
.\"O .BR sprintf (3)
.\"O is recommended.
これらの関数は廃止された。代わりに
.BR sprintf (3)
の使用を推奨する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ecvt (3),
.BR ecvt_r (3),
.BR gcvt (3),
.BR sprintf (3)
