.\"	$NetBSD: rcmd.3,v 1.9 1996/05/28 02:07:39 mrg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)rcmd.3	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/4/93
.\"
.\" Contributed as Linux man page by David A. Holland, 970908
.\" I have not checked whether the Linux situation is exactly the same.
.\"
.\" 2007-12-08, mtk, Converted from mdoc to man macros
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 1 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	standard name		(ホストの) 標準名
.\"WORD:	regular file		通常ファイル
.\"
.TH RCMD 3 2007-12-28 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O rcmd, rresvport, iruserok, ruserok \- routines for returning a
.\"O stream to a remote command
.SH 名前
rcmd, rresvport, iruserok, ruserok \- リモートコマンドにストリームを返す関数群
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <netdb.h> \ \ \fP/* Or <unistd.h> on some systems */
.sp
.BI "int rcmd(char **" ahost ", int " inport ", const char *" locuser ", "
.BI "         const char *" remuser ", const char *" cmd ", int *" fd2p );
.sp
.BI "int rresvport(int *" port );
.sp
.BI "int iruserok(uint32_t " raddr ", int " superuser ", "
.BI "             const char *" ruser ", const char *" luser );
.sp
.BI "int ruserok(const char *" rhost ", int " superuser ", "
.BI "            const char *" ruser ", const char *" luser );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR rcmd (),
.BR rresvport (),
.BR ruserok ():
_BSD_SOURCE
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR rcmd ()
.\"O function is used by the superuser to execute a command on
.\"O a remote machine using an authentication scheme based
.\"O on privileged port numbers.
.BR rcmd ()
関数は、スーパーユーザーがリモートマシンでコマンドを実行するために
用いられる。このとき特権ポート番号をもとにした認証スキームが
用いられる。
.\"O The
.\"O .BR rresvport ()
.\"O function
.\"O returns a descriptor to a socket
.\"O with an address in the privileged port space.
.BR rresvport ()
関数は、特権ポート空間のアドレスを持つソケットの
ディスクリプターを返す。
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iruserok ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ruserok ()
.\"O functions are used by servers
.\"O to authenticate clients requesting service with
.\"O .BR rcmd ().
.BR iruserok ()
関数と
.BR ruserok ()
関数は、
.BR rcmd ()
でサービス要求を行ったクライアントの認証を行うために
サーバーが用いる関数である。
.\"O All four functions are present in the same file and are used
.\"O by the
.\"O .BR rshd (8)
.\"O server (among others).
以上の 4 つの関数は、すべて同じファイルに記述されており、
.BR rshd (8)
サーバーによって (他の関数とともに) 利用される。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR rcmd ()
.\"O function
.\"O looks up the host
.\"O .I *ahost
.\"O using
.\"O .BR gethostbyname (3),
.\"O returning \-1 if the host does not exist.
.\"O Otherwise
.\"O .I *ahost
.\"O is set to the standard name of the host
.\"O and a connection is established to a server
.\"O residing at the well-known Internet port
.\"O .IR inport .
.BR rcmd ()
関数は
.BR gethostbyname (3)
を用いて
.I *ahost
の参照を行う。ホストが存在しない場合は \-1 を返す。
見つかった場合は
.I *ahost
にホストの標準名 (standard name) をセットして、
予約されているインターネットポート
.I inport
経由でサーバーへの接続を確立する。
.PP
.\"O If the connection succeeds,
.\"O a socket in the Internet domain of type
.\"O .BR SOCK_STREAM
.\"O is returned to the caller, and given to the remote
.\"O command as
.\"O .IR stdin
.\"O and
.\"O .IR stdout .
接続に成功したら、インターネットドメインに存在するタイプ
.B SOCK_STREAM
のソケットが呼び出しもとに返される。
このソケットの相手側はリモートコマンドの
.I stdin
および
.I stdout
に接続される。
.\"O If
.\"O .I fd2p
.\"O is nonzero, then an auxiliary channel to a control
.\"O process will be set up, and a descriptor for it will be placed
.\"O in
.\"O .IR *fd2p .
.I fd2p
がゼロでない場合は、制御プロセスへの接続がもう一つ用意され、
そのディスクリプターが
.I *fd2p
にセットされる。
.\"O The control process will return diagnostic
.\"O output from the command (unit 2) on this channel, and will also
.\"O accept bytes on this channel as being UNIX signal numbers, to be
.\"O forwarded to the process group of the command.
制御プロセスはリモートコマンドからの標準エラー出力 (unit 2) を
このチャンネルに返す。
また制御プロセスはこの接続から受け取ったバイトデータを
UNIX シグナルの番号として扱い、リモートコマンドのプロセス
グループへとシグナルを送る。
.\"O If
.\"O .I fd2p
.\"O is 0, then the
.\"O .IR stderr
.\"O (unit 2 of the remote
.\"O command) will be made the same as the
.\"O .IR stdout
.\"O and no
.\"O provision is made for sending arbitrary signals to the remote process,
.\"O although you may be able to get its attention by using out-of-band data.
.I fd2p
がゼロの場合は、
.I stderr
(リモートコマンドの unit 2) は
.I stdout
と一緒にまとめられる。またこの場合はリモートプロセスへ
任意のシグナルを送ることはできなくなる。
ただし帯域外 (out-of-band) データを用いれば、
リモートプロセスの注意を引くことはできるかもしれない。
.PP
.\"O The protocol is described in detail in
.\"O .BR rshd (8).
プロトコルの詳細は
.BR rshd (8)
に記述されている。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR rresvport ()
.\"O function is used to obtain a socket with a privileged
.\"O address bound to it.
.\"O This socket is suitable for use by
.\"O .BR rcmd ()
.\"O and several other functions.
.\"O Privileged Internet ports are those in the range 0 to 1023.
.\"O Only the superuser is allowed to bind an address of this sort to a socket.
.BR rresvport ()
関数は特権アドレスにバインドされたソケットを取得するために用いられる。
このソケットは
.BR rcmd ()
などの関数での利用に適している。インターネットポートの特権ポートは、
0 から 1023 の範囲である。スーパーユーザーだけがこれらのアドレスを
ソケットにバインドすることができる。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR iruserok ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ruserok ()
.\"O functions take a remote host's IP address or name, respectively,
.\"O two usernames and a flag indicating whether the local user's
.\"O name is that of the superuser.
.BR iruserok ()
と
.BR ruserok ()
関数は、まず以下の引数を取る: リモートホスト
.RB ( iruserok ()
は IP アドレスで、
.BR ruserok ()
はホスト名で指定)、 2 つのユーザー名、ローカルユーザーの名前が
スーパーユーザーのものであるかどうかを示すフラグ、である。
.\"O Then, if the user is
.\"O .I not
.\"O the superuser, it checks the
.\"O .IR /etc/hosts.equiv
.\"O file.
.\"O If that lookup is not done, or is unsuccessful, the
.\"O .IR .rhosts
.\"O in the local user's home directory is checked to see if the request for
.\"O service is allowed.
もしユーザーが\fBスーパーユーザーではない\fP場合は、これらの関数は
.I /etc/hosts.equiv
ファイルをチェックする。ファイルが見つからなかったり、
内容のチェックに失敗した場合には、
ローカルユーザーのホームディレクトリにある
.I .rhosts
ファイルをチェックして、サービス要求が許可されているかどうか調べる。
.PP
.\"O If this file does not exist, is not a regular file, is owned by anyone
.\"O other than the user or the superuser, or is writable by anyone other
.\"O than the owner, the check automatically fails.
.\"O Zero is returned if the machine name is listed in the
.\"O .IR hosts.equiv
.\"O file, or the host and remote username are found in the
.\"O .IR .rhosts
.\"O file; otherwise
.\"O .BR iruserok ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ruserok ()
.\"O return \-1.
.\"O If the local domain (as obtained from
.\"O .BR gethostname (2))
.\"O is the same as the remote domain, only the machine name need be specified.
このファイルが存在しなかったり、
通常ファイル (regular file) ではなかったり、
指定ユーザーまたはスーパーユーザー以外の所有だったり、
所有者以外から書き込み可能だったりした場合には、
このチェックは自動的に失敗する。
マシンの名前が
.I hosts.equiv
にリストされていたり、
ホストとリモートユーザーの名前が
.I .rhosts
ファイルに書かれていた場合には 0 が返される。
それ以外の場合には、
.BR iruserok ()
と
.BR ruserok ()
は \-1 を返す。
.RB ( gethostname (2)
によって取得される) ローカルドメインがリモートのドメインと同じ場合は、
マシンの名前だけを指定すればよい。
.PP
.\"O If the IP address of the remote host is known,
.\"O .BR iruserok ()
.\"O should be used in preference to
.\"O .BR ruserok (),
.\"O as it does not require trusting the DNS server for the remote host's domain.
リモートホストの IP アドレスがわかっている場合は、
.BR ruserok ()
よりも
.BR iruserok () を用いる方が良いだろう。
.BR ruserok ()
はリモートホストの所属するドメインの DNS サーバーが信頼できなくても
使用できるからである。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR rcmd ()
.\"O function
.\"O returns a valid socket descriptor on success.
.\"O It returns \-1 on error and prints a diagnostic message on the standard error.
.BR rcmd ()
関数は成功すると有効なソケットディスクリプターを返す。
失敗すると \-1 を返し、標準エラー出力に診断メッセージを
表示する。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR rresvport ()
.\"O function
.\"O returns a valid, bound socket descriptor on success.
.\"O It returns \-1 on error with the global value
.\"O .I errno
.\"O set according to the reason for failure.
.\"O The error code
.\"O .BR EAGAIN
.\"O is overloaded to mean "All network ports in use."
.BR rresvport ()
関数は、成功するとバインドされた有効なソケットディスクリプターを返す。
失敗すると \-1 を返し、グローバル変数
.I errno
をエラーの原因に対応する値にセットする。
エラーコード
.B EAGAIN
は、この関数においては「すべてのネットワークポートが使用中」
という意味を表す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O Not in POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O Present on the BSDs, Solaris, and many other systems.
.\"O These
.\"O functions appeared in
.\"O 4.2BSD.
POSIX.1-2001 にはない。
BSD 系、Solaris や他の多くのシステムに存在する。
これらの関数は 4.2BSD で登場した。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O .BR iruserok ()
.\"O is not declared in glibc headers.
.BR iruserok ()
は glibc のヘッダでは宣言されていない。
.\" Bug filed 25 Nov 2007:
.\" http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=5399
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR rlogin (1),
.BR rsh (1),
.BR intro (2),
.BR rexec (3),
.BR rexecd (8),
.BR rlogind (8),
.BR rshd (8)
