.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:25:21 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec 24 12:34:12 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated 2009-04-24, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.20
.\"
.TH SEEKDIR 3  2009-03-11 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O seekdir \- set the position of the next readdir() call in the directory
.\"O stream.
seekdir \- 次の readdir() 呼び出しのために、ディレクトリストリーム中の位置を
設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <dirent.h>
.sp
.BI "void seekdir(DIR *" dirp ", long " offset );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR seekdir ():
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR seekdir ()
.\"O function sets the location in the directory stream
.\"O from which the next
.\"O .BR readdir (2)
.\"O call will start.
.BR seekdir ()
関数は、次の
.BR readdir (3)
呼び出しの開始位置である、
ディレクトリストリームの中での位置を設定する。
.\"O .BR seekdir ()
.\"O should be used with an
.\"O .I offset
.\"O returned by
.\"O .BR telldir (3).
.BR seekdir ()
は
.BR telldir (3)
によって返される
.I offset
とともに使用されるべきである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR seekdir ()
.\"O function returns no value.
.BR seekdir ()
関数は、値を返さない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O In glibc up to version 2.1.1, the type of the
.\"O .I offset
.\"O argument was
.\"O .IR off_t .
.\"O POSIX.1-2001 specifies
.\"O .IR long ,
.\"O and this is the type used since glibc 2.1.2.
バージョン 2.1.1 以前の glibc では、
.I offset
引き数の型は
.I off_t
であった。
POSIX.1-2001 では
.I long
と規定されており、glibc 2.1.2 以降では
.I long
になっている。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR lseek (2),
.BR closedir (3),
.BR opendir (3),
.BR readdir (3),
.BR rewinddir (3),
.BR scandir (3),
.BR telldir (3)
