'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2009-02-23, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.19
.\"
.TH SEM_OPEN 3 2009-02-20 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sem_open \- initialize and open a named semaphore
sem_open \- 名前付きセマフォを初期化し、オープンする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.BR "#include <fcntl.h>" "           /* For O_* constants */"
.BR "#include <sys/stat.h>" "        /* For mode constants */"
.B #include <semaphore.h>
.sp
.BI "sem_t *sem_open(const char *" name ", int " oflag );
.BI "sem_t *sem_open(const char *" name ", int " oflag ", "
.BI "                mode_t " mode ", unsigned int " value );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lrt\fP or \fI\-pthread\fP.
\fI\-lrt\fP または \fI\-pthread\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR sem_open ()
.\"O creates a new POSIX semaphore or opens an existing semaphore.
.\"O The semaphore is identified by
.\"O .IR name .
.\"O For details of the construction of
.\"O .IR name ,
.\"O see
.\"O .BR sem_overview (7).
.BR sem_open ()
は、新規の POSIX セマフォを作成するか、既存のセマフォのオープンを行う。
セマフォは
.I name
で識別される。
.I name
の構成の詳細は
.BR sem_overview (7)
を参照。

.\"O The
.\"O .I oflag
.\"O argument specifies flags that control the operation of the call.
.\"O (Definitions of the flags values can be obtained by including
.\"O .IR <fcntl.h> .)
.I oflag
引き数には、
.BR sem_open ()
の動作を制御するフラグを指定する
(oflag の値の定義は
.I <fcntl.h>
のインクルードにより得られる)。
.\"O If
.\"O .B O_CREAT
.\"O is specified in
.\"O .IR oflag ,
.\"O then the semaphore is created if
.\"O it does not already exist.
.\"O The owner (user ID) of the semaphore is set to the effective
.\"O user ID of the calling process.
.\"O The group ownership (group ID) is set to the effective group ID
.\"O of the calling process.
.\"O .\" In reality the file system IDs are used on Linux.
.I oflag
に
.B O_CREAT
が指定されると、まだ存在しない場合にはそのセマフォが作成される。
セマフォの所有者 (ユーザ ID)、グループ所有権 (グループ ID) には、
それぞれ呼び出し元プロセスの実効 UID、実効 GID が設定される。
.\" 実際は、Linux ではファイルシステム ID が使用される。
.\"O If both
.\"O .B O_CREAT
.\"O and
.\"O .B O_EXCL
.\"O are specified in
.\"O .IR oflag ,
.\"O then an error is returned if a semaphore with the given
.\"O .I name
.\"O already exists.
.I oflag
に
.B O_CREAT
と
.B O_EXCL
の両方が指定された場合、指定された名前
.I name
のセマフォがすでに存在するとエラーが返される。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .B O_CREAT
.\"O is specified in
.\"O .IR oflag ,
.\"O then two additional arguments must be supplied.
.I oflag
に
.B O_CREAT
を指定する場合、さらに引き数が 2 つ必要である。
.\"O The
.\"O .I mode
.\"O argument specifies the permissions to be placed on the new semaphore,
.\"O as for
.\"O .BR open (2).
.\"O (Symbolic definitions for the permissions bits can be obtained by including
.\"O .IR <sys/stat.h> .)
.\"O The permissions settings are masked against the process umask.
.\"O Both read and write permission should be granted to each class of
.\"O user that will access the semaphore.
.I mode
引き数は、
.BR open (2)
と同じように、新しいセマフォに設定されるアクセス許可 (permission) を
指定する。許可設定はプロセスの umask でマスクされる
(許可ビットのシンボル定義は
.I <sys/stat.h>
のインクルードにより得られる)。
セマフォにアクセスしようとするユーザは、読み出し許可と書き込み許可の
両方を得る必要がある。
.\"O The
.\"O .I value
.\"O argument specifies the initial value for the new semaphore.
.\"O If
.\"O .B O_CREAT
.\"O is specified, and a semaphore with the given
.\"O .I name
.\"O already exists, then
.\"O .I mode
.\"O and
.\"O .I value
.\"O are ignored.
.I value
引き数は新しいセマフォの初期値を指定する。
.B O_CREAT
が指定され、指定した名前
.I name
のセマフォがすでに存在する場合、
.I mode
と
.I value
は無視される。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success,
.\"O .BR sem_open ()
.\"O returns the address of the new semaphore;
.\"O this address is used when calling other semaphore-related functions.
.\"O On error,
.\"O .BR sem_open ()
.\"O returns
.\"O .BR SEM_FAILED ,
.\"O with
.\"O .I errno
.\"O set to indicate the error.
成功すると、
.BR sem_open ()
は新しいセマフォのアドレスを返す。
このアドレスは他のセマフォ関連の関数を呼び出す際に使用される。
エラーの場合、
.BR sem_open ()
は
.B SEM_FAILED
を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値をセットする。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EACCES
.\"O The semaphore exists, but the caller does not have permission to
.\"O open it.
そのセマフォが存在するが、呼び出し元にはそのセマフォをオープンする
許可がない。
.TP
.B EEXIST
.\"O Both
.\"O .B O_CREAT
.\"O and
.\"O .B O_EXCL
.\"O were specified in
.\"O .IR oflag ,
.\"O but a semaphore with this
.\"O .I name
.\"O already exists.
.I oflag
に
.B O_CREAT
と
.B O_EXCL
の両方が指定されたが、
.I name
という名前のセマフォはすでに存在する。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I value
.\"O was greater than
.\"O .BR SEM_VALUE_MAX .
.I value
が
.B SEM_VALUE_MAX
よりも大きい。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I name
.\"O consists of just "/", followed by no other characters.
.I name
が "/" だけで構成され、その後ろに他の文字が続いていなかった。
.TP
.B EMFILE
.\"O The process already has the maximum number of files and open.
オープンされたファイル数がすでにそのプロセスにおける上限に達している。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.\"O .I name
.\"O was too long.
.I name
が長すぎる。
.TP
.B ENFILE
.\"O The system limit on the total number of open files has been reached.
オープンされたファイル総数がシステム全体での上限に達している。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O The
.\"O .B O_CREAT
.\"O flag was not specified in
.\"O .IR oflag
.\"O and no semaphore with this
.\"O .I name
.\"O exists;
.I oflag
に
.B O_CREAT
フラグが指定されておらず、
.I name
という名前のセマフォも存在しない。
.\"O or,
または、
.\" this error can occur if we have a name of the (nonportable) form
.\" /dir/name, and the directory /dev/shm/dir does not exist.
.\"O .B O_CREAT
.\"O was specified, but
.\"O .I name
.\"O wasn't well formed.
.B O_CREAT
が指定されたが、
.I name
が適切な形式ではなかった。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.\"O Insufficient memory.
十分なメモリがない。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR sem_close (3),
.BR sem_getvalue (3),
.BR sem_post (3),
.BR sem_unlink (3),
.BR sem_wait (3),
.BR sem_overview (7)
