'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SEM_GETVALUE 3 2006-03-25 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sem_getvalue \- get the value of a semaphore
sem_getvalue \- セマフォの値を取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <semaphore.h>
.sp
.BI "int sem_getvalue(sem_t *" sem ", int *" sval );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lrt\fP or \fI\-pthread\fP.
\fI\-lrt\fP または \fI\-pthread\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR sem_getvalue ()
.\"O places the current value of the semaphore pointed to
.\"O .I sem
.\"O into the integer pointed to by
.\"O .IR sval .
.BR sem_getvalue ()
は、
.I sem
が指すセマフォの現在の値を
.I sval
で指す整数に格納する。

.\"O If one or more processes or threads are blocked
.\"O waiting to lock the semaphore with
.\"O .BR sem_wait (3),
.\"O POSIX.1-2001 permits two possibilities for the value returned in
.\"O .IR sval :
.\"O either 0 is returned;
.\"O or a negative number whose absolute value is the count
.\"O of the number of processes and threads currently blocked in
.\"O .BR sem_wait (3).
.\"O Linux adopts the former behavior.
POSIX.1-2001 によると、
1つ以上のプロセスかスレッドが
.BR sem_wait (3)
でセマフォのロック待ちで停止している場合、
.I sval
で返される値は 0 もしくは負の値のいずれかとなる。
負の値の場合、その絶対値は
.BR sem_wait (3)
で現在停止しているプロセスかスレッドの合計数に等しい。
Linux は前者の動作 (0 を返す動作) を採用している。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR sem_getvalue ()
.\"O returns 0 on success;
.\"O on error, \-1 is returned and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to indicate the error.
成功すると、
.BR sem_getvalue ()
は 0 を返す。エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値をセットする。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I sem
.\"O is not a valid semaphore.
.I sem
は有効なセマフォではない。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The value of the semaphore may already have changed by the time
.\"O .BR sem_getvalue ()
.\"O returns.
.BR sem_getvalue ()
が返るときには、すでにセマフォの値は変化している可能性がある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR sem_post (3),
.BR sem_wait (3),
.BR sem_overview (7)
