'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SEM_UNLINK 3 2006-03-25 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sem_unlink \- remove a named semaphore
sem_unlink \- 名前付きセマフォを削除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <semaphore.h>
.sp
.BI "int sem_unlink(const char *" name );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lrt\fP or \fI\-pthread\fP.
\fI\-lrt\fP または \fI\-pthread\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR sem_unlink ()
.\"O removes the named semaphore referred to by
.\"O .IR name .
.\"O The semaphore name is removed immediately.
.\"O The semaphore is destroyed once all other processes that have
.\"O the semaphore open close it.
.BR sem_unlink ()
は、
.I name
で参照される名前付きセマフォを削除する。
セマフォの名前は直ちに削除される。
このセマフォをオープンしている他のすべてのプロセスがセマフォを
閉じて初めてセマフォの削除が行われる。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success
.\"O .BR sem_unlink ()
.\"O returns 0; on error, \-1 is returned, with
.\"O .I errno
.\"O set to indicate the error.
成功すると、
.BR sem_unlink ()
は 0 を返す。エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値をセットする。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EACCES
.\"O The caller does not have permission to unlink this semaphore.
呼び出し元にはこのセマフォを削除する許可がない。
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.\"O .I name
.\"O was too long.
.I name
が長すぎる。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O There is no semaphore with the given
.\"O .IR name .
指定された名前
.I name
のセマフォが存在しない。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR sem_getvalue (3),
.BR sem_open (3),
.BR sem_post (3),
.BR sem_wait (3),
.BR sem_overview (7)
