'\" t
.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-04-18, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SEM_CLOSE 3 2006-03-25 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sem_close \- close a named semaphore
sem_close \- 名前付きセマフォをクローズする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <semaphore.h>
.sp
.BI "int sem_close(sem_t *" sem );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lrt\fP or \fI\-pthread\fP.
\fI\-lrt\fP または \fI\-pthread\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR sem_close ()
.\"O closes the named semaphore referred to by
.\"O .IR sem ,
.\"O allowing any resources that the system has allocated to
.\"O the calling process for this semaphore to be freed.
.BR sem_close ()
は
.I sem
が参照する名前付きセマフォをクローズし、
このセマフォ用に呼び出し元プロセスにシステムが割り当てていた
リソースを解放できるようにする。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success
.\"O .BR sem_close ()
.\"O returns 0; on error, \-1 is returned, with
.\"O .I errno
.\"O set to indicate the error.
成功すると、
.BR sem_close ()
は 0 を返す。エラーの場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
にエラーを示す値をセットする。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O .I sem
.\"O is not a valid semaphore.
.I sem
は有効なセマフォではない。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O All open named semaphores are automatically closed on process
.\"O termination, or upon
.\"O .BR execve (2).
オープンされたすべての名前付きセマフォは、プロセス終了時、もしくは
.BR execve (2)
実行時に自動的にクローズされる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR sem_getvalue (3),
.BR sem_open (3),
.BR sem_post (3),
.BR sem_unlink (3),
.BR sem_wait (3),
.BR sem_overview (7)
