.\"  Copyright 2002 walter harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"  Distributed under GPL
.\"  based on glibc infopages
.\" polished - aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2005-02-20, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SETNETGRENT 3 2007-07-26 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O setnetgrent, endnetgrent, getnetgrent, getnetgrent_r, innetgr \-
.\"O handle network group entries
setnetgrent, endnetgrent, getnetgrent, getnetgrent_r, innetgr \-
ネットワーク・グループのエントリを操作する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <netdb.h>

.BI "int setnetgrent(const char *" netgroup );

.B "void endnetgrent(void);"

.BI "int getnetgrent(char **" host ", char **" user ", char **" domain );

.BI "int getnetgrent_r(char **" host ", char **" user ","
.BI "                  char **" domain ", char *" buf ", int " buflen );

.BI "int innetgr(const char *" netgroup ", const char *" host ","
.BI "            const char *" user ", const char *" domain );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR setnetgrent (),
.BR endnetgrent (),
.BR getnetgrent (),
.BR getnetgrent_r (),
.BR innetgr ():
_BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I netgroup
.\"O is a SunOS invention.
.\"O A netgroup database is a list of string triples
.\"O .RI ( hostname ", " username ", " domainname )
.\"O or other netgroup names.
.\"O Any of the elements in a triple can be empty,
.\"O which means that anything matches.
.\"O The functions described here allow access to the netgroup databases.
.\"O The file
.\"O .I /etc/nsswitch.conf
.\"O defines what database is searched.
.I netgroup
は SunOS で考案されたものである。ネットグループのデータベースの
エントリは、 3 つの文字列のリスト
.RI ( hostname ", " username ", " domainname )
もしくはネットグループ名である。
前記のリストの各要素は空であってもよい。
空は何とでも一致することを意味する。
本ページで説明する関数を使うことで、ネットグループのデータベースに
アクセスすることができる。どのデータベースが検索されるかは
.I /etc/nsswitch.conf
ファイルで定義されている。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR setnetgrent ()
.\"O call defines the netgroup that will be searched by subsequent
.\"O .BR getnetgrent ()
.\"O calls.
.\"O The
.\"O .BR getnetgrent ()
.\"O function retrieves the next netgroup entry, and returns pointers in
.\"O .IR host ,
.\"O .IR user ,
.\"O .IR domain .
.BR setnetgrent ()
コールは、この後で呼ばれる
.BR getnetgrent ()
コールが検索するネットグループを定める。
.BR getnetgrent ()
関数はネットグループの次のエントリを取得し、
.IR host ,
.IR user ,
.I domain
にポインタを入れて返る。
.\"O A NULL pointer means that the corresponding entry matches any string.
.\"O The pointers are valid only as long as there is no call to other
.\"O netgroup-related functions.
.\"O To avoid this problem you can use the GNU function
.\"O .BR getnetgrent_r ()
.\"O that stores the strings in the supplied buffer.
.\"O To free all allocated buffers use
.\"O .BR endnetgrent ().
NULL ポインタは、対応するエントリがどんな文字列とも一致することを意味する。
得られたポインタは、ネットグループ関係の関数のいずれかが呼ばれるまでの
間だけ有効である。この問題を避けるためには GNU 拡張の関数
.BR getnetgrent_r ()
を使うとよい。この関数は呼び出し側が用意したバッファに
文字列を格納する。割り当て済のバッファを全て解放するには
.BR endnetgrent ()
を使用する。
.PP
.\"O In most cases you only want to check if the triplet
.\"O .RI ( hostname ", " username ", " domainname )
.\"O is a member of a netgroup.
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR innetgr ()
.\"O can be used for this without calling the above three functions.
.\"O Again, a NULL pointer is a wildcard and matches any string.
.\"O The function is thread-safe.
ほとんどの場合、
.RI ( hostname ", " username ", " domainname )
の3要素の組がネットグループのメンバーかどうかを確認したいだけであろう。
.BR innetgr ()
関数を使うと、上記の3つの関数を呼び出さずにこの目的を達成できる。
もう一度書いておくが、NULL ポインタはワイルドカードであり、
あらゆる文字列と一致する。この関数はスレッドセーフである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O These functions return 1 on success and 0 for failure.
これらの関数は成功すると 1 を、失敗すると 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/netgroup
.br
.I /etc/nsswitch.conf
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
.\"O These functions are not in POSIX.1-2001, but
.\"O .BR setnetgrent (),
.\"O .BR endnetgrent (),
.\"O .BR getnetgrent (),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR innetgr ()
.\"O are available on most Unix systems.
.\"O .BR getnetgrent_r ()
.\"O is not widely available on other systems.
これらの関数は POSIX.1-2001 にはないが、
setnetgrent (),
endnetgrent (),
getnetgrent (),
innetgr ()
はほとんどの Unix システムで利用可能である。
.BR getnetgrent_r ()
は広く他のシステムで利用できるわけではない。
.\" getnetgrent_r() is on Solaris 8 and AIX 5.1, but not the BSDs.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O In the BSD implementation,
.\"O .BR setnetgrent ()
.\"O returns void.
BSD の実装では
.BR setnetgrent ()
は void を返す。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR sethostent (3),
.BR setprotoent (3),
.BR setservent (3)
