.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\" Based on glibc infopages, copyright Free Software Foundation
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Sep 22 09:46:55 2002
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH SIGNBIT 3 2010-09-20 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O signbit \- test sign of a real floating-point number
signbit \- 浮動小数点実数の符号 (sign) を調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "#include <math.h>"
.sp
.BI  "int signbit(" x ");"
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR signbit ():
.RS 4
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR signbit ()
.\"O is a generic macro which can work on all real floating-point types.
.\"O It returns a nonzero value if the value of
.\"O .I x
.\"O has its sign bit set.
.BR signbit ()
は、あらゆる種類の浮動小数点実数に対して
適用可能な汎用的なマクロである。
.I x
の値の符号ビットがセットされている場合、非 0 の値を返す。
.PP
.\"O This is not the same as
.\"O .IR "x < 0.0" ,
.\"O because IEEE 754 floating point allows zero to be signed.
.\"O The comparison
.\"O .IR "-0.0 < 0.0"
.\"O is false, but
.\"O .IR "signbit(\-0.0)"
.\"O will return a nonzero value.
このマクロは
.I "x < 0.0"
と全く同じではない。
なぜなら、IEEE 754 の浮動小数点表現では 0 も符号を持つからである。
.I "-0.0 < 0.0"
という比較結果は偽 (false) だが、
.IR "signbit (\-0.0)"
は 非 0 の値を返す。

.\"O NaNs and infinities have a sign bit.
NaN と無限大には符号ビットがある。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR signbit ()
.\"O macro returns nonzero if the sign of
.\"O .I x
.\"O is negative; otherwise it returns zero.
.BR signbit ()
マクロは
.I x
の符号が負の場合 0 以外を返し、そうでない場合 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O No errors occur.
エラーは発生しない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O This function is defined in IEC 559 (and the appendix with
.\"O recommended functions in IEEE 754/IEEE 854).
この関数は IEC 559 で定義されている
(また IEEE 754/IEEE 854 では付録で推奨関数として定義されている)。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR copysign (3)
