.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Distributed under GPL
.\" heavily based on glibc infopages, copyright Free Software Foundation
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb  1 07:40:41 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH SIGNIFICAND 3 2009-02-04 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O significand, significandf, significandl \-
.\"O get mantissa of floating-point number
significand, significandf, significandl \- 浮動小数点数の仮数 (mantissa) を取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double significand(double " x );
.br
.BI "float significandf(float " x );
.br
.BI "long double significandl(long double " x );
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.BR significand (),
.BR significandf (),
.BR significandl ():
.RS 4
_SVID_SOURCE || _BSD_SOURCE
.RE
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR significand ()
.\"O function returns the mantissa of
.\"O .I x
.\"O scaled to the range [1,2).
.BR significand ()
関数は
.I x
の仮数を [1,2) の範囲にして返す。
.\"O It is equivalent to
これは、以下と等しい。
.sp
.in +4n
scalb(x, (double) \-ilogb(x))
.in
.PP
.\"O This function exists mainly for use in certain standardized tests
.\"O for IEEE 754 conformance.
この関数は主に IEEE 754 への準拠を調べる標準テストで使われる。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
.\"O These functions are nonstandard; the
.\"O .I double
.\"O version is available on a number of other systems.
これらの関数は非標準である。。
.I double
版は他の多くのシステムでも利用可能である。
.\"O .\" .SH HISTORY
.\" .SH 履歴
.\"O .\" This function came from BSD.
.\" この関数は BSD に由来する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ilogb (3),
.BR scalb (3)
