.\" Copyright (C) 2004 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-03-03, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-12-05, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"   Catch up to LDP man-pages 2.16
.\"   Rename sigpause.2 to sigpause.3, and modified a little.
.\"
.\"WORD:	signal			シグナル
.\"WORD:	interrupt		割り込み
.\"WORD:	mask			マスク
.\"WORD:	block			ブロックする
.\"
.TH SIGPAUSE 3 2005-12-01 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sigpause \- atomically release blocked signals and wait for interrupt
sigpause \- ブロックされたシグナルをアトミックに解放して割り込みを待つ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int sigpause(int " sigmask ");  /* BSD */"
.sp
.BI "int sigpause(int " sig ");      /* System V / Unix95 */"
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Don't use this function.
.\"O Use
.\"O .BR sigsuspend (2)
.\"O instead.
この関数を使わないこと。
代わりに
.BR sigsuspend (2)
を使うこと。
.LP
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR sigpause ()
.\"O is designed to wait for some signal.
関数
.BR sigpause ()
はシグナルを待つように設計されている。
.\"O It changes the process's signal mask (set of blocked signals),
.\"O and then waits for a signal to arrive.
.\"O Upon arrival of a signal, the original signal mask is restored.
この関数はプロセスのシグナルマスク (ブロックされたシグナルのセット) を変更し、
シグナルが到着するのを待つ。
シグナルが到着すると、シグナルマスクは元に戻される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O If
.\"O .BR sigpause ()
.\"O returns, it was interrupted by a signal and the return value is \-1
.\"O with
.\"O .I errno
.\"O set to
.\"O .BR EINTR .
.BR sigpause ()
が返った場合、この関数はシグナルによって割り込まれている。
返り値は \-1 で、
.I errno
は
.B EINTR
に設定される。
.\"O .SH CONFORMING TO
.SH 準拠
.\"O The System V version of
.\"O .BR sigpause ()
.\"O is standardized in POSIX.1-2001.
System V 版の
.BR sigpause ()
は POSIX.1-2001 で標準化されている。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 備考
.\"O .SS History
.SS 歴史
.\"O The classical BSD version of this function appeared in 4.2BSD.
.\"O It sets the process's signal mask to
.\"O .IR sigmask .
.\"O Unix95 standardized the incompatible System V version of
.\"O this function, which removes only the specified signal
.\"O .I sig
.\"O from the process's signal mask.
.\"O .\" __xpg_sigpause: Unix 95, spec 1170, SVID, SVr4, XPG
.\"O The unfortunate situation with two incompatible functions with the
.\"O same name was solved by the
.\"O .BR \%sigsuspend (2)
.\"O function, that takes a
.\"O .I "sigset_t *"
.\"O argument (instead of an
.\"O .IR int ).
この関数の古典的な BSD 版は 4.2BSD で登場した。
この関数はプロセスのシグナルマスクを
.I sigmask
に設定する。
Unix95 では BSD 版と互換性のない System V 版のこの関数が標準化された。
Unix95 版は、指定されたシグナル
.I sig
をプロセスのシグナルマスクから削除するだけである。
.\" __xpg_sigpause: Unix 95, spec 1170, SVID, SVr4, XPG
同じ名前で互換性のない 2 つの関数があるという不幸な事態は、
.BR \%sigsuspend (2)
関数によって解消された。
この関数は
.RI ( int
の代わりに)
.B "sigset_t *"
引き数をとる。
.\"O .SS Linux Notes
.SS Linux での注意
.\"O On Linux, this routine is a system call only on the Sparc (sparc64)
.\"O architecture.
Linux では、このルーチンは Sparc (sparc64) アーキテクチャでのみ
システムコールとなっている。

.\"O Libc4 and libc5 only know about the BSD version.
libc4 と libc5 には BSD 版しかない。

.\"O Glibc uses the BSD version if the
.\"O .B _BSD_SOURCE
.\"O feature test macro is defined and none of
.\"O .BR _POSIX_SOURCE ,
.\"O .BR _POSIX_C_SOURCE ,
.\"O .BR _XOPEN_SOURCE ,
.\"O .BR _GNU_SOURCE ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B _SVID_SOURCE
.\"O is defined.
.\"O The System V version is used if
.\"O .B _XOPEN_SOURCE
.\"O is defined.
機能検査マクロ
.B _BSD_SOURCE
が定義され、
.BR _POSIX_SOURCE ,
.BR _POSIX_C_SOURCE ,
.BR _XOPEN_SOURCE ,
.BR _GNU_SOURCE ,
.B _SVID_SOURCE
のいずれも定義されていない場合、
glibc は BSD 版を使う。
.B _XOPEN_SOURCE
が定義された場合、System V 版を使用する。
.\"
.\"O .\" For the BSD version, one usually uses a zero
.\"O .\" .I sigmask
.\"O .\" to indicate that no signals are to be blocked.
.\" BSD 版では、
.\" .RI 「 sigmask
.\" を 0 にして、どのシグナルもブロックされないようにする」
.\" というのがよく使われる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigaction (2),
.BR sigprocmask (2),
.BR sigsuspend (2),
.BR sigblock (3),
.BR sigvec (3),
.BR feature_test_macros (7)
