.\" Copyright 2002 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Distributed under GPL, 2002-07-27 Walter Harms
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Sep  9 04:06:20 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-09-16, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" 
.TH SINCOS 3  2008-08-11 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sincos, sincosf, sincosl \- calculate sin and cos simultaneously
sincos, sincosf, sincosl \- 正弦と余弦を同時に計算する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.\"O .BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */"
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "void sincos(double " x ", double *" sin ", double *" cos );
.br
.BI "void sincosf(float " x ", float *" sin ", float *" cos );
.br
.BI "void sincosl(long double " x ", long double *" sin ", long double *" cos );
.fi
.sp
.\"O Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
\fI\-lm\fP でリンクする。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Several applications need sine and cosine of the same angle
.\"O .IR x .
.\"O This function computes both at the same time, and stores the results in
.\"O .I *sin
.\"O and
.\"O .IR *cos .
アプリケーションの中には、同じ角度
.I x
について正弦と余弦の両方の計算が必要なものがある。
この関数は両者を同時に計算し、その結果を
.I *sin
と
.I *cos
に格納する。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is a NaN,
.\"O a NaN is returned in
.\"O .I *sin
.\"O and
.\"O .IR *cos .
.I x
が NaN の場合、
.I *sin
と
.I *cos
に NaN が返される。

.\"O If
.\"O .I x
.\"O is positive infinity or negative infinity,
.\"O a domain error occurs, and
.\"O a NaN is returned in
.\"O .I *sin
.\"O and
.\"O .IR *cos .
.I x
が正の無限大か負の無限大の場合、
領域エラー (domain error) が発生し、
.I *sin
と
.I *cos
に NaN が返される。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O These functions return
.\"O .IR void .
これらの関数は
.I void
を返す。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.\"O See
.\"O .BR math_error (7)
.\"O for information on how to determine whether an error has occurred
.\"O when calling these functions.
これらの関数を呼び出した際にエラーが発生したかの判定方法についての情報は
.BR math_error (7)
を参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O The following errors can occur:
以下のエラーが発生する可能性がある。
.TP
.\"O Domain error: \fIx\fP is an infinity
領域エラー (domain error): \fIx\fp が無限大
.\" .I errno
.\" is set to
.\" .BR EDOM .
.\"O An invalid floating-point exception
.\"O .RB ( FE_INVALID )
.\"O is raised.
不正 (invalid) 浮動小数点例外
.RB ( FE_INVALID )
が上がる。
.PP
.\"O These functions do not set
.\"O .IR errno .
これらの関数は
.I errno
を設定しない。
.\" FIXME . Is it intentional that these functions do not set errno?
.\" sin() and cos() also don't set errno; bugs have been raised for
.\" those functions.
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
これらの関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 で初めて登場した。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O This function is a GNU extension.
この関数は GNU による拡張である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR cos (3),
.BR sin (3),
.BR tan (3)
