.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 10:39:43 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 Akihiro Motoki all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon May 25 1998 by Akihiro Motoki <motoki@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH STRFRY 3  1993-04-12 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O strfry \- randomize a string
strfry \- 文字列をランダムに並べ変える
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #define _GNU_SOURCE
.br
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "char *strfry(char *" string );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR strfry ()
.\"O function randomizes the contents of \fIstring\fP by
.\"O using
.\"O .BR rand (3)
.\"O to randomly swap characters in the string.
.\"O The result is an anagram of \fIstring\fP.
.BR strfry ()
関数は、文字列 \fIstring\fP の内容をランダムに並び換える。
並び換えは、
.BR rand (3)
関数を用いて、文字列中の各文字を無作為に
交換することで実現される。結果は、文字列 \fIstring\fP のアナグラムである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR strfry ()
.\"O functions returns a pointer to the randomized
.\"O string.
.BR strfry ()
関数は、ランダムに並び換えられた文字列へのポインタを返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O The
.\"O .BR strfry ()
.\"O function is unique to the
.\"O GNU C Library.
.BR strfry ()
関数は GNU C ライブラリに特有である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR memfrob (3),
.BR feature_test_macros (7)
