.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jan 11 00:55:48 JST 2000
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH STRNLEN 3 2010-09-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O strnlen \- determine the length of a fixed-size string
strnlen \- 固定長の文字列の長さを調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #define _GNU_SOURCE
.sp
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "size_t strnlen(const char *" s ", size_t " maxlen );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR strnlen ():
.PD 0
.ad l
.RS 4
.TP 4
.\"O Since glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 以降:
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.TP
.\"O Before glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 より前:
_GNU_SOURCE
.RE
.ad
.PD
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR strnlen ()
.\"O function returns the number of characters in the string
.\"O pointed to by \fIs\fP, not including the terminating \(aq\\0\(aq character,
.\"O but at most \fImaxlen\fP.
.\"O In doing this,
.\"O .BR strnlen ()
.\"O looks only at the first
.\"O \fImaxlen\fP characters at \fIs\fP and never beyond \fIs+maxlen\fP.
.BR strnlen ()
関数は \fIs\fP が指す文字列の長さをバイト数で返す。
長さには終端の \(aq\\0\(aq 文字を含まない。
また長さは最大で \fImaxlen\fP までであり、
.BR strnlen ()
は \fIs\fP の最初の \fImaxlen\fP バイトのみを検査し
\fIs+maxlen\fP より先を検査することはない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR strnlen ()
.\"O function returns \fIstrlen(s)\fP, if that is less than
.\"O \fImaxlen\fP, or \fImaxlen\fP
.\"O if there is no \(aq\\0\(aq character among the first
.\"O \fImaxlen\fP characters pointed to by \fIs\fP.
.BR strnlen ()
関数は \fImaxlen\fP 以下ならば \fIstrlen(s)\fP と同じ
値を返す。\fIs\fP の指す文字列が最大 \fImaxlen\fP バイトまでに
\(aq\\0\(aq 文字を含まない場合には \fImaxlen\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O This function is a GNU extension.
この関数は GNU の拡張である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strlen (3),
.BR feature_test_macros (7)
