.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:56:43 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Added history, aeb, 980113.
.\" 2005-05-05 mtk: added strcasestr()
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Dec 16 10:06:54 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Sep  5 JST 1999 by by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Wed Apr 20 JST 2005 by by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH STRSTR 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O strstr, strcasestr \- locate a substring
strstr, strcasestr \- 部分文字列の位置を示す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "char *strstr(const char *" haystack ", const char *" needle );
.sp
.\"O .BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */"
.sp
.B #include <string.h>
.sp
.BI "char *strcasestr(const char *" haystack ", const char *" needle );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR strstr ()
.\"O function finds the first occurrence of the substring
.\"O \fIneedle\fP in the string \fIhaystack\fP.
.\"O The terminating null bytes (\(aq\\0\(aq) are not compared.
.BR strstr ()
関数は、部分文字列 \fIneedle\fP が文字列 \fIhaystack\fP 中
で最初に現れる位置を見つける。
文字列を終端 NULL バイト (\(aq\\0\(aq) は比較されない。

.\"O The
.\"O .BR strcasestr ()
.\"O function is like
.\"O .BR strstr (),
.\"O but ignores the case of both arguments.
.BR strcasestr ()
関数は
.BR strstr ()
関数と同様だが、
両方の引数に対して大文字小文字を無視する。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O These functions return a pointer to the beginning of the
.\"O substring, or NULL if the substring is not found.
これらの関数は、部分文字列の開始を指すポインタを返し、
もし部分文字列が見つからない場合は NULL を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O The
.\"O .BR strstr ()
.\"O function conforms to C89 and C99.
.\"O The
.\"O .BR strcasestr ()
.\"O function is a nonstandard extension.
.BR strstr ()
関数は C89 と C99 に準拠している。
.BR strcasestr ()
関数は非標準拡張である。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Early versions of Linux libc (like 4.5.26) would not allow
.\"O an empty \fIneedle\fP argument for
.\"O .BR strstr ().
.\"O Later versions (like 4.6.27) work correctly,
.\"O and return \fIhaystack\fP when \fIneedle\fP is empty.
Linux libc の初期のバージョン(4.5.26 まで)は
.BR strstr ()
関数の \fIneedle\fP 引数に空文字列を指定できない。
最近のバージョン(4.6.27 以降)は正しく動作し、
\fIneedle\fP が空の時は \fIhaystack\fP を返す。
.SH 関連項目
.BR index (3),
.BR memchr (3),
.BR rindex (3),
.BR strcasecmp (3),
.BR strchr (3),
.BR string (3),
.BR strpbrk (3),
.BR strsep (3),
.BR strspn (3),
.BR strtok (3),
.BR wcsstr (3)
