.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Sep  5 21:02:09 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH STRTOIMAX 3 2003-11-28 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O strtoimax, strtoumax \- convert string to integer
strtoimax, strtoumax \- 文字列を整数に変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <inttypes.h>
.sp
.BI "intmax_t strtoimax(const char *" nptr ", char **" endptr ", int " base );
.br
.BI "uintmax_t strtoumax(const char *" nptr ", char **" endptr ", int " base );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O These functions are just like
.\"O .BR strtol (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR strtoul (3),
.\"O except that they return a value of type
.\"O .I intmax_t
.\"O and
.\"O .IR uintmax_t ,
.\"O respectively.
これらの関数はちょうど
.BR strtol (3)
と
.BR strtoul (3)
に似ているが、それぞれ
.I intmax_t
と
.I uintmax_t
型の値を返す。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, the converted value is returned.
.\"O If nothing was found to convert, zero is returned.
成功した場合、変換された値が返される。
変換するものが見つからなかった場合、0 が返される。
.\"O On overflow or underflow
.\"O .B INTMAX_MAX
.\"O or
.\"O .B INTMAX_MIN
.\"O or
.\"O .B UINTMAX_MAX
.\"O is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set to
.\"O .BR ERANGE .
オーバーフローまたはアンダーフローの場合、
.B INTMAX_MAX
または
.B INTMAX_MIN
または
.B UINTMAX_MAX
が返され、
.I errno
が
.B ERANGE
に設定される。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR imaxabs (3),
.BR imaxdiv (3),
.BR strtol (3),
.BR strtoul (3),
.BR wcstoimax (3)
