.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the American National Standards Committee X3, on Information
.\" Processing Systems.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)strtod.3	5.3 (Berkeley) 6/29/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sun Aug 21 17:16:22 1994 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Sat May 04 19:34:31 MET DST 1996 by Michael Haardt
.\"   (michael@cantor.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)
.\" Added strof, strtold, aeb, 2001-06-07
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998-1999
.\"   Michihide Hotta and NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Jun 26 1998 by Yasushi Shoji <yashi@yashi.com>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Mar 14 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jul  1 16:59:53 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified 2006-07-20,
.\"         Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.36
.\"
.TH STRTOD 3 2010-00-20 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O strtod, strtof, strtold \- convert ASCII string to floating-point number
.SH 名前
strtod, strtof, strtold \- ASCII 文字列を浮動小数点実数に変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "double strtod(const char *" nptr ", char **" endptr );
.br
.BI "float strtof(const char *" nptr ", char **" endptr );
.br
.BI "long double strtold(const char *" nptr ", char **" endptr );
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.ad l
.sp
.BR strtof (),
.BR strtold ():
.RS 4
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 600 || _ISOC99_SOURCE ||
_POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200112L;
.br
or
.I cc\ -std=c99
.RE
.ad l
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR strtod (),
.\"O .BR strtof (),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR strtold ()
.\"O functions convert the initial portion of the string pointed to by
.\"O .I nptr
.\"O to
.\"O .IR double ,
.\"O .IR float ,
.\"O and
.\"O .I long double
.\"O representation, respectively.
.BR strtod (),
.BR strtof (),
.BR strtold ()
関数は、
.I nptr
が指し示す文字列のはじめの部分を
.IR double ,
.IR float ,
.I long double
型の値にそれぞれ変換する。

.\"O The expected form of the (initial portion of the) string is
.\"O optional leading white space as recognized by
.\"O .BR isspace (3),
.\"O an optional plus (\(aq+\(aq) or minus sign (\(aq\-\(aq) and then either
.\"O (i) a decimal number, or (ii) a hexadecimal number,
.\"O or (iii) an infinity, or (iv) a NAN (not-a-number).
入力する文字列 (の先頭部分) は以下の形式が期待されている。
先頭にホワイトスペース、
次にプラス (\(aq+\(aq) またはマイナス (\(aq\-\(aq) の記号、
その後に (i) 10 進数、(ii) 16 進数、(iii) 無限、
(iv) NAN (計算できない数、not-a-number) のいずれかがある
(ホワイトスペース、符号は省略可能。
ホワイトスペースは
.BR isspace (3)
で識別される)。
.LP
.\"O A
.\"O .I "decimal number"
.\"O consists of a nonempty sequence of decimal digits
.\"O possibly containing a radix character (decimal point, locale-dependent,
.\"O usually \(aq.\(aq), optionally followed by a decimal exponent.
.\"O A decimal exponent consists of an \(aqE\(aq or \(aqe\(aq, followed by an
.\"O optional plus or minus sign, followed by a nonempty sequence of
.\"O decimal digits, and indicates multiplication by a power of 10.
.I "10 進数"
は 1 文字以上の 10 進の数字の列からなり、
基を表す文字 (radix charater)
(小数点。ロケールに依存するが、通常は \(aq.\(aq) が含まれることもある。
この後に 10 進の指数部が続いても良い。
10 進の指数部は \(aqE\(aq または \(aqe\(aq と、その後に置かれる正負記号 (省略可)、
およびその後に続く 1 文字以上の 10 進の数字の列からなり、
10 の何乗であるかを表す。
.LP
.\"O A
.\"O .I "hexadecimal number"
.\"O consists of a "0x" or "0X" followed by a nonempty sequence of
.\"O hexadecimal digits possibly containing a radix character,
.\"O optionally followed by a binary exponent.
.\"O A binary exponent
.\"O consists of a \(aqP\(aq or \(aqp\(aq, followed by an optional
.\"O plus or minus sign, followed by a nonempty sequence of
.\"O decimal digits, and indicates multiplication by a power of 2.
.\"O At least one of radix character and binary exponent must be present.
.I "16 進数"
は、"0x" または "0X" とその後に続く 1 文字以上の 16 進の数字の列からなり、
基を表す文字が含まれることもある。
この後に 2 進の指数部が続いても良い。
2 進の指数部は \(aqP\(aq または \(aqp\(aq と、その後に置かれる正負記号 (省略可)、
およびその後に続く 1 文字以上の 10 進の数字の列から構成され、
2 の何乗であるかを表す。
基を表す文字と 2 進の指数部は、どちらか一方しか存在してはならない。
.LP
.\"O An
.\"O .I infinity
.\"O is either "INF" or "INFINITY", disregarding case.
.I 無限
は "INF" または "INFINITY" で表され、大文字小文字は区別されない。
.LP
.\"O A
.\"O .I NAN
.\"O is "NAN" (disregarding case) optionally followed by \(aq(\(aq,
.\"O a sequence of characters, followed by \(aq)\(aq.
.\"O The character string specifies in an implementation-dependent
.\"O way the type of NAN.
.I NAN
は "NAN" (大文字小文字は区別されない) で表され、
その後に \(aq(\(aq 文字列 \(aq)\(aq が続く場合もある。
この文字列は実装に依存する NAN を指定する。
.\" From glibc 2.8's stdlib/strtod_l.c:
.\"     We expect it to be a number which is put in the
.\"     mantissa of the number.
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUES"
.SH 返り値
.\"O These functions return the converted value, if any.
これらの関数は、変換された値があれば、それを返す。

.\"O If
.\"O .I endptr
.\"O is not NULL,
.\"O a pointer to the character after the last character used in the conversion
.\"O is stored in the location referenced by
.\"O .IR endptr .
.I endptr
が NULL でないときは、変換に使われた最終文字の次の文字へのポインターが
.I endptr
で参照される場所へ保存される。

.\"O If no conversion is performed, zero is returned and the value of
.\"O .I nptr
.\"O is stored in the location referenced by
.\"O .IR endptr .
変換が行われなかったときには 0 が返る。そして
.I endptr
が参照している場所に
.I nptr
の値 (変換対象である文字列の開始アドレス) が保存される。

.\"O If the correct value would cause overflow, plus or minus
.\"O .B HUGE_VAL
.\"O .RB ( HUGE_VALF ,
.\"O .BR HUGE_VALL )
.\"O is returned (according to the sign of the value), and
.\"O .B ERANGE
.\"O is stored in
.\"O .IR errno .
.\"O If the correct value would cause underflow, zero is
.\"O returned and
.\"O .B ERANGE
.\"O is stored in
.\"O .IR errno .
正しい形式の数値文字列であるが、変換結果がオーバーフローを起こした場合
には、プラスまたはマイナスの
.B HUGE_VAL
.RB ( HUGE_VALF ,
.BR HUGE_VALL )
が返り (値の符号による)、
.B ERANGE
が
.I errno
に代入される。変換結果がアンダーフローを起こした場合には 0 が返り、
.B ERANGE
が
.I errno
に代入される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B ERANGE
.\"O Overflow or underflow occurred.
オーバーフローまたはアンダーフローが起こった。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O C89 describes
.\"O .BR strtod (),
.\"O C99
.\"O describes the other two functions.
C89 では
.BR strtod ()
が、C99 では残りの 2 つの関数が記述されている。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Since
.\"O 0 can legitimately be returned
.\"O on both success and failure, the calling program should set
.\"O .I errno
.\"O to 0 before the call,
.\"O and then determine if an error occurred by checking whether
.\"O .I errno
.\"O has a nonzero value after the call.
成功、失敗どちらの場合でも 0 を返す可能性があるので、
プログラムは呼び出す前に
.I errno
を 0 に設定し、呼び出し後に
.I errno
が 0 以外の値かどうかを確認しエラーが発生したかどうかを判断する
必要がある。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O See the example on the
.\"O .BR strtol (3)
.\"O manual page;
.\"O the use of the functions described in this manual page is similar.
.BR strtol (3)
のマニュアルページの例を参照。
このページで説明した関数の使用方法も同様である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR atof (3),
.BR atoi (3),
.BR atol (3),
.BR strtol (3),
.BR strtoul (3)
