.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:52:15 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2001-12-15, aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HIROFUMI Nishizuka
.\"	all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Dec 19 13:24:02 JST 1997
.\"	by HIROFUMI Nishizuka <nishi@rpts.cl.nec.co.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Dec 21 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH SWAB 3  2001-12-15 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O swab \- swap adjacent bytes
swab \- 隣接するバイトを交換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.\"O .BR "#define _XOPEN_SOURCE" "       /* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.BR "#define _XOPEN_SOURCE" "       /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "void swab(const void *" from ", void *" to ", ssize_t " n );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR swab ()
.\"O function copies \fIn\fP bytes from the array pointed
.\"O to by \fIfrom\fP to the array pointed to by \fIto\fP, exchanging
.\"O adjacent even and odd bytes.
.\"O This function is used to exchange data
.\"O between machines that have different low/high byte ordering.
.BR swab ()
関数は、\fIfrom\fP で指された配列から \fIn\fP バイトを
\fIto\fP で指された配列に、隣接した偶数/奇数バイトを交換しながらコピーする。
この関数は異なるバイトオーダーを持つマシン間でのデータ交換に
使用される。
.LP
.\"O This function does nothing when \fIn\fP is negative.
.\"O When \fIn\fP is positive and odd, it handles \fIn\-1\fP bytes
.\"O as above, and does something unspecified with the last byte.
.\"O (In other words, \fIn\fP should be even.)
\fIn\fP が負の数の場合、この関数は何もしない。
\fIn\fP が正でかつ奇数の場合、\fIn\-1\fP バイトは上記の通り扱い、
最後のバイトについては未規定の動作をする
(言い換えれば、\fIn\fP は偶数にするべきである)。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR swab ()
.\"O function returns no value.
.BR swab ()
関数は、値を返さない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SVr4, 4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR bstring (3)
