.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 25 08:17:41 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD: transliteration descriptor	変換記述子
.\"
.TH TOWCTRANS 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O towctrans \- wide-character transliteration
towctrans \- ワイド文字の変換
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t towctrans(wint_t " wc ", wctrans_t " desc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O If \fIwc\fP is a wide character, the
.\"O .BR towctrans ()
.\"O function
.\"O translates it according to the transliteration descriptor \fIdesc\fP.
.\"O If \fIwc\fP is \fBWEOF\fP, \fBWEOF\fP is returned.
\fIwc\fP がワイド文字ならば、
.BR towctrans ()
関数は変換記述子
\fIdesc\fP に従ってその文字を変換する。\fIwc\fP が \fBWEOF\fP ならば、
\fBWEOF\fP が返される。
.PP
.\"O \fIdesc\fP must be a transliteration descriptor returned by
.\"O the
.\"O .BR wctrans (3)
.\"O function.
\fIdesc\fP は、
.BR wctrans (3)
が返した変換記述子でなければならない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR towctrans ()
.\"O function returns the translated wide character,
.\"O or \fBWEOF\fP if \fIwc\fP is \fBWEOF\fP.
.BR towctrans ()
関数は、変換結果のワイド文字を返す。\fIwc\fP が \fBWEOF\fP
ならば、\fBWEOF\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR towctrans ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR towctrans ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR towlower (3),
.BR towupper (3),
.BR wctrans (3)
