.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 25 08:06:53 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH TOWLOWER 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O towlower \- convert a wide character to lowercase
towlower \- ワイド文字 1 個を小文字に変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t towlower(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR towlower ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR tolower (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O If \fIwc\fP is a wide character, it is converted to
.\"O lowercase.
.\"O Characters which do not have case are returned unchanged.
.BR towlower ()
関数は、
.BR tolower (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
\fIwc\fP がワイド文字ならば、この文字は小文字に変換される。
大文字・小文字の区別がない文字は変換されずに返される。
.\"O If \fIwc\fP is \fBWEOF\fP, \fBWEOF\fP is returned.
\fIwc\fP が \fBWEOF\fP ならば、\fBWEOF\fP が返される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR towlower ()
.\"O function returns the lowercase equivalent of \fIwc\fP,
.\"O or \fBWEOF\fP if \fIwc\fP is \fBWEOF\fP.
.BR towlower ()
関数は、\fIwc\fP に対応する小文字を返す。\fIwc\fP が
\fBWEOF\fP ならば、\fBWEOF\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR towlower ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR towlower ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.PP
.\"O This function is not very appropriate for dealing with Unicode characters,
.\"O because Unicode knows about three cases: upper, lower and title case.
この関数を Unicode 文字に対して使うのはあまり適切でない。なぜなら、
Unicode には、大文字 (upper case)・小文字 (lower case)・
タイトル文字 (title case) という 3 つの "case" が含まれているからである。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR iswlower (3),
.BR towctrans (3),
.BR towupper (3)
