.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Moved to man3, aeb, 980612
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat 18 Jul 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Sun Dec 18 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ULIMIT 3 2008-08-06 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ulimit \- get and set user limits
.SH 名前
ulimit \- ユーザー制限を取得・設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <ulimit.h>
.sp
.BI "long ulimit(int " cmd ", long " newlimit );
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Warning: This routine is obsolete.
.\"O Use
.\"O .BR getrlimit (2),
.\"O .BR setrlimit (2),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR sysconf (3)
.\"O instead.
注意: このルーチンは古い。
代わりに
.BR getrlimit (2),
.BR setrlimit (2),
.BR sysconf (3)
などを用いること。
.\"O For the shell command
.\"O .BR ulimit (),
.\"O see
.\"O .BR bash (1).
シェルコマンドとしての
.BR ulimit ()
については、
.BR bash (1)
を見ること。

.\"O The
.\"O .BR ulimit ()
.\"O call will get or set some limit for the calling process.
.BR ulimit ()
は呼び出し元のプロセスに関する制限のいくつかを取得・設定する。
.\"O The
.\"O .I cmd
.\"O argument can have one of the following values.
.I cmd
引き数には、以下の値のうちのどれか一つを与えることができる。
.TP
.B UL_GETFSIZE
.\"O Return the limit on the size of a file, in units of 512 bytes.
ファイルサイズに関する制限を返す。単位は 512 バイト。
.TP
.B UL_SETFSIZE
.\"O Set the limit on the size of a file.
ファイルサイズに関する制限を設定する。
.TP
.B 3
.\"O (Not implemented for Linux.)
.\"O Return the maximum possible address of the data segment.
(Linux では実装されていない)
データセグメントで指定できるアドレスの最大値を返す。
.TP
.B 4
.\"O (Implemented but no symbolic constant provided.)
.\"O Return the maximum number of files that the calling process can open.
(実装されているが、対応するシンボリックな定数は存在しない)
プロセスがオープンできるファイル数の最大値を返す。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success,
.\"O .BR ulimit ()
.\"O returns a nonnegative value.
.\"O On error, \-1 is returned, and
.\"O .I errno
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功すると
.BR ulimit ()
は 0 または正の値を返す。
エラーが生じると \-1 を返し、
.I errno
を適切な値に設定する。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EPERM
.\"O A unprivileged process tried to increase a limit.
非特権プロセスが制限値を増加させようとした。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
SVr4, POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O POSIX.1-2008 marks
.\"O .BR ulimit ()
.\"O as obsolete.
POSIX.1-2008 は
.BR ulimit ()
を廃止予定としている。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR bash (1),
.BR getrlimit (2),
.BR setrlimit (2),
.BR sysconf (3)
