.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jan 11 00:55:43 JST 2000
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"
.TH UNGETWC 3 1999-09-19 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ungetwc \- push back a wide character onto a FILE stream
ungetwc \- ワイド文字を FILE ストリームへ戻す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t ungetwc(wint_t " wc ", FILE *" stream );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The \fBungetwc\fP() function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR ungetc (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It pushes back a wide character onto \fIstream\fP and returns it.
.BR ungetwc ()
関数は
.BR ungetc (3)
関数のワイド文字版である。
この関数はワイド文字を \fIstream\fP へ戻して、それを返す。
.PP
.\"O If \fIwc\fP is \fBWEOF\fP, it returns \fBWEOF\fP.
.\"O If \fIwc\fP is an invalid wide character,
.\"O it sets \fIerrno\fP to \fBEILSEQ\fP and returns \fBWEOF\fP.
\fIwc\fP が \fBWEOF\fP の場合、 \fBWEOF\fP を返す。
\fIwc\fP が不正なワイド文字の場合、
\fIerrno\fP に \fBEILSEQ\fP を設定して \fBWEOF\fP を返す。
.PP
.\"O If \fIwc\fP is a valid wide character, it is pushed back onto the stream
.\"O and thus becomes available for future wide character read operations.
.\"O The file-position indicator is decremented by one or more.
.\"O The end-of-file
.\"O indicator is cleared.
.\"O The backing storage of the file is not affected.
\fIwc\fP が有効なワイド文字の場合、それをストリームへと戻して後の
ワイド文字読み込み操作で取得できるようにする。ファイル位置(file-position)
指示子は1以上戻される。ファイル終端(end-of-file)指示子はクリアされる。
そのファイルの背後にある記憶媒体は影響を受けない。
.PP
.\"O Note: \fIwc\fP need not be the last wide-character read from the stream;
.\"O it can be any other valid wide character.
注意: \fIwc\fP はストリームから読み込んだ最後のワイド文字である必要はない。
有効なワイド文字ならば何でも良い。
.PP
.\"O If the implementation supports multiple push-back operations in a row, the
.\"O pushed-back wide characters will be read in reverse order; however, only one
.\"O level of push-back is guaranteed.
続けて複数のワイド文字を戻すことをサポートしている実装の場合は、
戻したワイド文字は、戻したのとは逆の順番で読み込まれる。
しかしこの場合でも一段階の戻ししか保証されていない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR ungetwc ()
.\"O function returns \fIwc\fP when successful, or \fBWEOF\fP upon
.\"O failure.
.BR ungetwc ()
関数は成功した場合には \fIwc\fP を返す。
失敗した場合には \fBWEOF\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR ungetwc ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR ungetwc ()
関数の動作は現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存している。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fgetwc (3)
