.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\" This page is in the public domain. - aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul  8 02:25:57 JST 2003
.\"         by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" 
.TH UNLOCKPT 3 2008-06-14 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O unlockpt \- unlock a pseudoterminal master/slave pair
.SH 名前
unlockpt \- 擬似端末マスタ/スレーブのペアのロックを解除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.\"O .BR "#define _XOPEN_SOURCE" "       /* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.BR "#define _XOPEN_SOURCE" "       /* feature_test_macros(7) 参照 */"
.br
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "int unlockpt(int " fd ");"
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR unlockpt ()
.\"O function unlocks the slave pseudoterminal device
.\"O corresponding to the master pseudoterminal referred to by
.\"O .IR fd .
.BR unlockpt ()
関数は
.I fd
で参照されるマスタ擬似端末に対応するスレーブ擬似端末のロックを
解除する。
.PP
.\"O .BR unlockpt ()
.\"O should be called before opening the slave side of a pseudoterminal.
擬似端末のスレーブ側をオープンする前に、
.BR unlockpt ()
を呼び出す必要がある。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O When successful,
.\"O .BR unlockpt ()
.\"O returns 0.
.\"O Otherwise, it returns \-1 and sets
.\"O .I errno
.\"O appropriately.
成功した場合、
.BR grantpt ()
は 0 を返す。そうでない場合、\-1 を返し、
.I errno
に適切な値がセットされる。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EBADF
.\"O The
.\"O .I fd
.\"O argument is not a file descriptor open for writing.
引き数
.I fd
が書き込み用にオープンされたファイル・ディスクリプタでない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O The
.\"O .I fd
.\"O argument is not associated with a master pseudoterminal.
引き数
.I fd
がマスタ擬似端末に対応するものではない。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O .BR unlockpt ()
.\"O is provided in glibc since version 2.1.
.BR unlockpt ()
は、バージョン 2.1 以降の glibc で提供されている。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR grantpt (3),
.BR posix_openpt (3),
.BR ptsname (3),
.BR pts (4),
.BR pty (7)
