.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 25 22:24:35 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCPCPY 3 2010-09-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcpcpy \- copy a wide-character string, returning a pointer to its end
wcpcpy \- ワイド文字文字列をコピーし、その末尾を指すポインタを返す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wcpcpy(wchar_t *" dest ", const wchar_t *" src );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR wcpcpy ():
.PD 0
.ad l
.RS 4
.TP 4
.\"O Since glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 以降:
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.TP
.\"O Before glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 より前:
_GNU_SOURCE
.RE
.ad
.PD
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcpcpy ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR stpcpy (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It copies the wide-character string pointed to by \fIsrc\fP,
.\"O including the terminating L\(aq\\0\(aq character, to the array pointed to by
.\"O \fIdest\fP.
.BR wcpcpy ()
関数は、
.BR stpcpy (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は \fIsrc\fP が指すワイド文字文字列を、終端の L\(aq\\0\(aq を含めて、
\fIdest\fP が指す配列にコピーする。
.PP
.\"O The strings may not overlap.
これらの文字列は重なっていてはならない。
.PP
.\"O The programmer must ensure that there
.\"O is room for at least \fIwcslen(src)+1\fP
.\"O wide characters at \fIdest\fP.
プログラマは、\fIdest\fP が指す領域に少なくともワイド文字
\fIwcslen(src)+1\fP 個分の領域を確保しなければならない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR wcpcpy ()
.\"O returns a pointer to the end of the wide-character string
.\"O \fIdest\fP, that is, a pointer to the terminating L\(aq\\0\(aq character.
.BR wcpcpy ()
は、ワイド文字文字列 \fIdest\fP の末尾、つまり終端の
L\(aq\\0\(aq 文字を指すポインタを返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.\"O This function is a GNU extension.
この関数は GNU 拡張である。
.SH 関連項目
.BR strcpy (3),
.BR wcscpy (3),
.BR feature_test_macros (7)
