.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 25 23:52:06 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSCASECMP 3 2009-02-04 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcscasecmp \- compare two wide-character strings, ignoring case
wcscasecmp \- ワイド文字列を比較する。大文字と小文字を区別しない。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #define _GNU_SOURCE
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int wcscasecmp(const wchar_t *" s1 ", const wchar_t *" s2 );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcscasecmp ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR strcasecmp (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It compares the wide-character string pointed to
.\"O by \fIs1\fP and the wide-character string pointed to by \fIs2\fP, ignoring
.\"O case differences
.\"O .RB ( towupper (3),
.\"O .BR towlower (3)).
.BR wcscasecmp ()
関数は、
.BR strcasecmp (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数
である。この関数は、\fIs1\fP が指すワイド文字文字列と \fIs2\fP が指す
ワイド文字文字列を、大文字と小文字の違い
.RB ( towupper (3),
.BR towlower (3))
を無視して比較する。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcscasecmp ()
.\"O function returns zero if the wide-character strings at
.\"O \fIs1\fP and \fIs2\fP are equal except for case distinctions.
.\"O It returns a
.\"O positive integer if \fIs1\fP is greater than \fIs2\fP, ignoring case.
.\"O It
.\"O returns a negative integer if \fIs1\fP is smaller
.\"O than \fIs2\fP, ignoring case.
.BR wcscasecmp ()
関数は、\fIs1\fP と \fIs2\fP が指すワイド文字列を大文
字と小文字の違いを無視して比較した時に、等しければ 0 を返す。大文字と
小文字の違いを無視して \fIs1\fP の方が \fIs2\fP より大きければ正の整数
を返す。
大文字と小文字の違いを無視して \fIs1\fP の方が \fIs2\fP より小さければ
負の整数を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2008.
.\"O This function is not specified in POSIX.1-2001,
.\"O and is not widely available on other systems.
この関数は POSIX.1-2001 では規定されていないが、
Linux 以外の他のシステムで広く利用可能である。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR wcscasecmp ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR wcscasecmp ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
に依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strcasecmp (3),
.BR wcscmp (3)
