.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sun Oct 17 22:19:07 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSCSPN 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcscspn \- search a wide-character string for any of a set of wide characters
wcscspn \- ワイド文字文字列から、与えた文字集合に含まれる文字を検索する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "size_t wcscspn(const wchar_t *" wcs ", const wchar_t *" reject );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcscspn ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent
.\"O of the
.\"O .BR strcspn (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It determines the length of the longest initial segment of \fIwcs\fP
.\"O which consists entirely of wide-characters not listed in \fIreject\fP.
.\"O In
.\"O other words, it searches for the first occurrence in the wide-character
.\"O string \fIwcs\fP of any of the characters in the wide-character string
.\"O \fIreject\fP.
.BR wcscspn ()
関数は、
.BR strcspn (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwcs\fP の先頭部分を調べ、\fIreject\fP に列挙されていない
ワイド文字だけによって構成される部分を最も長く取った場合の長さを求める。
言い換えると、この関数はワイド文字文字列 \fIwcs\fP の中に、ワイド文字列
\fIreject\fP に含まれるいずれかの文字が現われる最初の位置を探す。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcscspn ()
.\"O function returns the number of
.\"O wide characters in the longest
.\"O initial segment of \fIwcs\fP which consists entirely of wide-characters not
.\"O listed in \fIreject\fP.
.\"O In other words, it returns the position of the first
.\"O occurrence in the wide-character string \fIwcs\fP
.\"O of any of the characters in
.\"O the wide-character string \fIreject\fP,
.\"O or \fIwcslen(wcs)\fP if there is none.
.BR wcscspn ()
関数は、\fIwcs\fP の先頭部分を調べ、\fIreject\fP に列挙
されていないワイド文字だけによって構成される部分を最も長く取った場合の
長さを返す。
言い換えると、この関数はワイド文字文字列 \fIwcs\fP の中に、ワイド文字列
\fIreject\fP に含まれるいずれかの文字が現われる最初の位置を返す。
何も現われなかった場合には \fIwcslen(wcs)\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strcspn (3),
.BR wcspbrk (3),
.BR wcsspn (3)
