.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sun Oct 17 21:56:31 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSCAT 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcscat \- concatenate two wide-character strings
wcscat \- 2 つのワイド文字文字列を結合する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wcscat(wchar_t *" dest ", const wchar_t *" src );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcscat ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent
.\"O of the
.\"O .BR strcat (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It copies the wide-character string pointed to by \fIsrc\fP,
.\"O including the terminating null wide character (L\(aq\\0\(aq),
.\"O to the end of the wide-character string pointed to by \fIdest\fP.
.BR wcscat ()
関数は、
.BR strcat (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIsrc\fP が指すワイド文字文字列
(終端の NULL ワイド文字 (L\(aq\\0\(aq) を含む) を、
\fIdest\fP が指すワイド文字文字列の最後にコピーする。
.PP
.\"O The strings may not overlap.
この文字列は重なっていてはならない。
.PP
.\"O The programmer must ensure that there is room for at least
.\"O \fIwcslen(dest)+wcslen(src)+1\fP wide characters at \fIdest\fP.
プログラマは、少なくとも \fIwcslen(dest)+wcslen(src)+1\fP 文字の
ワイド文字が入るだけの領域を \fIdest\fP に対して確保しなければならない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR wcscat ()
.\"O returns \fIdest\fP.
.BR wcscat ()
は \fIdest\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strcat (3),
.BR wcpcpy (3),
.BR wcscpy (3),
.BR wcsncat (3)
