.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sun Oct 17 21:56:31 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSCHR 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcschr \- search a wide character in a wide-character string
wcschr \- ワイド文字文字列中のワイド文字を検索する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wcschr(const wchar_t *" wcs ", wchar_t " wc );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcschr ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent
.\"O of the
.\"O .BR strchr (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It searches the first occurrence of \fIwc\fP in the wide-character
.\"O string pointed to by \fIwcs\fP.
.BR wcschr ()
関数は、
.BR strchr (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwcs\fP が指すワイド文字文字列の中で最初に現われる \fIwc\fP を検索する。
.\"O.SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcschr ()
.\"O function returns a pointer to the first occurrence of
.\"O \fIwc\fP in the wide-character string pointed to by \fIwcs\fP, or NULL if
.\"O \fIwc\fP does not occur in the string.
.BR wcschr ()
関数は、\fIwcs\fP が指すワイド文字文字列の中で最初に現われた
\fIwc\fP へのポインタを返す。\fIwc\fP が文字列中に現われなかった場合は
NULL を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strchr (3),
.BR wcspbrk (3),
.BR wcsrchr (3),
.BR wcsstr (3),
.BR wmemchr (3)
