.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sun Oct 17 22:09:35 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSCMP 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcscmp \- compare two wide-character strings
wcscmp \- 2 つのワイド文字文字列を比較する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int wcscmp(const wchar_t *" s1 ", const wchar_t *" s2 );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcscmp ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent
.\"O of the
.\"O .BR strcmp (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It compares the wide-character string pointed to by \fIs1\fP and the
.\"O wide-character string pointed to by \fIs2\fP.
.BR wcscmp ()
関数は、
.BR strcmp (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIs1\fP が指すワイド文字文字列と
\fIs2\fP が指すワイド文字文字列を比較する。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcscmp ()
.\"O function returns zero if the wide-character strings at
.\"O \fIs1\fP and \fIs2\fP are equal.
.\"O It returns an integer greater than zero if
.\"O at the first differing position \fIi\fP, the corresponding wide-character
.\"O \fIs1[i]\fP is greater than \fIs2[i]\fP.
.\"O It returns an integer less than zero if
.\"O at the first differing position \fIi\fP, the corresponding wide-character
.\"O \fIs1[i]\fP is less than \fIs2[i]\fP.
.BR wcscmp ()
関数は、\fIs1\fP と \fIs2\fP がそれぞれ指すワイド文字文字列
が同じであれば 0 を返す。異なる文字が最初に現われた位置において、その位
置にあるワイド文字 \fIs1[i]\fP が \fIs2[i]\fP より大きければ正の値を返す。
異なる文字が最初に現われた位置において、その位置にあるワイド文字 \fIs1[i]\fP
が \fIs2[i]\fP より小さければ負の値を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strcmp (3),
.BR wcscasecmp (3),
.BR wmemcmp (3)
