.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 18 22:36:21 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jun  6 13:23:46 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSDUP 3  2010-09-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcsdup \- duplicate a wide-character string
wcsdup \- ワイド文字文字列を複製する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wcsdup(const wchar_t *" s );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR wcsdup ():
.PD 0
.ad l
.RS 4
.TP 4
.\"O Since glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 以降:
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.TP
.\"O Before glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 より前:
_GNU_SOURCE
.RE
.ad
.PD
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsdup ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent
.\"O of the
.\"O .BR strdup (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It allocates and returns a new wide-character string whose initial
.\"O contents is a duplicate of the wide-character string pointed to by \fIs\fP.
.BR wcsdup ()
関数は、
.BR strdup (3)
関数のワイド文字版である。
この関数はポインタ \fIs\fP が指し示すワイド文字文字列の複製を
新しい領域に割り当てて返す。
.PP
.\"O Memory for the new wide-character string is
.\"O obtained with
.\"O .BR malloc (3),
.\"O and should be freed with
.\"O .BR free (3).
新しいワイド文字文字列のためのメモリは
.BR malloc (3)
を使って割り当てられる。
この領域は
.BR free (3)
を使って解放すべきである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsdup ()
.\"O function returns a pointer
.\"O to the new wide-character string,
.\"O or NULL if sufficient memory was not available.
.BR wcsdup ()
関数は、新しいワイド文字文字列へのポインタを返す。
十分なメモリがなければ NULL を返す。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.\"O Insufficient memory available to allocate duplicate string.
複製文字列を割り当てるのに十分なメモリがない。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2008.
.\"O This function is not specified in POSIX.1-2001,
.\"O and is not widely available on other systems.
この関数は POSIX.1-2001 では規定されていないが、
Linux 以外の他のシステムで広く利用可能である。
.\"O .\" present in libc5 and glibc 2.0 and later
.\" libc5 と glibc 2.0 とそれ以降に存在する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strdup (3),
.BR wcscpy (3)
