.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 18 22:43:56 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSLEN 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcslen \- determine the length of a wide-character string
wcslen \- ワイド文字文字列の長さを求める
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "size_t wcslen(const wchar_t *" s );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcslen ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent
.\"O of the
.\"O .BR strlen (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It determines the length of the wide-character string pointed to
.\"O by \fIs\fP, not including the terminating L\(aq\\0\(aq character.
.BR wcslen ()
関数は、
.BR strlen (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIs\fP が指すワイド文字文字列の長さを求める。
終端の L\(aq\\0\(aq 文字はこの長さには含まれない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcslen ()
.\"O function returns the
.\"O number of wide characters in \fIs\fP.
.BR wcslen ()
関数は、\fIs\fP に含まれるワイド文字の数を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strlen (3)
