.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 18 22:59:06 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSNCASECMP 3 2010-09-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcsncasecmp \- compare two fixed-size wide-character strings, ignoring case
wcsncasecmp \- 大文字と小文字を区別せず、2 つの固定長のワイド文字文字列を比較する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int wcsncasecmp(const wchar_t *" s1 ", const wchar_t *" s2 ", size_t " n );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
.\"O Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7)):
glibc 向けの機能検査マクロの要件
.RB ( feature_test_macros (7)
参照):
.in
.sp
.BR wcsncasecmp ():
.PD 0
.ad l
.RS 4
.TP 4
.\"O Since glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 以降:
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.TP
.\"O Before glibc 2.10:
glibc 2.10 より前:
_GNU_SOURCE
.RE
.ad
.PD
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsncasecmp ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR strncasecmp (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It compares the wide-character string pointed to
.\"O by \fIs1\fP and the wide-character string
.\"O pointed to by \fIs2\fP, but at most
.\"O \fIn\fP wide characters from each string, ignoring case differences
.\"O .RB ( towupper (3),
.\"O .BR towlower (3)).
.BR wcsncasecmp ()
関数は、
.BR strncasecmp (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関
数である。この関数は、\fIs1\fP が指すワイド文字文字列と \fIs2\fP が指
すワイド文字文字列を比較するが、最大でも先頭のワイド文字 \fIn\fP 個
しか比較しない。また、大文字と小文字
.RB ( towupper (3),
.BR towlower (3))
は区別しない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsncasecmp ()
.\"O function returns zero
.\"O if the wide-character strings at
.\"O \fIs1\fP and \fIs2\fP,
.\"O truncated to at most length \fIn\fP, are equal except
.\"O for case distinctions.
.\"O It returns a positive integer if truncated \fIs1\fP is
.\"O greater than truncated \fIs2\fP, ignoring case.
.\"O It returns a negative integer
.\"O if truncated \fIs1\fP is smaller than truncated \fIs2\fP, ignoring case.
.BR wcsncasecmp ()
関数は、\fIs1\fP と \fIs2\fP がそれぞれ指す文字列を
\fIn\fP 文字に収まるように切り詰めたものを、大文字と小文字の違いを無視
して比較したときに等しければ 0 を返す。この関数は、大文字と小文字を区
別しない場合に、\fIs1\fP を切り詰めたものが \fIs2\fP を切り詰めたもの
より大きければ正の値を返す。この関数は、大文字と小文字を区別しない場合
に、\fIs1\fP を切り詰めたものが \fIs2\fP を切り詰めたものより小さけれ
ば負の値を返す。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsncasecmp ()
.\"O function is provided in glibc since version 2.1.
.BR wcsncasecmp ()
関数は glibc バージョン 2.1 以降で提供されている。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2008.
.\"O This function is not specified in POSIX.1-2001,
.\"O and is not widely available on other systems.
この関数は POSIX.1-2001 では規定されていないが、
Linux 以外の他のシステムで広く利用可能である。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR wcsncasecmp ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR wcsncasecmp ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strncasecmp (3),
.BR wcsncmp (3)
