.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 18 23:11:34 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSNCAT 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcsncat \- concatenate two wide-character strings
wcsncat \- 2 つのワイド文字文字列を結合する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wcsncat(wchar_t *" dest ", const wchar_t *" src ", size_t " n );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsncat ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR strncat (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It copies at most \fIn\fP wide characters from the wide-character
.\"O string pointed to by \fIsrc\fP to the end of the wide-character string pointed
.\"O to by \fIdest\fP, and adds a terminating L\(aq\\0\(aq character.
.BR wcsncat ()
関数は
.BR strncat (3)
に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIsrc\fP が指すワイド文字文字列から最大 \fIn\fP 個分のワ
イド文字をコピーして、\fIdest\fP が指すワイド文字文字列の末尾に貼り付
ける。\fIdest\fP の終端には L\(aq\\0\(aq 文字を追加する。
.PP
.\"O The strings may not overlap.
これらの文字列は重なっていてはならない。
.PP
.\"O The programmer must ensure that there is room for at least
.\"O \fIwcslen(dest) + n + 1\fP wide characters at \fIdest\fP.
プログラマは、\fIdest\fP に少なくとも \fIwcslen(dest) + n + 1\fP
個のワイド文字が入る領域を確保しておかなければならない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR wcsncat ()
.\"O returns \fIdest\fP.
.BR wcsncat ()
は \fIdest\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strncat (3),
.BR wcscat (3)
