.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Tue Oct 19 02:13:45 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSNCPY 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcsncpy \- copy a fixed-size string of wide characters
wcsncpy \- 固定長のワイド文字文字列をコピーする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wcsncpy(wchar_t *" dest ", const wchar_t *" src ", size_t " n );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsncpy ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR strncpy (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It copies at most \fIn\fP wide characters from the wide-character
.\"O string pointed to by \fIsrc\fP,
.\"O including the terminating null wide character (L\(aq\\0\(aq),
.\"O to the array pointed to by \fIdest\fP.
.\"O Exactly \fIn\fP wide characters are
.\"O written at \fIdest\fP.
.\"O If the length \fIwcslen(src)\fP is smaller than \fIn\fP,
.\"O the remaining wide characters in the array
.\"O pointed to by \fIdest\fP are filled
.\"O with null wide characters.
.\"O If the length \fIwcslen(src)\fP is greater or equal
.\"O to \fIn\fP, the string pointed to by \fIdest\fP
.\"O will not be terminated by a null wide character.
.BR wcsncpy ()
関数は、
.BR strncpy (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は \fIsrc\fP が指すワイド文字文字列から、
終端の NULL ワイド文字 (L\(aq\\0\(aq) を
含めて最大 \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字を、\fIdest\fP が指す配列にコピーする。
ちょうど \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字が \fIdest\fP に書き込まれる。
\fIwcslen(src)\fP の長さが \fIn\fP より小さければ、\fIdest\fP が指す
配列の残りのワイド文字の部分は NULL ワイド文字で埋められる。
\fIwcslen(src)\fP の長さが \fIn\fP 以上ならば、\fIdest\fP が指す文字列
が NULL ワイド文字で終端されることはない。
.PP
.\"O The strings may not overlap.
これらの配列は重なってはならない。
.PP
.\"O The programmer must ensure that there is room for at least \fIn\fP wide
.\"O characters at \fIdest\fP.
プログラマは、少なくとも \fIn\fP 文字のワイド文字が入るだけの領域を
\fIdest\fP に対して確保しなければならない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR wcsncpy ()
.\"O returns \fIdest\fP.
.BR wcsncpy ()
は \fIdest\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strncpy (3)
