.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Mon Oct 18 23:40:56 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSNCMP 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcsncmp \- compare two fixed-size wide-character strings
wcsncmp \- 2 つの固定長ワイド文字文字列を比較する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int wcsncmp(const wchar_t *" s1 ", const wchar_t *" s2 ", size_t " n );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsncmp ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR strncmp (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It compares the wide-character string pointed to by \fIs1\fP and the
.\"O wide-character string pointed to by \fIs2\fP, but at most \fIn\fP wide
.\"O characters from each string.
.\"O In each string, the comparison extends only up
.\"O to the first occurrence of a L\(aq\\0\(aq character, if any.
.BR wcsncmp ()
関数は、
.BR strncmp (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIs1\fP が指すワイド文字文字列と \fIs2\fP が指すワイド文
字文字列を比較するが、最大でも先頭のワイド文字 \fIn\fP 個までしか比較
しない。またいずれかの文字列に L\(aq\\0\(aq 文字が現れたら、比較は
その位置で終了する。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsncmp ()
.\"O function returns zero if the wide-character strings at
.\"O \fIs1\fP and \fIs2\fP, truncated to at most length \fIn\fP, are equal.
.\"O It returns an integer greater than zero if at the first differing position
.\"O \fIi\fP (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP),
.\"O the corresponding wide-character \fIs1[i]\fP is
.\"O greater than \fIs2[i]\fP.
.\"O It returns an integer less than zero if at the first
.\"O differing position \fIi\fP (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP), the corresponding
.\"O wide-character \fIs1[i]\fP is less than \fIs2[i]\fP.
.BR wcsncmp ()
関数は、\fIs1\fP と \fIs2\fP がそれぞれ指す文字列を
\fIn\fP 文字に収まるように切り詰めたものが等しければ 0 を返す。
この関数は、異なる文字が最初に現われた位置 \fIi\fP (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP)
において、その位置にある文字 \fIs1[i]\fP が \fIs2[i]\fP より大きければ
正の値を返す。異なる文字が最初に現われた位置 \fIi\fP (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP)
において、その位置にある文字 \fIs1[i]\fP が \fIs2[i]\fP より小さければ
負の値を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strncmp (3),
.BR wcsncasecmp (3)
