.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sat Oct 23 15:19:34 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSPBRK 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcspbrk \- search a wide-character string for any of a set of wide characters
wcspbrk \- ワイド文字列から、与えられたワイド文字集合に含まれる文字を検索する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wcspbrk(const wchar_t *" wcs ", const wchar_t *" accept );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcspbrk ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent
.\"O of the
.\"O .BR strpbrk (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It searches for the first occurrence in the wide-character
.\"O string pointed to by \fIwcs\fP of any of the
.\"O characters in the wide-character
.\"O string pointed to by \fIaccept\fP.
.BR wcspbrk ()
関数は、
.BR strpbrk (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIwcs\fP が指すワイド文字文字列において、\fIaccept\fP が
示すワイド文字文字列のいずれかの文字が最初に現われる位置を検索する。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcspbrk ()
.\"O function returns a pointer to the first occurrence in
.\"O \fIwcs\fP of any of the characters listed in \fIaccept\fP.
.\"O If \fIwcs\fP
.\"O contains none of these characters, NULL is returned.
.BR wcspbrk ()
関数は、\fIaccept\fP に列挙された文字のいずれかが
\fIwcs\fP 中に最初に現われた位置へのポインタを返す。このような文字が
\fIwcs\fP に含まれない場合は、NULL が返される。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strpbrk (3),
.BR wcschr (3),
.BR wcscspn (3)
