.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sat Oct 23 15:50:55 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSSTR 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcsstr \- locate a substring in a wide-character string
wcsstr \- ワイド文字文字列中の部分文字列の位置を特定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wcsstr(const wchar_t *" haystack ", const wchar_t *" needle );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsstr ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR strstr (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It searches for the first occurrence of the wide-character string
.\"O \fIneedle\fP (without its terminating null wide character (L\(aq\\0\(aq))
.\"O as a substring in the wide-character string \fIhaystack\fP.
.BR wcsstr ()
関数は、
.BR strstr (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字文字列である。
この関数はワイド文字文字列 \fIneedle\fP (終端の NULL ワイド文字
(L\(aq\\0\(aq) は含まない) が、ワイド文字文字列 \fIhaystack\fP の部分文字列
として最初に現われる位置を探す。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcsstr ()
.\"O function returns a pointer to the first occurrence of
.\"O \fIneedle\fP in \fIhaystack\fP.
.\"O It returns NULL if \fIneedle\fP does not occur
.\"O as a substring in \fIhaystack\fP.
.BR wcsstr ()
関数は、\fIhaystack\fP 中に \fIneedle\fP が現われた最初の
位置を返す。\fIneedle\fP が \fIhaystack\fP の部分文字列でなければ
NULL を返す。
.PP
.\"O Note the special case:
.\"O If \fIneedle\fP is the empty wide-character string,
.\"O the return value is always \fIhaystack\fP itself.
以下の特殊な場合に注意すること: \fIneedle\fP が空のワイド文字文字列な
らば、返り値は常に \fIhaystack\fP 自身となる。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR strstr (3),
.BR wcschr (3)
