.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Sep 11 07:57:58 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH WCSTOIMAX 3 2003-11-01 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcstoimax, wcstoumax \- convert wide-character string to integer
wcstoimax, wcstoumax \- ワイド文字文字列を整数に変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <stddef.h>
.br
.B #include <inttypes.h>
.sp
.BI "intmax_t wcstoimax(const wchar_t *" nptr ", wchar_t **" endptr \
", int " base );
.br
.BI "uintmax_t wcstoumax(const wchar_t *" nptr ", wchar_t **" endptr \
", int " base );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O These functions are just like
.\"O .BR wcstol (3)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR wcstoul (3),
.\"O except that they return a value of type
.\"O .I intmax_t
.\"O and
.\"O .IR uintmax_t ,
.\"O respectively.
これらの関数はちょうど
.BR wcstol (3)
と
.BR wcstoul (3)
に似ているが、それぞれ
.I intmax_t
と
.I uintmax_t
型の値を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR imaxabs (3),
.BR imaxdiv (3),
.BR strtoimax (3),
.BR strtoumax (3),
.\" FIXME . the pages referred to by the following xrefs are not yet written
.BR wcstol (3),
.BR wcstoul (3)
