.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sat Oct 23 20:01:16 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCTYPE 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wctype \- wide-character classification
wctype \- ワイド文字の分類
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "wctype_t wctype(const char *" name );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I wctype_t
.\"O type represents a property which a wide character may or
.\"O may not have.
.\"O In other words, it represents a class of wide characters.
.I wctype_t
型は、ワイド文字が持っている、あるいは持っていない属性を表現する。
言い換えると、
.I wctype_t
型はワイド文字のクラスを表現する。
.\"O This type's nature is implementation-dependent, but the special value
.\"O .I "(wctype_t) 0"
.\"O denotes an invalid property.
.\"O Nonzero
.\"O .I wctype_t
.\"O values
.\"O can be passed to the
.\"O .BR iswctype (3)
.\"O function
.\"O to actually test whether a given
.\"O wide character has the property.
この型は本質的に実装依存であるが、特殊な値
.I "(wctype_t) 0"
は不正な属性を示す。
0 でない値を持つ
.I wctype_t
を
.BR iswctype (3)
関数に渡
すことによって、与えられたワイド文字がその属性を持つかどうかを実際にテ
ストすることができる。
x.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wctype ()
.\"O function returns a property, given by its name.
.\"O The set of
.\"O valid names depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the current locale, but the
.\"O following names are valid in all locales.
.BR wctype ()
関数は、名前によって与えられる属性を返す。有効な名前の集
合は現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存するが、以下の名前は全てのロケールで有効である。
.sp
.nf
.\"O   "alnum" \- realizes the \fBisalnum\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "alpha" \- realizes the \fBisalpha\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "blank" \- realizes the \fBisblank\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "cntrl" \- realizes the \fBiscntrl\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "digit" \- realizes the \fBisdigit\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "graph" \- realizes the \fBisgraph\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "lower" \- realizes the \fBislower\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "print" \- realizes the \fBisprint\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "punct" \- realizes the \fBispunct\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "space" \- realizes the \fBisspace\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "upper" \- realizes the \fBisupper\fP(3) classification function
.\"O   "xdigit" \- realizes the \fBisxdigit\fP(3) classification function
  "alnum" \- クラス化関数 \fBisalnum\fP(3) を実現する
  "alpha" \- クラス化関数 \fBisalpha\fP(3) を実現する
  "blank" \- クラス化関数 \fBisblank\fP(3) を実現する
  "cntrl" \- クラス化関数 \fBiscntrl\fP(3) を実現する
  "digit" \- クラス化関数 \fBisdigit\fP(3) を実現する
  "graph" \- クラス化関数 \fBisgraph\fP(3) を実現する
  "lower" \- クラス化関数 \fBislower\fP(3) を実現する
  "print" \- クラス化関数 \fBisprint\fP(3) を実現する
  "punct" \- クラス化関数 \fBispunct\fP(3) を実現する
  "space" \- クラス化関数 \fBisspace\fP(3) を実現する
  "upper" \- クラス化関数 \fBisupper\fP(3) を実現する
  "xdigit" \- クラス化関数 \fBisxdigit\fP(3) を実現する
.fi
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wctype ()
.\"O function returns a property descriptor
.\"O if the
.\"O .I name
.\"O is valid.
.\"O Otherwise it returns
.\"O .IR "(wctype_t) 0" .
.BR wctype ()
関数は、
.I name
が有効ならば属性記述子を返す。
有効でなければ
.I "(wctype_t) 0"
を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR wctype ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR wctype ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR iswctype (3)
