.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Sat Oct 23 20:06:18 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Aug 16 01:32:21 JST 2002
.\"           by Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WCWIDTH 3  2011-09-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wcwidth \- determine columns needed for a wide character
wcwidth \- ワイド文字が必要とするカラム数を調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #define _XOPEN_SOURCE
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int wcwidth(wchar_t " c );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcwidth ()
.\"O function returns the number of columns
.\"O needed to represent the wide character \fIc\fP.
.\"O If \fIc\fP is a printable wide character, the value
.\"O is at least 0.
.\"O If \fIc\fP is null wide character (L\(aq\\0\(aq), the value is 0.
.\"O Otherwise \-1 is returned.
.BR wcwidth ()
関数は、ワイド文字 \fIc\fP を表現するために必要なカラム
数を返す。\fIc\fP が印刷可能文字ならば、この値は 0 以上である。
\fIc\fP が NULL ワイド文字 (L\(aq\\0\(aq) ならば、値は 0 である。
それ以外の場合には \-1 が返される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wcwidth ()
.\"O function returns the number of
.\"O column positions for \fIc\fP.
.BR wcwidth ()
関数は、\fIc\fP の表現に必要なカラム数を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
POSIX.1-2001.

.\"O Note that glibc before 2.2.5 used the prototype
glibc 2.2.5 以前では以下のプロトタイプ宣言が使用されていたことに
注意すること。
.br
.nf
.BI "int wcwidth(wint_t " c );
.fi
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .BR wcwidth ()
.\"O depends on the
.\"O .B LC_CTYPE
.\"O category of the
.\"O current locale.
.BR wcwidth ()
の動作は、現在のロケールの
.B LC_CTYPE
カテゴリに依存する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR iswprint (3),
.BR wcswidth (3),
.BR feature_test_macros (7)
