.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Tue Oct 26 00:39:25 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WMEMCMP 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wmemcmp \- compare two arrays of wide-characters
wmemcmp \- ワイド文字の配列 2 つを比較する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int wmemcmp(const wchar_t *" s1 ", const wchar_t *" s2 ", size_t " n );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wmemcmp ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR memcmp (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It compares the \fIn\fP wide-characters starting at \fIs1\fP and the
.\"O \fIn\fP wide-characters starting at \fIs2\fP.
.BR wmemcmp ()
関数は、
.BR memcmp (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIs1\fP を先頭とする \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字と \fIs2\fP を
先頭とする \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字を比較する。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wmemcmp ()
.\"O function returns
.\"O zero if the wide-character arrays of size
.\"O \fIn\fP at \fIs1\fP and \fIs2\fP are equal.
.\"O It returns an integer greater than
.\"O zero if at the first differing position \fIi\fP (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP), the
.\"O corresponding wide-character \fIs1[i]\fP is greater than \fIs2[i]\fP.
.\"O It returns an integer less than zero if
.\"O at the first differing position \fIi\fP
.\"O (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP), the corresponding
.\"O wide-character \fIs1[i]\fP is less than
.\"O \fIs2[i]\fP.
.BR wmemcmp ()
関数は、\fIs1\fP と \fIs2\fP を先頭とする大きさが
\fIn\fP の 2 つの配列が等しければ 0 を返す。
最初に異なる文字が現われた位置 \fIi\fP (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP)において、そ
の位置にあるワイド文字 \fIs1[i]\fP が \fIs2[i]\fP より大きければ正の整
数を返す。
最初に異なる文字が現われた位置 \fIi\fP (\fIi\fP < \fIn\fP)において、そ
の位置にあるワイド文字 \fIs1[i]\fP が \fIs2[i]\fP より小さければ負の整
数を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR memcmp (3),
.BR wcscmp (3)
