.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Tue Oct 26 00:03:46 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WMEMCHR 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wmemchr \- search a wide character in a wide-character array
wmemchr \- ワイド文字の配列からワイド文字を探す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wmemchr(const wchar_t *" s ", wchar_t " c ", size_t " n );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wmemchr ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR memchr (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It searches the \fIn\fP wide characters starting at \fIs\fP for
.\"O the first occurrence of the wide character \fIc\fP.
.BR wmemchr ()
関数は、
.BR memchr (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIs\fP を先頭とする \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字の中から、最初
にワイド文字 \fIc\fP が現われる場所を探す。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wmemchr ()
.\"O function returns a pointer to the first occurrence of \fIc\fP
.\"O among the \fIn\fP wide characters starting at \fIs\fP, or NULL if \fIc\fP does
.\"O not occur among these.
.BR wmemchr ()
関数は、\fIs\fP を先頭とする \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字の中
において最初に \fIc\fP が現われる場所へのポインタを返す。\fIc\fP が現
われなかった場合には NULL を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR memchr (3),
.BR wcschr (3)
