.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.\" About this Japanese page, please contact to JM Project <JM@linux.or.jp>
.\" Translated Tue Oct 26 00:43:58 JST 1999
.\"           by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.TH WMEMCPY 3 1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O wmemcpy \- copy an array of wide-characters
wmemcpy \- ワイド文字の配列をコピーする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wchar_t *wmemcpy(wchar_t *" dest ", const wchar_t *" src ", size_t " n );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .BR wmemcpy ()
.\"O function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.\"O .BR memcpy (3)
.\"O function.
.\"O It copies \fIn\fP wide characters from the array starting at
.\"O \fIsrc\fP to the array starting at \fIdest\fP.
.BR wmemcpy ()
関数は、
.BR memcpy (3)
関数に対応するワイド文字関数である。
この関数は、\fIsrc\fP を先頭とする配列から \fIdest\fP を先頭とする配列
に \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字をコピーする。
.PP
.\"O The arrays may not overlap; use
.\"O .BR wmemmove (3)
.\"O to copy between overlapping
.\"O arrays.
2 つの配列は重なっていてはならない。配列が重なっている場合には
.BR wmemmove (3)
を使ってコピーすること。
.PP
.\"O The programmer must ensure that there is room for at least \fIn\fP wide
.\"O characters at \fIdest\fP.
プログラマは、少なくとも \fIn\fP 個のワイド文字が入る領域を \fIdest\fP
に確保しなければならない。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O .BR wmemcpy ()
.\"O returns \fIdest\fP.
.BR wmemcpy ()
は \fIdest\fP を返す。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
C99.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR memcpy (3),
.BR wcscpy (3),
.BR wmemmove (3),
.BR wmempcpy (3)
