.\"  Copyright 2003 walter harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"  Distributed under GPL
.\"  this is the 3rd type of interface for cryptographic routines
.\"  1. encrypt() expects a bit field
.\"  2. cbc_crypt() byte values
.\"  3. xencrypt() a hexstring
.\"  to bad to be true :(
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Sep 15 01:02:11 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH XCRYPT 3 2003-04-04 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O xencrypt, xdecrypt, passwd2des \- RFS password encryption
xencrypt, xdecrypt, passwd2des \- RFS パスワード暗号化
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "#include <rpc/des_crypt.h>"
.sp
.BI "void passwd2des(char " *passwd ", char *" key ");"
.sp
.BI "int xencrypt(char *" secret ", char *" passwd ");"
.sp
.BI "int xdecrypt(char *" secret ", char *" passwd ");"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The function
.\"O .BR passwd2des ()
.\"O takes a character string
.\"O .I passwd
.\"O of arbitrary length and fills a character array
.\"O .I key
.\"O of length 8.
.\"O The array
.\"O .I key
.\"O is suitable for use as DES key.
.\"O It has odd parity set in bit 0 of each byte.
関数
.BR passwd2des ()
は任意の長さの文字列
.I passwd
をとり、長さ 8 の文字配列
.I key
を埋める。
配列
.I key
は DES キーとして使うのに適している。
この配列の各バイトのビット 0 は奇数パリティである。
.\"O Both other functions described here use this function to turn their
.\"O argument
.\"O .I passwd
.\"O into a DES key.
ここで説明されている残りの 2 つの関数は、
この関数を使い、引き数
.I passwd
を DES キーに変換する。
.LP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR xencrypt ()
.\"O function takes the ASCII character string
.\"O .I secret
.\"O given in hex,
.\"O .\" (over the alphabet 0123456789abcdefABCDEF),
.BR xencrypt ()
関数は
.\" (アルファベット 0123456789abcdefABCDEF で表される)
16 進数で与えられた ASCII 文字列
.I secret
をとる。
.\"O which must have a length that is a multiple of 16,
この長さは 16 の倍数でなければならない。
.\"O encrypts it using the DES key derived from
.\"O .I passwd
.\"O by
.\"O .BR passwd2des (),
そして
.BR passwd2des ()
によって
.I passwd
から導き出された DES キーを使い、
.I secret
を暗号化する。
.\"O and outputs the result again in
.\"O .I secret
.\"O as a hex string
.\"O .\" (over the alphabet 0123456789abcdef)
.\"O of the same length.
その結果は
.\" (アルファベット 0123456789abcdef で表される)
16 進数文字列として
.I secret
に再び同じ長さで出力される。
.LP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR xdecrypt ()
.\"O function performs the converse operation.
.BR xdecrypt ()
関数は逆の操作を行う。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O The functions
.\"O .BR xencrypt ()
.\"O and
.\"O .BR xdecrypt ()
.\"O return 1 on success and 0 on error.
関数
.BR xencrypt ()
と
.BR xdecrypt ()
は、成功した場合に 1 を返し、失敗した場合に 0 を返す。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O These routines are present in libc 4.6.27 and later, and in
.\"O glibc 2.1 and later.
これらのルーチンは libc 4.6.27 以降と glibc 2.1 以降に存在する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The prototypes are missing from the abovementioned include file.
上記のインクルードファイルにプロトタイプがない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR cbc_crypt (3)
