.\" This manual page is distributed with agetty.c in util-linux 2.8b
.\"
.\" agetty.c is  an another getty program for Linux. By W. Z. Venema 1989
.\" Ported to Linux by Peter Orbaek <poe@daimi.aau.dk>
.\" This program is freely distributable.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Jan 14 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified & Updated Wed Jun 24 1998 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH AGETTY 8 
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O agetty \- alternative Linux getty
.SH 名前
agetty \- Linux 用 getty のもう一つの実装

.SH 書式
.BR "agetty " [\-ihLmnw]
.RI "[-f " issue_file ]
.RI "[-l " login_program ]
.RI "[-I " init ]
.RI "[-t " timeout ]
.I port
.I baud_rate,...
.RI [ term ]
.br
.BR "agetty " [\-ihLmnw]
.RI "[-f " issue_file ]
.RI "[-l " login_program ]
.RI "[-I " init ]
.RI "[-t " timeout ]
.I baud_rate,...
.I port
.RI [ term ]

.SH 説明
.ad
.fi
.\"O \fBagetty\fP opens a tty port, prompts for a login name and invokes
.\"O the /bin/login command. It is normally invoked by \fIinit(8)\fP.
\fBagetty\fP
は tty ポートをオープンし、ログイン名を求めるプロンプトを出し、 
/bin/login コマンドを起動する。通常 \fBagetty\fP は \fIinit(8)\fP から
起動される。

.\"O \fBagetty\fP has several \fInon-standard\fP features that are useful
.\"O for hard-wired and for dial-in lines:
.B agetty
はいくつか\fI非標準\fPな機能を持っており、直結ラインやダイアルインの
ラインに便利になっている。
.IP o
.\"O Adapts the tty settings to parity bits and to erase, kill,
.\"O end-of-line and uppercase characters when it reads a login name.
.\"O The program can handle 7-bit characters with even, odd, none or space
.\"O parity, and 8-bit characters with no parity. The following special
.\"O characters are recognized: @ and Control-U (kill); #, DEL and
.\"O back space (erase); carriage return and line feed (end of line).
ログイン名を読むときに tty の設定（パリティビット、 erase、 
kill、 end-of-line、 uppercase 文字）を行う。
.\"?? uppercase character は、大文字のみの端末かどうかということ？
.B agetty
は 7 ビット文字を偶、奇、スペースの各パリティ、あるいはパリティなしの
いずれでも扱うことができる。また 8 ビット文字をパリティなしで扱うこと
ができる。以下の特殊文字を認識する; @ および コントロール U (kill)、 #、 
DEL およびバックスペース (erase)、復帰 (carriage return) および改行 
(linefeed) (end of line)。
.IP o
.\"O Optionally deduces the baud rate from the CONNECT messages produced by
.\"O Hayes(tm)-compatible modems.
オプション機能: Hayes(tm) 互換のモデムが出す CONNECT メッセージ
から通信速度 (baud rate) を推測する。
.IP o
.\"O Optionally does not hang up when it is given an already opened line
.\"O (useful for call-back applications).
オプション機能: すでにオープンしているラインを与えられた場合に
はラインを切断しない (コールバックの用途に便利)。
.IP o
.\"O Optionally does not display the contents of the \fI/etc/issue\fP file.
オプション機能: \fI/etc/issue\fP ファイルの内容を表示させない。
.IP o
.\"O Optionally displays an alternative issue file instead of \fI/etc/issue\fP.
オプション機能: \fI/etc/issue\fP 以外の issue ファイルを表示する。
.IP o
.\"O Optionally does not ask for a login name.
オプション機能: ログイン名を尋ねない。
.IP o
.\"O Optionally invokes a non-standard login program instead of
.\"O \fI/bin/login\fP.
オプション機能: \fI/bin/login\fP 以外の非標準なログインプログラムを起
動する。
.IP o
.\"O Optionally turns on hard-ware flow control
オプション機能: ハードウェアによるフローコントロールを有効にする。
.IP o
.\"O Optionally forces the line to be local with no need for carrier detect.
オプション機能: 接続ラインをローカルなライン (キャリア検知を必要としな
いライン) に設定する。
.PP
.\"O This program does not use the \fI/etc/gettydefs\fP (System V) or
.\"O \fI/etc/gettytab\fP (SunOS 4) files.
このプログラムは \fI/etc/gettydefs\fP (System V) や 
\fI/etc/gettytab\fP (SunOS 4) ファイルを利用しない。
.\"O .SH ARGUMENTS
.na
.nf
.fi
.ad
.TP
port
.\"O A path name relative to the \fI/dev\fP directory. If a "-" is
.\"O specified, \fBagetty\fP assumes that its standard input is
.\"O already connected to a tty port and that a connection to a
.\"O remote user has already been established.
\fI/dev/\fP ディレクトリからの相対パス名。 "-" が指定されると、
.B agetty
は自分の標準入力がすでに tty ポートに接続されており、リモートユーザー
への接続がすでに確立されているものとみなす。
.sp
.\"O Under System V, a "-" \fIport\fP argument should be preceded
.\"O by a "--".
System V では \fIport\fP 引き数としての "-" は "--" の前に置かなければ
ならない。
.TP
baud_rate,...
.\"O A comma-separated list of one or more baud rates. Each time
.\"O \fBagetty\fP receives a BREAK character it advances through
.\"O the list, which is treated as if it were circular.
一つ以上の通信速度をコンマで区切ったリスト。
.B agetty
が BREAK 文字を受け取ると、リストの次に進む。最後まで行ったら最初に戻
る。
.sp
.\"O Baud rates should be specified in descending order, so that the
.\"O null character (Ctrl-@) can also be used for baud rate switching.
通信速度は大きい方から小さい方へと並べるようにする。こうすると null
文字 (Ctrl-@) も通信速度の切り替えに使えるようになる。
.TP
term
.\"O The value to be used for the TERM environment variable. This overrides
.\"O whatever init(8) may have set, and is inherited by login and the shell.
TERM 環境変数に用いる値。これは init(8) の設定を上書きし、 login およ
び shell に受け継がれる。
.SH オプション
.na
.nf
.fi
.ad
.TP
\-h
.\"O Enable hardware (RTS/CTS) flow control. It is left up to the
.\"O application to disable software (XON/XOFF) flow protocol where
.\"O appropriate.
ハードウェア (RTS/CTS) コントロールを有効にする。ソフトウェアによる 
(XON/XOFF) フローコントロールを無効にするかどうかはアプリケーションに
任せる。
.TP
\-i
.\"O Do not display the contents of \fI/etc/issue\fP (or other) before writing the
.\"O login prompt. Terminals or communications hardware may become confused
.\"O when receiving lots of text at the wrong baud rate; dial-up scripts
.\"O may fail if the login prompt is preceded by too much text.
ログインプロンプトの前に
.I /etc/issue
の内容を表示しない。端末や通信装置は、正しくない通信速度で大量のテキ
ストを受け取ると混乱してしまうことがある。ダイアルアップスクリプトによっ
ては、ログインプロンプトの前に大量のテキストを受け取ると落ちてしまう場
合がある。
.TP
\-f \fIissue_file\fP
.\"O Display the contents of \fIissue_file\fP instead of \fI/etc/issue\fP.
.\"O This allows custom messages to be displayed on different terminals.
.\"O The \-i option will override this option.
.I issue_file
を
.I /etc/issue
の代わりに表示する。端末別にメッセージを変えることができるようになる。
\-i オプションはこのオプションを上書きする。
.TP
\-I \fIinitstring\fP
.\"O Set an initial string to be sent to the tty or modem before sending
.\"O anything else. This may be used to initialize a modem.  Non printable
.\"O characters may be sent by writing their octal code preceded by a
.\"O backslash (\\). For example to send a linefeed character (ASCII 10,
.\"O octal 012) write \\012.
通信に先立って tty やモデムに送る初期化文字列を設定する。これはモデムの
初期化に用いることができる。印刷できない文字も、バックスラッシュ (\\) 
に引き続いて 8 進数で指定すれば送ることができる。例えば改行文字 (ASCII
10, 8 進数では 012) を送るには \\012 とする。
.PP
.TP
\-l \fIlogin_program\fP
.\"O Invoke the specified \fIlogin_program\fP instead of /bin/login.
.\"O This allows the use of a non-standard login program (for example,
.\"O one that asks for a dial-up password or that uses a different
.\"O password file).
指定した \fIlogin_program\fP を /bin/login の代わりに起動する。これに
よって非標準なログインプログラム (例えばダイアルアップパスワードを尋ね
たり、 /etc/passwd 以外のパスワードファイルを用いるなど) を使うことが
できる。
.TP
\-m
.\"O Try to extract the baud rate the CONNECT status message
.\"O produced by Hayes(tm)\-compatible modems. These status
.\"O messages are of the form: "<junk><speed><junk>".
.\"O \fBagetty\fP assumes that the modem emits its status message at
.\"O the same speed as specified with (the first) \fIbaud_rate\fP value
.\"O on the command line.
通信速度を Hayes(tm) 互換モデムが出す CONNECT メッセージから抽出しよ
うと試みる。メッセージは "<その他><速度><その他>" というような形式になっ
ている。
.B agetty
では、コマンドラインの \fIbaud_rate\fP の先頭に指定されたスピードで、
モデムがステータスメッセージを出力するものとみなしている。
.sp
.\"O Since the \fI\-m\fP feature may fail on heavily-loaded systems,
.\"O you still should enable BREAK processing by enumerating all
.\"O expected baud rates on the command line.
\fI\-m\fP の機能は負荷の高いシステムでは失敗することもあるので、コマン
ドラインでも予想される通信速度をすべて列記して、 BREAK 処理を有効に
しておく方が良いだろう。
.TP 
\-n 
.\"O Do not prompt the user for a login name. This can be used in
.\"O connection with \-l option to invoke a non-standard login process such
.\"O as a BBS system. Note that with the \-n option, \fBagetty\fR gets no input from
.\"O user who logs in and therefore won't be able to figure out parity,
.\"O character size, and newline processing of the connection. It defaults to 
.\"O space parity, 7 bit characters, and ASCII CR (13) end-of-line character.
.\"O Beware that the program that \fBagetty\fR starts (usually /bin/login)
.\"O is run as root.
ログイン名入力のプロンプトを出さない。これは \-l オプションと共に用い
て、 BBS システムのように非標準のログイン処理を起動する際に便利である。 
\-n オプションを用いると、 \fBagetty\fR はログインしてくるユーザーから
入力を受け取ることができないので、コネクションのパリティやキャラクタビッ
ト数、改行処理などを決定することができない。デフォルトはスペースパリティ、
文字は 7 ビット、行末文字は ASCII の CR (13) となっている。
.B agetty
が起動するプログラム (通常は /bin/login) は root 権限で実行されること
に注意せよ。
.TP
\-t \fItimeout\fP
.\"O Terminate if no user name could be read within \fItimeout\fP
.\"O seconds. This option should probably not be used with hard-wired
.\"O lines.
\fItimeout\fP 秒以内にユーザー名を読み込むことができなかったら切断する。
このオプションは直結回線には用いない方が良いだろう。
.TP
\-L
.\"O Force the line to be a local line with no need for carrier detect. This can
.\"O be useful when you have a locally attached terminal where the serial line
.\"O does not set the carrier detect signal.
接続回線を、キャリア検知の必要がないローカルな直結回線であるとみなす。
これはローカルに接続された端末で、キャリア検知用の信号線がないシリアル
ケーブルを使っているときに便利である。
.TP
\-w 
.\"O Wait for the user or the modem to send a carriage-return or a
.\"O linefeed character before sending the \fI/etc/issue\fP (or other) file
.\"O and the login prompt. Very useful in connection with the \-I option.
ユーザーまたはモデムからの復帰文字か改行文字を待ち、これを受け取ってか
ら \fI/etc/issue\fP (または別の issue) ファイルやログインプロンプトを
出す。 \-I オプションを用いた接続の際に非常に便利。
.PP
.SH 例
.\"O This section shows examples for the process field of an entry in the
.\"O \fI/etc/inittab\fP file.  You'll have to prepend appropriate values
.\"O for the other fields.  See \fIinittab(5)\fP for more details.
この節では \fI/etc/inittab\fPファイルに記述するコマンドエントリの例を示す。
他のフィールドには、それぞれ適当な値を指定する必要があるだろう。詳細は
.BR inittab (5)
を参照すること。

.\"O For a hard-wired line or a console tty:
直結ラインまたはコンソール tty 用:
.ti +5
/sbin/agetty 9600 ttyS1

.\"O For a directly connected terminal without proper carriage detect wiring:
.\"O (try this if your terminal just sleeps instead of giving you a password:
.\"O prompt.)
.\"O?? carrier detect の間違いかな？
直結された端末で、正しい CD 線のない場合 (password: プロンプトが出ない
で端末が黙ってしまう場合はこちらを試してみると良い):
.ti +5
/sbin/agetty \-L 9600 ttyS1 vt100

.\"O For a old style dial-in line with a 9600/2400/1200 baud modem:
9600/2400/1200 bps のモデムを用いた古いスタイルのダイアルイン接続ライ
ン
.ti +5
/sbin/agetty \-mt60 ttyS1 9600,2400,1200

.\"O For a Hayes modem with a fixed 115200 bps interface to the machine:
.\"O (the example init string turns off modem echo and result codes, makes
.\"O modem/computer DCD track modem/modem DCD, makes a DTR drop cause a 
.\"O dis-connection and turn on auto-answer after 1 ring.)
Hayes モデムで、マシンへのインターフェースが 115200 bps に固定されてい
る場合 (以下の例の初期文字列ではモデムのエコーとリザルトコードを抑止し、
モデム/コンピュータ間の DCD はモデム/モデム間の DCD に追随するようにし、 
DTR が落ちた場合は切断とベル 1 回での自動応答機能を有効にするように
設定している):
.\"?? モデムのマニュアル持っている方、チェックお願いします(^_^;
.ti +5
/sbin/agetty \-w \-I 'ATE0Q1&D2&C1S0=1\\015' 115200 ttyS1

.\"O .SH ISSUE ESCAPES
.SH "ISSUE で利用できるエスケープ"
.\"O The issue-file (\fI/etc/issue\fP or the file set with the \-f option)
.\"O may contain certain escape codes to display the system name, date and
.\"O time etc. All escape codes consist of a backslash (\\) immediately
.\"O followed by one of the letters explained below.
.\"O 
issue ファイル (\c
.I /etc/issue
または \-f オプションで設定されたファイル) ではシステム名や日付、時間
などを表示するエスケープコードを用いることができる。エスケープコードは
バックスラッシュ (\\) とそれに続く一文字からなる。文字は以下のうちのど
れか。
.TP
b
.\"O Insert the baudrate of the current line.
現在のラインの通信速度。
.TP
d
.\"O Insert the current date.
現在の日付。
.TP
s
.\"O Insert the system name, the name of the operating system.
システム名 (オペレーティングシステムの名前)。
.TP
l
.\"O Insert the name of the current tty line.
現在の tty ラインの名前。
.TP
m
.\"O Insert the architecture identifier of the machine, eg. i486
マシンのアーキテクチャを表す名前 (例: i486)。
.TP
n
.\"O Insert the nodename of the machine, also known as the hostname.
マシンのノード名 (ホスト名)。
.TP
o
.\"O Insert the domainname of the machine.
マシンのドメイン名。
.TP
r
.\"O Insert the release number of the OS, eg. 1.1.9.
OS のリリース番号 (例: 1.1.9)。
.TP
t
.\"O Insert the current time.
現在の時刻。
.TP
u
.\"O Insert the number of current users logged in.
現在ログインしているユーザー数。
.TP
U
.\"O Insert the string "1 user" or "<n> users" where <n> is the number of current
.\"O users logged in.
文字列 "1 user" または "<n> users"。 <n> は現在ログインしているユーザー
数。
.TP
v
.\"O Insert the version of the OS, eg. the build-date etc.
OS のバージョン (ビルドした日付など)。
.TP
.\"O Example: On my system, the following \fI/etc/issue\fP file:
.\"O 
以下は著者のシステムでの \fI/etc/issue\fP ファイルの例である:
.na
.nf
.ti +.5
This is \\n.\\o (\\s \\m \\r) \\t
.TP
.\"O displays as
表示は以下のようになる。
.ti +.5
This is thingol.orcan.dk (Linux i386 1.1.9) 18:29:30

.fi

.SH ファイル
.na
.nf
.\"O /var/run/utmp, the system status file.
.\"O /etc/issue, printed before the login prompt.
.\"O /dev/console, problem reports (if syslog(3) is not used).
.\"O /etc/inittab, \fIinit\fP(8) configuration file.
/var/run/utmp, システムのステータスファイル。
/etc/issue, ログインプロンプトの前に表示される。
/dev/console, 障害を報告する端末 (syslog(3) が使われていない場合)。
/etc/inittab, \fIinit\fP(8) の設定ファイル。
.SH バグ
.ad
.fi
.\"O The baud-rate detection feature (the \fI-m\fP option) requires that
.\"O \fBagetty\fP be scheduled soon enough after completion of a dial-in
.\"O call (within 30 ms with modems that talk at 2400 baud). For robustness,
.\"O always use the \fI\-m\fP option in combination with a multiple baud
.\"O rate command-line argument, so that BREAK processing is enabled.
通信速度の自動検知機能 (\fI\-m\fP オプション) では、
.B agetty
のスケジュールがダイアルイン接続の確立後すぐに回ってこなければならない 
(2400 bps の場合は 30 ms 以内)。システムを強くするために、 \fI\-m\fP 
オプションを用いる場合には、常にコマンドライン引き数で通信速度の複数
指定を行い、 BREAK 処理を有効にしておくべきである。

.\"O The text in the \fI/etc/issue\fP file (or other) and the login prompt
.\"O are always output with 7-bit characters and space parity.
.I /etc/issue
(または他の issue ファイル) のテキストとログインプロンプトの表示には常
に 7 ビット文字とスペースパリティが用いられる。

.\"O The baud-rate detection feature (the \fI-m\fP option) requires that
.\"O the modem emits its status message \fIafter\fP raising the DCD line.
通信速度の自動検知機能 (\fI\-m\fP オプション) では、モデムのステータ
スメッセージは DCD ラインが high になってからでないと受け付けない。
.SH 返り値
.ad
.fi
.\"O Depending on how the program was configured, all diagnostics are
.\"O written to the console device or reported via the syslog(3) facility.
.\"O Error messages are produced if the \fIport\fP argument does not
.\"O specify a terminal device; if there is no utmp entry for the
.\"O current process (System V only); and so on.
プログラムが返す情報はすべて console デバイスに書き込まれるか、 
syslog(3) を通してレポートされる。どちらかはプログラムの設定に依存する。 
\fIport\fP 引き数が端末デバイスを指定していない場合、 utmp に現在のプ
ロセスのエントリがない場合 (System V のみ) などにエラーメッセージ
が発行される。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR(S)
.SH 著者
.na
.nf
W.Z. Venema <wietse@wzv.win.tue.nl>
Eindhoven University of Technology
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Den Dolech 2, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Peter Orbaek <poe@daimi.aau.dk>
.\"O Linux port and more options. Still maintains the code.
Linux への移植とオプションの追加。現在もコードを保守している。

Eric Rasmussen <ear@usfirst.org>
.\"O Added \-f option to display custom login messages on different terminals.
\-f オプション (端末によってissue ファイルを変更する機能) の追加。

.\"O .SH CREATION DATE
.SH 作成日
.na
.nf
Sat Nov 25 22:51:05 MET 1989
.\"O .SH LAST MODIFICATION
.SH 最終修正日
.na
.nf
96/07/20

