.\" cfdisk.8 -- man page for cfdisk
.\" Copyright 1994 Kevin E. Martin (martin@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" " for hilit mode
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Feb 26 19:13:14 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	unusable	使用不可
.\"WORD:	free space	空き領域
.\"WORD:	unused		未使用
.\"WORD:	raw data	生データ
.\"
.TH CFDISK 8 "3 June 1995" "The BOGUS Linux Release" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O cfdisk \- Curses based disk partition table manipulator for Linux
cfdisk \-  Linux 用のパーティションテーブル操作ツール (curses 版)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "cfdisk [ \-agvz ] [ \-c " cylinders " ] [ \-h " heads " ]"
.BI "[ \-s " sectors-per-track " ] [ -P " opt " ] [ " device " ]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O is a curses based program for partitioning any hard disk drive.
.\"O Typical values of the
.\"O .I device
.\"O argument are:
.B cfdisk
は、ハードディスクドライブのパーティション分割をする
curses ベースのプログラムである。
.I device
引き数の典型的な値は、以下のものがある:
.sp
.nf
.RS
/dev/hda [default]
/dev/hdb
/dev/sda
/dev/sdb
/dev/sdc
/dev/sdd
.RE
.fi

.\"O In order to write the partition table
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O needs something called the `geometry' of the disk: the number
.\"O of `heads' and the number of `sectors per track'. 
パーティションテーブルを書き込むために、
.B cfdisk
はディスクの「ジオメトリ」と呼ばれるものを必要とする:
ジオメトリとは、「ヘッド数」と「1 トラック当たりのセクタ数」である。
.\"O Linux does not
.\"O use any geometry, so if the disk will not be accessed by other
.\"O operating systems, you can safely accept the defaults that
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O chooses for you. 
Linux はジオメトリを使わないので、
ディスクが他のオペレーティングシステムからアクセスされることがなければ、
.B cfdisk
が選んだデフォルトを受け入れても安全である。
.\"O The geometry used by
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O is found as follows. 
.B cfdisk
が使うジオメトリは、次のようにして見付ける。
.\"O First the partition table is examined,
.\"O to see what geometry was used by the previous program that
.\"O changed it. 
初めにパーティションテーブルを調べる。
これは、以前にジオメトリを変更したプログラムが
どのようなジオメトリを使ったかを見るためである。
.\"O If the partition table is empty, or contains garbage,
.\"O or does not point at a consistent geometry, the kernel is
.\"O asked for advice. If nothing works 255 heads and 63 sectors/track
.\"O is assumed. 
パーティションテーブルが空である・ゴミを含んでいる・
整合性の取れたジオメトリを指していない、といった場合は、
カーネルから情報をもらう。
うまく動かない場合は、ヘッド数 255, トラック当たりのセクタ数 63 を仮定する。
.\"O The geometry can be overridden on the command line
.\"O or by use of the `g' command. When partitioning an empty large modern
.\"O disk, picking 255 heads and 63 sectors/track is always a good idea.
ジオメトリは、コマンドラインまたは `g' コマンドを使って上書きできる。
大容量の最近のディスクを何も書かれていない状態から
パーティション分割する場合、
通常はヘッド数 255, トラック当たりのセクタ数 63 を選ぶのが良い。
.\"O There is no need to set the number of cylinders, since
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O knows the disk size.
.B cfdisk
はディスクサイズを知っているので、
シリンダ数を設定する必要はない。

.\"O Next,
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O tries to read the current partition table from the disk drive.  
次に
.B cfdisk
はディスクドライブからパーティションテーブルを読み込みこもうとする。
.\"O If it
.\"O is unable to figure out the partition table, an error is displayed and
.\"O the program will exit.  
パーティションテーブルが検出できなかった場合は、
エラーを表示してプログラムが終了する。
.\"O This might also be caused by incorrect
.\"O geometry information, and can be overridden on the command line.
これは間違ったジオメトリ情報によっても起こることなので、
コマンドライン上から上書きすることができる。
.\"O Another way around this problem is with the
.\"O .B \-z
.\"O option.  This will ignore the partition table on the disk.
この問題を回避するもう 1 つの方法は、
.B \-z
オプションを使うことである。
このオプションにより、ディスクのパーティションテーブルは無視される。

.\"O The main display is composed of four sections, from top to bottom: the
.\"O header, the partitions, the command line and a warning line.  
メインの表示画面は 4 つのセクションから構成される:
上から順に、ヘッダ・パーティション・コマンド行・警告行がある。
.\"O The
.\"O header contains the program name and version number followed by the
.\"O disk drive and its geometry.  
ヘッダには、プログラム名・バージョン番号・
ディスクドライブ・ジオメトリが書かれている。
.\"O The partitions section always displays
.\"O the current partition table.  
パーティションのセクションには、
現在のパーティションテーブルが常に表示される。
.\"O The command line is the place where
.\"O commands and text are entered.  The available commands are usually
.\"O displayed in brackets.  
コマンド行は、コマンドとテキストが入力される場所である。
使用できるコマンドは、通常、大括弧の中に表示される。
.\"O The warning line is usually empty except when
.\"O there is important information to be displayed.  
警告行は、表示すべき重要な情報があるとき以外、通常は何も表示されない。
.\"O The current partition
.\"O is highlighted with reverse video (or an arrow if the
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option is given).  All partition specific commands apply to the
.\"O current partition.
現在選択しているパーティションは反転してハイライト表示される
.RB ( \-a
オプションが指定された場合は、矢印で示される)。
パーティション毎に適用される全てのコマンドは、
現在選択されているパーティションに適用される。

.\"O The format of the partition table in the partitions section is, from
.\"O left to right: Name, Flags, Partition Type, Filesystem Type and Size.
パーティションセクションにあるパーティションテーブルのフォーマットは、
左から右へ、名前・フラグ・パーティションタイプ・ファイルシステムタイプ・
(訳註: ラベル)・サイズのようになっている。
.\"O The name is the partition device name.  
名前はパーティションのデバイス名である。
.\"O The flags can be
.\"O .IR Boot ,
.\"O which designates a bootable partition or
.\"O .IR NC ,
.\"O which stands for "Not Compatible with DOS or OS/2".  
フラグは、ブート可能パーティションを表す
.IR ブート 、
または「DOS や OS/2 と互換性がない (Not Compatible) 」 ことを表す
.I NC
である。
.\"O DOS, OS/2 and
.\"O possibly other operating systems require the first sector of the first
.\"O partition on the disk and all logical partitions to begin on the
.\"O second head.  
DOS, OS/2 では (もしかしたら他の OS でも)、
第 2 ヘッドを起こすために、
ディスクの第 1 パーティションと
全ての論理パーティションの第 1 セクタを必要とする。
.\"O This wastes the second through the last sector of the
.\"O first track of the first head (the first sector is taken by the
.\"O partition table itself).
これは第 1 ヘッドの第 1 トラックにある
第 2 セクタから最終セクタまでを無駄にしている
(第 1 セクタはパーティションテーブル自身に使用される)。
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O allows you to recover these "lost" sectors with the maximize command
.\"O .RB ( m ).
.B cfdisk
は、この「失われた」セクタを最大化 (maximize) コマンド
.RB ( m )
で回復させることができる。
.\"O .I Note:
.\"O .BR fdisk (8)
.\"O and some early versions of DOS create all partitions with the number
.\"O of sectors already maximized.  For more information, see the maximize
.\"O command below.  
.I 注意:
.BR fdisk (8)
と幾つかの初期バージョンの DOS は、
セクタ数を最大化した状態で全パーティションを作成する。
より詳細な情報は、後述の最大化コマンドを参照すること。
.\"O The partition type can be one of
.\"O .IR Primary " or " Logical .
パーティションタイプは、
.I 基本 (Primary)
または
.I 論理 (Logical)
のどちらかである。
.\"O For unallocated space on the drive, the partition type can also be
.\"O .IR Pri/Log ,
.\"O or empty (if the space is unusable).  
ドライブ内の割り当てられていない領域では、
そのパーティションタイプは、
.I 基本/論理 、
または (その領域を使用していないのであれば)
空白にしておくことができる。
.\"O The filesystem type section
.\"O displays the name of the filesystem used on the partition, if known.
もし既知のファイルシステムである場合は、
ファイルシステムタイプのセクションに
パーティションで使われているファイルシステム名が表示される。
.\"O If it is unknown, then
.\"O .I Unknown
.\"O and the hex value of the filesystem type are displayed.  
不明の場合は、
.I 不明
という文字列とファイルシステムタイプを示す 16 進数の値が表示される。
.\"O A special
.\"O case occurs when there are sections of the disk drive that cannot be
.\"O used (because all of the primary partitions are used).  
(全ての基本パーティションが使われているために)
ディスクドライブのセクタが使用できない、という特殊なケースがある。
.\"O When this is
.\"O detected, the filesystem type is displayed as
.\"O .IR Unusable .
この様なケースを検知した場合、
ファイルシステムタイプは
.I 使用不可
と表示される。
.\"O The size field displays the size of the partition in megabytes (by
.\"O default).
サイズフィールドには、パーティションのサイズが
(デフォルトでは) MB 単位で表示される。
.\"O It can also display the size in sectors and cylinders (see
.\"O the change units command below).
サイズをセクタ数やシリンダ数で表示することもできる
(以下の単位変更コマンドを参照すること)。
.\"O If an asterisks
.\"O .RB ( * )
.\"O appears after the size, this means that the partition is not aligned
.\"O on cylinder boundaries.
アスタリスク
.RB ( * )
がサイズの後に表示されている場合、
パーティションがシリンダの境界線上に並んでいないことを示す。
.\"O .SH "DOS 6.x WARNING"
.SH DOS 6.x 向けの警告
.\"O The DOS 6.x FORMAT command looks for some information in the first
.\"O sector of the data area of the partition, and treats this information
.\"O as more reliable than the information in the partition table.  DOS
.\"O FORMAT expects DOS FDISK to clear the first 512 bytes of the data area
.\"O of a partition whenever a size change occurs.  DOS FORMAT will look at
.\"O this extra information even if the /U flag is given -- we consider
.\"O this a bug in DOS FORMAT and DOS FDISK.
DOS 6.x の FORMAT コマンドはパーティションのデータエリアの
第一セクタからある種の情報を検索し、
これをパーティションテーブルにある情報より信頼できるものとして扱う。
DOS の FORMAT は、容量が変更されたときには
最初の 512 バイト分のデータ領域が
DOS 版 FDISK によってクリアされていることを仮定している。
DOS の FORMAT はこの拡張情報を /U フラグを指定した場合でも見ようとする 
\- これは DOS FORMAT と DOS FDISK のバグであると我々は考える。

.\"O The bottom line is that if you use cfdisk or fdisk to change the size of a
.\"O DOS partition table entry, then you must also use
.\"O .B dd
.\"O to zero the first 512 bytes of that partition before using DOS FORMAT to
.\"O format the partition.  For example, if you were using cfdisk to make a DOS
.\"O partition table entry for /dev/hda1, then (after exiting fdisk or cfdisk
.\"O and rebooting Linux so that the partition table information is valid) you
.\"O would use the command "dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/hda1 bs=512 count=1" to zero
.\"O the first 512 bytes of the partition. Note:
結局のところ、 cfdisk や fdisk を用いて
DOS パーティションの容量を変更したときは、
DOS FORMAT を使ってパーティションをフォーマットする前に
.B dd
を使って先頭の 512 バイトを 0 で埋めなければならない、というわけである。
例えば cfdisk を用いて /dev/hda1 の DOS パーティションの
テーブルエントリを作成した場合には、(fdisk または cfdisk を終了し、
Linux をリブートしてパーティションテーブルの情報を有効にしたあとで)
先頭の 512 バイトをゼロにするために
"dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/hda1 bs=512 count=1"
などと実行する必要がある。
注意点:

.\"O .B BE EXTREMELY CAREFUL
.\"O if you use the
.\"O .B dd
.\"O command, since a small typo can make all of the data on your disk useless.
.B dd
コマンドを使う場合には\fB特に注意すること\fP。
ちょっとしたタイプミスで、
ディスク上のすべてのデータがパーになる可能性もある。

.\"O For best results, you should always use an OS-specific partition table
.\"O program.  For example, you should make DOS partitions with the DOS FDISK
.\"O program and Linux partitions with the Linux fdisk or Linux cfdisk program.
できるだけ問題を起こしたくなければ、
常に OS 固有のパーティションテーブル用プログラムを用いることである。
例えば DOS パーティションは DOS FDISK プログラムで作り、
Linux のパーティションは Linux の fdisk または
cfdisk で作るべきなのである。

.\"O .SH COMMANDS
.SH コマンド
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O commands can be entered by pressing the desired key (pressing
.\"O .I Enter
.\"O after the command is not necessary).  Here is a list of the available
.\"O commands:
.B cfdisk
コマンドは、キーを押すことで入力できる
(コマンドの後に
.I Enter
を押す必要はない)。
使用可能なコマンドは、以下の通りである:
.TP
.B b
.\"O Toggle bootable flag of the current partition.  This allows you to
.\"O select which primary partition is bootable on the drive.
選択しているパーティションのブート可能フラグを切替える。
このコマンドにより、ドライブ上で
どの基本パーティションをブート可能にするかを選択できる。
.TP
.B d
.\"O Delete the current partition.  This will convert the current partition
.\"O into free space and merge it with any free space immediately
.\"O surrounding the current partition.  A partition already marked as free
.\"O space or marked as unusable cannot be deleted.
選択しているパーティションを削除する。
このコマンドは、パーティションを空き領域に変換し、
そのパーティションのすぐ前後にある空き領域と統合する。
既に空き領域とマークされているパーティションや、
既に使用不能と使用不可パーティションは、削除できない。
.TP
.B g
.\"O Change the disk geometry (cylinders, heads, or sectors-per-track).
.\"O .B WARNING:
.\"O This option should only be used by people who know what they are
.\"O doing.  A command line option is also available to change the disk
.\"O geometry.  While at the change disk geometry command line, you can
.\"O choose to change cylinders
.\"O .RB ( c ),
.\"O heads
.\"O .RB ( h ),
.\"O and sectors per track
.\"O .RB ( s ).
ディスクジオメトリ
(シリンダ数・ヘッド数・トラック当たりのセクタ数) を変更する。
.B 警告:
このコマンドは、何をしているかを理解している人のみが使うべきである。
ディスクジオメトリを変更するコマンドラインオプションもある。
ディスクジオメトリを変更するコマンドラインでは、
シリンダ数の変更
.RB ( c ),
ヘッダ数の変更
.RB ( h ),
トラック当たりのセクタ数の変更
.RB ( s )
を選ぶことができる。
.\"O The default value will be printed at the prompt which you can accept
.\"O by simply pressing the
.\"O .I Enter
.\"O key, or you can exit without changes by pressing the
.\"O .I ESC
.\"O key.  
単純に
.I Enter
キーを押すと、使用できるデフォルトの値がプロンプトに表示される。
また、
.I ESC
キーを押して変更せずに終了することもできる。
.\"O If you want to change the default value, simply enter the
.\"O desired value and press
.\"O .IR Enter .
デフォルトの値を変更したい場合は、
希望する値を入力し、
.I Enter
を押すだけでよい。
.\"O The altered disk parameter values do not take effect until you return
.\"O the main menu (by pressing
.\"O .IR Enter " or " ESC
.\"O at the change disk geometry command line.  
変更されたディスクパラメータの値は、
(ディスクジオメトリ変更のコマンドラインで
.IR Enter " または " ESC
を押して) メインメニューに戻るまで反映されない。
.\"O If you change the geometry
.\"O such that the disk appears larger, the extra sectors are added at the
.\"O end of the disk as free space.  
ディスク容量が大きくなるようにジオメトリを変更した場合、
余分のセクタがディスクの終りに空き領域として追加される。
.\"O If the disk appears smaller, the
.\"O partitions that are beyond the new last sector are deleted and the
.\"O last partition on the drive (or the free space at the end of the
.\"O drive) is made to end at the new last sector.
ディスク容量が小さくなるようにした場合、
新たな最終セクタより後のパーティションは削除され、
ドライブの最後のパーティション
(またはドライブの終りにある空き領域) が新たな最終セクタになる。
.TP
.B h
.\"O Print the help screen.
ヘルプ画面を表示する。
.TP
.B m
.\"O Maximize disk usage of the current partition.  This command will
.\"O recover the the unused space between the partition table and the
.\"O beginning of the partition, but at the cost of making the partition
.\"O incompatible with DOS, OS/2 and possibly other operating systems.
.\"O This option will toggle between maximal disk usage and DOS, OS/2,
.\"O etc. compatible disk usage.  The default when creating a partition is
.\"O to create DOS, OS/2, etc. compatible partitions.
選択されているパーティションのディスク使用量を最大化する。
このコマンドは、パーティションテーブルとパーティションの先頭の間にある
未使用領域を回復する (訳注: 利用できるようにする)。
しかし、パーティションが DOS, OS/2, その他の OS との
互換性を失うというコストを伴う。
このコマンドは、ディスク使用量を最大にするのか、
DOS, OS/2 などと互換性のあるディスクを使用するのかを切替える。
パーティションを作成する場合、
デフォルトでは DOS, OS/2 などと互換性のあるパーティションを作成する。
.TP
.B n
.\"O Create new partition from free space.  If the partition type is
.\"O .IR Primary " or " Logical ,
.\"O a partition of that type will be created, but if the partition type is
.\"O .IR Pri/Log ,
.\"O you will be prompted for the type you want to create.  Be aware that
.\"O (1) there are only four slots available for primary partitions and (2)
.\"O since there can be only one extended partition, which contains all of
.\"O the logical drives, all of the logical drives must be contiguous (with
.\"O no intervening primary partition).
空き領域から新しいパーティションを作成する。
パーティションのタイプが、
.I 基本領域
または
.I 論理領域
の場合、そのタイプのパーティションが作成される。
しかし、
.I 基本/論理
の場合、作成するパーティションタイプを質問される。
(1) プライマリパーティションは 4 スロットしか使用できない。
(2) 全ての論理ドライブを収める拡張パーティションは 1 つしか使用できないので、
全ての論理ドライブは (基本パーティションを挟まずに)
連続していなければならない。
という点を知っておくこと。
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O next prompts you for the size of the partition you want to create.
.\"O The default size, equal to the entire free space of the current
.\"O partition, is display in megabytes.  You can either press the
.\"O .I Enter
.\"O key to accept the default size or enter a different size at the
.\"O prompt.
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O accepts size entries in megabytes
.\"O .RB ( M )
.\"O [default], kilobytes
.\"O .RB ( K ),
.\"O cylinders
.\"O .RB ( C )
.\"O and sectors
.\"O .RB ( S )
.\"O by entering the number immediately followed by one of
.\"O .RB ( M ", " K ", " C " or " S ).
次に
.B cfdisk
は、作成するパーティションのサイズを聞いてくる。
選択されている空き領域全体のサイズと同じデフォルトのサイズが、
MB 単位で表示される。
デフォルトのサイズにするには
.I Enter
を押せばいいし、
別のサイズにするにはプロンプトで望みのサイズを入力すればよい。
.B cfdisk
は、サイズ数の直後に
.RB ( M ", " K ", " C ", " S )
を付けて入力することにより、サイズを
(デフォルトの) メガバイト
.RB ( M )
・キロバイト
.RB ( K )
・シリンダ
.RB ( C )
・セクタ
.RB ( S )
で設定することができる。
.\"O If the partition fills the free space available, the partition is
.\"O created and you are returned to the main command line.  Otherwise, the
.\"O partition can be created at the beginning or the end of the free
.\"O space, and
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O will ask you to choose where to place the partition.  After the
.\"O partition is created,
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O automatically adjusts the other partition's partition types if all of
.\"O the primary partitions are used.
パーティションが使用可能な空き領域を埋める場合は、
パーティションが作成された後にメインのコマンドラインに戻る。
そうでない場合は、
パーティションが空き領域の最初または最後に作成されることになり、
.B cfdisk
はパーティションをどこに配置するかを聞いてくる。
パーティションが作成された後、
全ての基本パーティションが使われている場合には、
.B cfdisk
は他のパーティションのタイプを自動的に調整する。
.TP
.B p
.\"O Print the partition table to the screen or to a file. There are
.\"O several different formats for the partition that you can choose from:
パーティションテーブルを画面またはファイルに出力する。
以下に示すいくつかの異なるフォーマットから選択できる:
.sp
.RS
.TP
.B r
.\"O Raw data format (exactly what would be written to disk)
生データフォーマット (ディスクに書き込まれる正確な形式)
.TP
.B s
.\"O Partition table in sector order format
セクタ順フォーマットのパーティションテーブル
.TP
.B t
.\"O Partition table in raw format
生データフォーマットのパーティションテーブル
.RE

.RS
.\"O The
.\"O .I raw data format
.\"O will print the sectors that would be written to disk if a
.\"O .BR w rite
.\"O command is selected.  First, the primary partition table is printed,
.\"O followed by the partition tables associated with each logical
.\"O partition.  The data is printed in hex byte by byte with 16 bytes per
.\"O line.
.I 生データフォーマット
は、
.BR w rite
コマンドが選択された場合に、ディスクに書き込まれるセクタを表示する。
最初に基本パーティションテーブルが表示され、
続いて各論理パーティションに関連づけられた
パーティションテーブルが表示される。
データはバイト単位で 1 行に 16 バイトずつ 16 進数で表示される。

.\"O The
.\"O .I partition table in sector order format
.\"O will print the partition table ordered by sector number.  The fields,
.\"O from left to right, are the number of the partition, the partition
.\"O type, the first sector, the last sector, the offset from the first
.\"O sector of the partition to the start of the data, the length of the
.\"O partition, the filesystem type (with the hex value in parenthesis),
.\"O and the flags (with the hex value in parenthesis).  In addition to the
.\"O primary and logical partitions, free and unusable space is printed and
.\"O the extended partition is printed before the first logical partition.
.I セクタ順フォーマットのパーティションテーブル
は、セクタ番号で並べたパーティションテーブルを表示する。
フィールドは、左から右に、
パーティション番号・パーティションタイプ・最初のセクタ・最後のセクタ・
パーティションの最初のセクタからデータの始まりまでのオフセット・
パーティションの長さ・
ファイルシステムタイプ (括弧内にその 16 進数の値が表示される)・
フラグ (括弧内にその 16 進数の値が表示される) がある。
基本パーティションと論理パーティションに加え、
空き領域と使用不可領域が表示される。
拡張パーティションは、最初の論理パーティションの前に表示される。

.\"O If a partition does not start or end on a cylinder boundary or if the
.\"O partition length is not divisible by the cylinder size, an asterisks
.\"O .RB ( * )
.\"O is printed after the non-aligned sector number/count.  This usually
.\"O indicates that a partition was created by an operating system that
.\"O either does not align partitions to cylinder boundaries or that used
.\"O different disk geometry information.  If you know the disk geometry of
.\"O the other operating system, you could enter the geometry information
.\"O with the change geometry command
.\"O .RB ( g ).
パーティションがシリンダの境界で始まるか終るかしていない場合、
またはパーティションの長さがシリンダサイズで表示できない場合、
並んでいないセクタ番号/カウントの後にアスタリスク
.RB ( * )
が表示される。
通常、これは、
パーティションをシリンダ境界に並べて作成されない OS か、
異なるディスクジオメトリ情報を使う OS によって
パーティションが作成されたことを示す。
他の OS のディスクジオメトリが分かる場合には、
ジオメトリ変更コマンド
.RB ( g )
を使ってジオメトリ情報を入力することができる。

.\"O For the first partition on the disk and for all logical partitions, if
.\"O the offset from the beginning of the partition is not equal to the
.\"O number of sectors per track (i.e., the data does not start on the
.\"O first head), a number sign
.\"O .RB ( # )
.\"O is printed after the offset.  For the remaining partitions, if the
.\"O offset is not zero, a number sign will be printed after the offset.
.\"O This corresponds to the
.\"O .I NC
.\"O flag in the partitions section of the main display.
ディスクの最初のパーティションと全ての論理パーティションでは、
パーティションの先頭からのオフセットが
トラック当たりのセクタ数に一致しない場合
(つまり、データが最初のヘッドから始まっていない場合)、
番号記号
.RB ( # )
がオフセットの後に表示される。
残りのパーティションでは、
オフセットが 0 でない場合、番号記号がオフセットの後に表示される。
これは、メイン画面のパーティションセクションにおける
.I NC
フラグに対応する。

.\"O The
.\"O .I partition table in raw format
.\"O will print the partition table ordered by partition number.  It will
.\"O leave out all free and unusable space.  The fields, from left to
.\"O right, are the number of the partition, the flags (in hex), the
.\"O starting head, sector and cylinder, the filesystem ID (in hex), the
.\"O ending head, sector and cylinder, the starting sector in the partition
.\"O and the number of sectors in the partition.  The information in this
.\"O table can be directly translated to the
.\"O .IR "raw data format" .
.I 生データフォーマットのパーティションテーブル
では、パーティションの番号順にパーティションテーブルが表示される。
この場合、全ての使用不可領域と空き領域は無視される。
フィールドは、左から右へ、パーティション番号・(16 進数の) フラグ・
最初のヘッド・セクタとシリンダ・(16 進数の) ファイルシステム ID・
最後のヘッド・セクタとシリンダ・パーティションの最初のセクタと
パーティション内のセクタ数となっている。
このテーブルの情報は、直接
.I 生データフォーマット
に変換される。

.\"O The partition table entries only have 10 bits available to represent
.\"O the starting and ending cylinders.  Thus, when the absolute starting
.\"O (ending) sector number is on a cylinder greater than 1023, the maximal
.\"O values for starting (ending) head, sector and cylinder are printed.
.\"O This is the method used by OS/2, and thus fixes the problems
.\"O associated with OS/2's fdisk rewriting the partition table when it is
.\"O not in this format.  Since Linux and OS/2 use absolute sector counts,
.\"O the values in the starting and ending head, sector and cylinder are
.\"O not used.
パーティションテーブルのエントリは、
最初と最後のシリンダを表すのに 10 ビットしか使用できない。
よって、最初 (最後) のセクタの絶対的なセクタ番号が
シリンダ数で 1023 を超える場合、
最初 (最後) のヘッド・セクタ・シリンダの最大値が表示される。
これは OS/2 で使われている方法で、
このフォーマットで書かれていない場合でも、
OS/2 の fdisk によるパーティションテーブルの再書き込みに
関連する問題を修正する。
Linux と OS/2 は絶対的なセクタカウントを使うので、
最初と最後のヘッド・セクタ・シリンダの値は使われない。
.RE
.TP
.B q
.\"O Quit program.  This will exit the program without writing any data to
.\"O disk.
プログラムを終了する。
このコマンドは、データをディスクに書き込まずにプログラムを終了する。
.TP
.B t
.\"O Change the filesystem type.  By default, new partitions are created as
.\"O .I Linux
.\"O partitions, but since
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O can create partitions for other operating systems, change partition
.\"O type allows you to enter the hex value of the filesystem you desire.
.\"O A list of the know filesystem types is displayed.  You can type in the
.\"O filesystem type at the prompt or accept the default filesystem type
.\"O .RI [ Linux ].
ファイルシステムタイプを変更する。
デフォルトでは、新しいパーティションは
.I Linux
パーティションとして作成されるが、
.B cfdisk
は他の OS 用のパーティションも作成できるので、
パーティションタイプの変更では
希望するファイルシステムを 16 進数で入力できる。
ファイルシステムタイプをプロンプトで入力することも、
デフォルトのファイルシステムタイプ
.RI [ Linux ]
を受け入れることもできる。
.TP
.B u
.\"O Change units of the partition size display.  It will rotate through
.\"O megabytes, sectors and cylinders.
パーティションサイズ表示の単位を変更する。
単位はメガバイト・セクタ・シリンダと切り替わる。
.TP
.B W
.\"O Write partition table to disk (must enter an upper case W).  Since
.\"O this might destroy data on the disk, you must either confirm or deny
.\"O the write by entering `yes' or `no'.  If you enter `yes',
.\"O .B cfdisk
.\"O will write the partition table to disk and the tell the kernel to
.\"O re-read the partition table from the disk.  The re-reading of the
.\"O partition table works is most cases, but I have seen it fail.  Don't
.\"O panic.  It will be correct after you reboot the system.  In all cases,
.\"O I still recommend rebooting the system--just to be safe.
パーティションテーブルをディスクに書き込む
(大文字 W を入力しなければならない)。
このコマンドはディスク上のデータを破壊するかもしれないので、
`yes' または `no' を入力して、
書き込みを承認するか拒否するかしなければならない。
`yes' を入力した場合、
.B cfdisk
はパーティションテーブルをディスクに書き込み、
カーネルに対してディスクからパーティションテーブルを
再読み込みするように指示する。
ほとんどの場合、パーティションテーブルの再読み込みはうまく動作するが、
失敗するのを見たこともある。
(このようになっても) 慌てないこと。
システムを再起動した後で改訂されるだろう。
全ての場合で、-- 安全のために -- システムを再起動することを勧める。
.TP
.\"O .I Up Arrow
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I Down Arrow
.\"O Move cursor to the previous or next partition.  If there are more
.\"O partitions than can be displayed on a screen, you can display the next
.\"O (previous) set of partitions by moving down (up) at the last (first)
.\"O partition displayed on the screen.
.I 上矢印 (↑)
.TP
.I 下矢印 (↓)
カーソルを前または次のパーティションに移動する。
画面上に表示できる以上のパーティションがある場合、
画面に表示されている最後 (最初) のパーティションで
下 (上) に移動することで、
次 (前) のパーティションセットを表示できる。
.TP
.I CTRL-L
.\"O Redraws the screen.  In case something goes wrong and you cannot read
.\"O anything, you can refresh the screen from the main command line.
画面を再描画する。
何か問題が発生し、何も表示が読めなくなった場合、
メインコマンドラインから画面をリフレッシュすることができる。
.TP
.B ?
.\"O Print the help screen.
ヘルプ画面を表示する。

.RE
.\"O All of the commands can be entered with either upper or lower case
.\"O letters (except for
.\"O .BR W rites).
.\"O When in a sub-menu or at a prompt to enter a filename, you can hit the
.\"O .I ESC
.\"O key to return to the main command line.
全てのコマンドは大文字でも小文字でも入力できる
.RB ( W rites
は例外である)。
サブメニューやファイル名を入力するプロンプトにいる場合、
.I ESC
キーを入力することでメインコマンドラインに戻ることができる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Use an arrow cursor instead of reverse video for highlighting the
.\"O current partition.
選択しているパーティションをハイライトするために、
反転表示ではなく、矢印カーソルを使う。
.TP
.B \-g
.\"O Do not use the geometry given by the disk driver, but try to
.\"O guess a geometry from the partition table.
ディスクドライバが与えるジオメトリを使わず、
パーティションテーブルからジオメトリを推測する。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Print the version number and copyright.
バージョン番号と著作権を表示する。
.TP
.B \-z
.\"O Start with zeroed partition table.  This option is useful when you
.\"O want to repartition your entire disk.
.\"O .I Note:
.\"O this option does not zero the partition table on the disk; rather, it
.\"O simply starts the program without reading the existing partition
.\"O table.
白紙のパーティションテーブルで起動する。
このオプションは、ディスク全体を再分割する場合に役立つ。
.I 注意:
このオプションはディスクのパーティションを白紙にするわけではない;
白紙にすると言うよりは、
単に既存のパーティションテーブルを読み込ませずに
プログラムを起動するだけである。
.TP
.BI \-c " cylinders"
.TP
.BI \-h " heads"
.TP
.BI \-s " sectors-per-track"
.\"O Override the number of cylinders, heads and sectors per track read
.\"O from the BIOS.  If your BIOS or adapter does not supply this
.\"O information or if it supplies incorrect information, use these options
.\"O to set the disk geometry values.
BIOS から読み込んだシリンダ数・ヘッド数・トラック当たりのセクタ数を
上書きする。
BIOS やアダプタがこれらの情報を提供しない場合や、
間違った情報を提供する場合、
ディスクジオメトリの値を設定するためにこれらのオプションを使うこと。
.TP
.BI \-P " opt"
.\"O Prints the partition table in specified formats.
.\"O .I opt
.\"O can be one or more of "r", "s" or "t".  See the
.\"O .BR p rint
.\"O command (above) for more information on the print formats.
指定されたフォーマットでパーティションテーブルを表示する。
.I opt
は "r", "s", "t" のうちの 1 つまた複数で指定する。
表示フォーマットのより詳細な情報は、(上記の)
.BR p rint
コマンドを参照すること。
.\"O .SH "EXIT STATUS"
.SH 終了状態
.\"O 0: No errors; 1: Invocation error; 2: I/O error;
.\"O 3: cannot get geometry; 4: bad partition table on disk.
0: エラーなし; 1: 起動エラー; 2: I/O エラー;
3: ジオメトリが取得できない; 4: ディスクのパーティションテーブルが不正である
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fdisk (8),
.BR mkfs (8),
.BR parted (8),
.BR sfdisk (8)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The current version does not support multiple disks.
現在のバージョンでは、複数のディスクをサポートしていない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Kevin E. Martin (martin@cs.unc.edu)
.SH 翻訳者謝辞
この man ページの翻訳にあたり、
<http://www.debian.or.jp/Documents/manuals_not_sgml/cfdisk.ja.txt>
を参考にさせていただいた。
