.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Koso Fukuba
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 27 12:00:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Koso Fukuba <koso@ga2.so-net.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Oct 7 1999
.\"         by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Mon Aug 20 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"WORD:	ring buffer	リングバッファ
.TH DMESG 8 
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O dmesg \- print or control the kernel ring buffer
.SH 名前
dmesg \- カーネルの (ログ用) リングバッファの表示と制御
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "dmesg [ \-c ] [ \-n " level " ] [ \-s " bufsize " ]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B dmesg
.\"O is used to examine or control the kernel ring buffer.
.B dmesg
は、カーネルのリングバッファの内容を表示・制御するために用いる。

.\"O The program helps users to print out their bootup messages.  Instead of
.\"O copying the messages by hand, the user need only:
このプログラムはブートアップメッセージの確認に便利である。
ブート時のメッセージを手で写す必要はなく、
.RS
dmesg > boot.messages
.RE
.\"O and mail the
.\"O .I boot.messages
.\"O file to whoever can debug their problem.
として、
.I boot.messages
ファイルをその問題に対処できる人にメールで送れば良い。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Clear the ring buffer contents after printing.
リングバッファの内容を表示した後、クリアする。
.TP
.BI \-s bufsize
.\"O Use a buffer of size
.\"O .I bufsize
.\"O to query the kernel ring buffer.  This is 16392 by default.
.\"O (The default kernel syslog buffer size was 4096
.\"O at first, 8192 since 1.3.54, 16384 since 2.1.113.)
カーネル循環バッファへの問い合わせに
.I bufsize
の大きさのバッファを用いる。デフォルトでは 16392 になっている
(カーネルの syslog バッファのデフォルトは、最初は 4096、
1.3.54 からは 8192、2.1.113 からは 16384 である)。
.\"O If you have set the kernel buffer to be larger than the default
.\"O then this option can be used to view the entire buffer.
カーネルのバッファをデフォルトより大きくした場合に、
バッファ全体を見るにはこのオプションが必要である。
.TP
.BI \-n level
.\"O Set the
.\"O .I level
.\"O at which logging of messages is done to the console.  For example,
.\"O .B \-n 1
.\"O prevents all messages, expect panic messages, from appearing on the
.\"O console.  All levels of messages are still written to
.\"O .IR /proc/kmsg ,
.\"O so
.\"O .BR syslogd (8)
.\"O can still be used to control exactly where kernel messages appear.  When
.\"O the
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option is used,
.\"O .B dmesg
.\"O will
.\"O .I not
.\"O print or clear the kernel ring buffer.
コンソールに出力されるログメッセージのレベルを
.I level
に設定する。例えば
.B \-n 1
とすれば、パニックメッセージ以外のメッセージはコンソールに
出力されなくなる。ただしすべてのメッセージレベルは
.I /proc/kmsg
には依然として書き込まれるので、
.BR syslogd (8)
を用いれば、カーネルメッセージの出力を望むように制御できる。
.B \-n
オプションが指定されたときには、
.B dmesg
はカーネルのリングバッファの表示やクリアを行なわない。

.\"O When both options are used, only the last option on the command line will
.\"O have an effect.
複数のオプションを指定すると、最後に指定したオプションだけが有効になる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR syslogd (8)
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHOR
.\" .SH 著者
.\" Theodore Ts'o (tytso@athena.mit.edu)
