.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Mar  4 16:02:45 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	latency		待ち時間
.\"
.TH ELVTUNE 8 "14 March 2000" "Version 1.0"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O elvtune \- I/O elevator tuner
elvtune \- I/O エレベータの調整ツール
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B elvtune
[
.B \-r
.I r_lat
]
[
.B \-w
.I w_lat
]
[
.B \-b
.I b_max
]
.B /dev/blkdev1
[
.B /dev/blkdev2 ...
]

.B elvtune
.B -h

.B elvtune
.B -v
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B elvtune
.\"O allows to tune the I/O elevator per blockdevice queue basis. 
.B elvtune
は、ブロックデバイスのキューベース毎に
I/O エレベータを調整することができる。
.\"O The
.\"O tuning can be safely done at runtime. 
調整は稼働中に安全に行うことができる。
.\"O Tuning the elevator means
.\"O being able to change disk performance and interactiveness. 
エレベータの調整とは、
ディスクの性能と対話性が変更可能であることを意味している。
.\"O In the
.\"O output of elvtune the address of the queue tuned will be shown
.\"O and it can be considered as a queue ID.
elvtune の出力には、
調整されたキューのアドレスが表示される。
これはキューの ID と考えることができる。
.\"O For example multiple partitions in the same harddisk will
.\"O share the same queue and so tuning one partition will be
.\"O like tuning the whole HD.
例えば、同じハードディスク内の複数のパーティションは
同じキューを共有するので、
1 つのパーティションを調整することは、
HD 全体を調整することになる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI -r \ r_lat
.\"O set the max latency that the I/O scheduler will provide on
.\"O each read.
I/O スケジューラが読み込み毎に与える最大待ち時間を設定する。
.TP
.BI -w \ w_lat
.\"O set the max latency that the I/O scheduler will provide on
.\"O each write.
I/O スケジューラが書き出し毎に与える最大待ち時間を設定する。
.TP
.BI -b \ b_max
.\"O max coalescing factor allowed on writes when there are reads
.\"O pending in the queue.
read キューに未処理の要求がある場合の、
write キューの max coalescing factor
(write 要求を最大いくつまで一括で行うか)
を指定する。
.TP
.BI -h
.\"O help.
ヘルプを表示する。
.TP
.BI -v
.\"O version.
バージョンを表示する。
.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.\"O Actually the only fields tunable are those relative
.\"O to the IO scheduler. It's not possible to select
.\"O a one-way or two-way elevator yet.
実際のところ、調整可能なフィールドは I/O スケジューラに関連したものである。
エレベータが片方向か双方向かの選択は、今のところできない。
.PP
.\"O For logical blockdevices like LVM the tuning has to
.\"O be done on the
.\"O .I physical
.\"O devices. Tuning the queue of the LVM logical device
.\"O is useless.
LVM のような論理ブロックデバイスでは、
.I 物理
デバイスに対して調整を行わなければならない。
LVM 論理デバイスのキュー調整は無駄である。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O 0 on success and 1 on failure.
成功の場合は 0、失敗の場合は 1。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O Ioctls for tuning elevator behaviour were added in Linux 2.3.99-pre1.
エレベータ動作の調整用の ioctl は、Linux 2.3.99-pre1 で追加された。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Andrea Arcangeli <andrea@suse.de> SuSE


