.\" Copyright 2002 Andre C. Mazzone (linuxdev@karagee.com)
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Koso Fukuba
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 27 12:00:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Koso Fukuba <koso@ga2.so-net.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon May  6 21:55:12 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Aug 29 04:17:49 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.\"WORD:	attach		付加
.\"WORD:	detach		分離
.\"
.TH IPCRM 8 "last change: 19 March 2002" "ipcrm" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ipcrm \- remove a message queue, semaphore set or shared memory id
ipcrm \- メッセージキュー・セマフォ集合・共有メモリ ID を削除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B ipcrm
[
.B \-M
.I key
|
.B \-m
.I id
|
.B \-Q
.I key
|
.B \-q
.I id
|
.B \-S
.I key
|
.B \-s
.I id
] ...

.\"O deprecated usage
以前の使用法

.BI ipcrm
[
.B shm
|
.B msg
|
.B sem
]
.IR id " ..."
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I ipcrm
.\"O removes System V interprocess communication (IPC) objects
.\"O and associated data structures from the system.
.I ipcrm
は System V プロセス間通信 (interprocess communication, IPC) オブジェクトと、
それに関連するデータ構造をシステムから削除する。
.\"O In order to delete such objects, you must be superuser, or
.\"O the creator or owner of the object.
これらのオブジェクトを削除するためには、スーパーユーザーであるか、
オブジェクトの作成者または所有者でなければならない。

.\"O System V IPC objects are of three types: shared memory,
.\"O message queues, and semaphores.
System V IPC オブジェクトには、
共有メモリ・メッセージキュー・セマフォの 3 つがある。
.\"O Deletion of a message queue or semaphore object is immediate
.\"O (regardless of whether any process still holds an IPC
.\"O identifier for the object).
メッセージキューオブジェクトとセマフォオブジェクトの削除は、
(他のプロセスがそのオブジェクトの IPC 識別子を
持っていたとしても) 即座に行われる。
.\"O A shared memory object is only removed
.\"O after all currently attached processes have detached
.\"O .RB ( shmdt (2))
.\"O the object from their virtual address space.
共有メモリオブジェクトが削除されるのは、
現在付加 (attach) されている全てのプロセスが
.RB ( shmdt (2)
で) 仮想アドレス空間からオブジェクトを分離 (detach) してからである。

.\"O Two syntax styles are supported.  The old Linux historical syntax specifies
.\"O a three letter keyword indicating which class of object is to be deleted,
.\"O followed by one or more IPC identifiers for objects of this type.
2 つの書式がサポートされている。
昔の Linux で使われていた伝統的な書式では、
削除するオブジェクトの種類を表す 3 文字のキーワードの後に、
その種類のオブジェクトの IPC 識別子を 1 つ以上指定する。

.\"O The SUS-compliant syntax allows the specification of
.\"O zero or more objects of all three types in a single command line,
.\"O with objects specified either by key or by identifier. (See below.)
SUS 互換の書式では、1 つのコマンド行で
3 種類のオブジェクトすべてをそれぞれ 0 個以上指定することができ、
オブジェクトの指定はキーまたは識別子 (後述) で行う。
.\"O Both keys and identifiers may be specified in decimal, hexadecimal
.\"O (specified with an initial '0x' or '0X'), or octal (specified with
.\"O an initial '0').
キーと識別子は 10 進数、16 進数 (最初を '0X' または '0x' で表記する)、
8 進数 (最初を '0' で表記する) で指定することができる。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-M " shmkey"
.\"O removes the shared memory segment created with
.\"O .I shmkey
.\"O after the last detach is performed.
最後の分離が行われた後、
.I shmkey
で作成された共有メモリセグメントを削除する。
.TP
.BI \-m " shmid"
.\"O removes the shared memory segment identified by
.\"O .I shmid
.\"O after the last detach is performed.
最後の分離が行われた後、
.I shmid
で識別される共有メモリセグメントを削除する。
.TP
.BI \-Q " msgkey"
.\"O removes the message queue created with
.\"O .IR msgkey .
.I msgkey
で作成されたメッセージキューを削除する。
.TP
.BI \-q " msgid"
.\"O removes the message queue identified by
.\"O .IR msgid .
.I msgid
で識別されるメッセージキューを削除する。
.TP
.BI \-S " semkey"
.\"O removes the semaphore created with
.\"O .IR semkey .
.I semkey
で作成されたセマフォを削除する。
.TP
.BI \-s " semid"
.\"O removes the semaphore identified by
.\"O .IR semid .
.I semid
で識別されるセマフォを削除する。
.LP
.\"O The details of the removes are described in
.\"O .IR msgctl (2),
.\"O .IR shmctl (2),
.\"O and
.\"O .IR semctl (2).
削除の詳細は
.IR msgctl (2),
.IR shmctl (2),
.IR semctl (2)
で説明されている。
.\"O The identifiers and keys may be found by using
.\"O .IR ipcs (8).
識別子とキーは
.IR ipcs (8)
を使えば分かる。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O In its first Linux implementation, ipcrm used the deprecated syntax
.\"O shown in the
.\"O .BR SYNOPSIS .
Linux における最初の実装では、
ipcrm は「\fB書式\fR」にあるような昔の構文を使っていた。
.\"O Functionality present in other *nix implementations of ipcrm has since
.\"O been added, namely the ability to delete resources by key (not just
.\"O identifier), and to respect the same command-line syntax. For backward
.\"O compatibility the previous syntax is still supported.
他の *nix  における ipcrm の実装に存在する機能、
つまり (識別子だけでなく) キーを指定してリソースを削除する機能と、
同様なコマンドラインの構文が追加された。
後方互換のため、以前の構文もサポートされている。
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHORS
.\" .SH 著者
.\" Andre C. Mazzone (linuxdev@karagee.com)
.\" .br
.\" Krishna Balasubramanian (balasub@cis.ohio-state.edu)
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.nh
.SH 関連項目
.BR ipcs (8),
.BR msgctl (2),
.BR msgget (2),
.BR semctl (2),
.BR semget (2),
.BR shmctl (2),
.BR shmdt (2),
.BR shmget (2),
.BR ftok (3)
