.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 20:55:06 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ISOSIZE "8" "December 2000" "sg3_utils-0.91" SG_UTILS
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O isosize \- outputs the length of a iso9660 file system
isosize \- iso9660 ファイルシステムの長さを出力する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B isosize
[\fI-x\fR] [\fI-d <num>\fR] \fI<iso9660_image_file>\fR...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
.\"O This command outputs the length of an iso9660 file system that
.\"O is contained in given file. That file may be a normal file or
.\"O a block device (e.g. /dev/hdd or /dev/sr0). In the absence of
.\"O any switches (or errors) it will output the size of the iso9660
.\"O file system in bytes. This can now be a large number (> > 4 GB).
このコマンドは、与えられたファイルに含まれる
iso9660 ファイルシステムの長さを出力する。
ファイルは通常のファイルでも
ブロックデバイス (例えば /dev/hdd や /dev/sr0) でもよい。
スイッチ (またはエラー) がない場合、
iso9660 ファイルシステムのサイズをバイト単位で出力する。
現在では大きな数 (> > 4 GB) になることもある。
.TP
-x
.\"O output in humanly readable form the block count and the block
.\"O size. Output uses the term "sectors" for "blocks".
ブロックカウントとブロックサイズを人に可読な形式で出力する。
出力では「ブロック」に対して「セクタ」という言葉が使われる。
.TP
-d <num>
.\"O only has affect when "-x" is not given. The number output (if no errors)
.\"O is the iso9660 file size in bytes divided by <num>. So if <num> is
.\"O the block size then the output number will be the block count.
"-x" が指定されていない場合にのみ効果がある。
(エラーがない場合) 出力される数値は、
<num> で分割されたバイト単位での iso9660 ファイルシステムのサイズである。
よって、<num> がブロックサイズの場合、
出力される数値はブロックカウントになる。
.PP
.\"O The size of the file (or block device) holding a iso9660 file
.\"O system can be marginally larger than the actual size of the
.\"O iso9660 file system. One reason for this is that cd writers
.\"O are allowed to add "run out" sectors at the end of a iso9660
.\"O image.
iso9660 ファイルシステムを含む
ファイル (またはブロックデバイス) のサイズは、
iso9660 ファイルシステムの実際のサイズより少し大きい。
この理由の 1 つは、cd ライタが iso9660 イメージの後に
"run out" セクタを追加できることにある。
