.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Nov 3 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu 19 Oct 2000 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Wed May  5 16:10:26 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat May  7 00:26:26 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH LOSETUP 8 "2003-07-01" "Linux" "MAINTENANCE COMMANDS"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O losetup \- set up and control loop devices
losetup \- loop デバイスの設定と制御を行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.ad l
.\"O Get info:
情報を取得する:
.sp
.in +5
.B losetup
.I loop_device
.sp
.in -5
.\"O Delete loop:
loop を削除する:
.sp
.in +5
.B "losetup \-d"
.I loop_device
.sp
.in -5
.\"O Print name of first unused loop device:
使用されていない最初 loop デバイスの名前を表示する:
.sp
.in +5
.B "losetup \-f"
.sp
.in -5
.\"O Setup loop device:
loop デバイスを設定する:
.sp
.in +5
.B losetup
.RB [{\-e | \-E}
.IR encryption ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR offset ]
.RB [ \-p
.IR pfd ]
.in +8
.RB { \-f | \fIloop_device\fP }
.I file
.in -13
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B losetup
.\"O is used to associate loop devices with regular files or block devices,
.\"O to detach loop devices and to query the status of a loop device. If only the
.\"O \fIloop_device\fP argument is given, the status of the corresponding loop
.\"O device is shown.
.B losetup
は loop デバイスを通常のファイルやブロックデバイスと接続/切断したり、
loop デバイスへの問い合わせを行うために用いられる。
引き数として
.I loop_device
が与えられた場合に限り、対応する loop デバイスの状態が表示される。

.\"O .SS "Encryption"
.SS "暗号化"
.\"O It is possible to specify transfer functions (for encryption/decryption
.\"O or other purposes) using one of the
.\"O .B \-E
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-e
.\"O options.
.B \-E
または
.B \-e
オプションのいずれか 1 つにより、
(暗号化・復号化やその他の目的で使う) 変換関数を指定することができる。
.\"O There are two mechanisms to specify the desired encryption: by number
.\"O and by name. If an encryption is specified by number then one
.\"O has to make sure that the Linux kernel knows about the encryption with that
.\"O number, probably by patching the kernel. Standard numbers that are
.\"O always present are 0 (no encryption) and 1 (XOR encryption).
使いたい暗号化機能を指定する 2 つの仕組みがある。
番号で指定する方法と名前で指定する方法である。
暗号化機能を番号で指定する場合、
Linux カーネルがその番号の暗号化機能を知っていることを
確認しておかなければならない。
この暗号化機能は、たぶんカーネルへのパッチで提供される。
常に提供されている標準的な番号は、
0 (暗号化なし) と 1 (XOR 暗号化) である。
.\"O When the cryptoloop module is loaded (or compiled in), it uses number 18.
cryptoloop モジュールがロードされると (または組み込まれていると)、
このモジュールは番号 18 を使う。
.\"O This cryptoloop module wil take the name of an arbitrary encryption type
.\"O and finds the module that knows how to perform that encryption.
cryptoloop は任意の暗号化タイプの名前を受け取り、
その暗号化を実行可能なモジュールを探す。
.\"O (Thus, either one uses a number different from 18 with the
.\"O .B \-E
.\"O option, or one uses a name with the
.\"O .B \-e
.\"O option.)
(よって、ユーザは
.B \-E
オプションで 18 以外の番号を指定するか、
.B \-e
オプションで名前を指定すればよい。)
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.IP \fB\-d\fP
.\"O Detach the file or device associated with the specified loop device.
指定した loop デバイスを対応するファイルやデバイスから切り放す。
.IP "\fB\-E \fIencryption_type\fP"
.\"O Enable data encryption with specified number.
指定された番号のデータ暗号化機能を有効にする。
.IP "\fB\-e \fIencryption_name\fP"
.\"O Enable data encryption with specified name.
指定された名前のデータ暗号化機能を有効にする。
.IP "\fB\-f\fP"
.\"O Find the first unused loop device. If a
.\"O .I file
.\"O argument is present, use this device. Otherwise, print its name.
使用されていない最初の loop デバイスを見つける。
.I file
引き数が指定されている場合は、そのデバイスを使用する。
指定されていない場合は、loop デバイスの名前を表示する。
.IP "\fB\-o \fIoffset\fP"
.\"O The data start is moved \fIoffset\fP bytes into the specified file or
.\"O device.
データの開始地点を指定したファイルやデバイスの
.I offset
バイトに移動する。
.IP "\fB\-p \fInum\fP"
.\"O Read the passphrase from file descriptor with number
.\"O .I num
.\"O instead of from the terminal.
パスフレーズを端末からではなく、番号
.I num
のファイルディスクリプタから読み込む。
.\"O .SH RETURN VALUE
.SH 返り値
.\"O .B losetup
.\"O returns 0 on success, nonzero on failure. When
.\"O .B losetup
.\"O displays the status of a loop device, it returns 1 if the device
.\"O is not configured and 2 if an error occurred which prevented
.\"O .B losetup
.\"O from determining the status of the device.
.B losetup
は成功すると 0 を返し、失敗すると 0 以外を返す。
.B losetup
に loop デバイスの状態を表示させる場合は、
デバイスが設定されていなければ 1 を、
デバイスの状態を決定できなくするようなエラーが起った場合は 2 を返す。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.nf
.\"O /dev/loop0, /dev/loop1, ...   loop devices (major=7)
/dev/loop0, /dev/loop1, ...   ループデバイス (major=7)
.fi
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O If you are using the loadable module you must have the module loaded
.\"O first with the command
ローダブルモジュールを用いている場合は、
まず以下のコマンドによってモジュールをロードする必要がある。
.IP
# insmod loop.o
.LP
.\"O Maybe also encryption modules are needed.
暗号化モジュールも必要かも知れない。
.nf
.IP
# insmod des.o
# insmod cryptoloop.o
.fi
.LP
.\"O The following commands can be used as an example of using the loop device.
以下の一連のコマンドは loop デバイスの使用例である。
.nf
.IP
# dd if=/dev/zero of=/file bs=1k count=100
# losetup -e des /dev/loop0 /file
Password:
Init (up to 16 hex digits):
# mkfs -t ext2 /dev/loop0 100
# mount -t ext2 /dev/loop0 /mnt
 ...
# umount /dev/loop0
# losetup -d /dev/loop0
.fi
.LP
.\"O If you are using the loadable module you may remove the module with
.\"O the command
ローダブルモジュールを用いている場合は、
以下のコマンドによってモジュールを削除することができる。
.IP
# rmmod loop
.LP
.fi
.\"O .SH RESTRICTION
.SH 制限
.\"O DES encryption is painfully slow. On the other hand, XOR is terribly weak.
DES 暗号化は非常に遅い。一方 XOR は非常に弱い。
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHORS
.\" .SH 著者
.\" .nf
.\"O .\" Original version: Theodore Ts'o <tytso@athena.mit.edu>
.\"O .\" Original DES by: Eric Young <eay@psych.psy.uq.oz.au>
.\" オリジナル版: Theodore Ts'o <tytso@athena.mit.edu>
.\" オリジナルの DES 実装: Eric Young <eay@psych.psy.uq.oz.au>
.\" .fi
