.\" Copyright 1992, 1993, 1994 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" May be freely distributed.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar 18 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 18 Feb 2001 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.\" This man page is a part of util-linux.
.\"
.\"WORD:	inode		i-ノード
.\"WORD:	bad block	不良ブロック
.\"
.TH MKFS.MINIX 8 "2 July 1996" "Util-linux 2.6" "Linux System Administrator's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O mkfs.minix \- make a Linux MINIX filesystem
.SH 名前
mkfs.minix \- Linux MINIX ファイルシステムを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR "mkfs.minix [ \-c | \-l filename ] [ \-n"
namelength
.B ] [ \-i
inodecount
.B ] [ \-v ]
device 
.B [ 
size-in-blocks
.B ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B mkfs.minix
.\"O creates a Linux MINIX file-system on a device (usually a disk partition).
.B mkfs.minix
は Linux MINIX ファイルシステムをデバイス
(通常はディスクパーティション) 上に作成する。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I device
.\"O is usually of the following form:
.I device
は通常以下のようなものである:
.sp
.nf
.RS
/dev/hda[1-8] (IDE disk 1)
/dev/hdb[1-8] (IDE disk 2)
/dev/sda[1-8] (SCSI disk 1)
/dev/sdb[1-8] (SCSI disk 2)
.RE
.fi
.sp
.\"O The
.\"O .I size-in-blocks
.\"O parameter is the desired size of the file system, in blocks.
.\"O It is present only for backwards compatibility.
.\"O If omitted the size will be determined automatically.
.\"O Only block counts strictly greater than 10 and strictly less than
.\"O 65536 are allowed.
.I size-in-blocks
引数は、ファイルシステムのサイズの希望値をブロック単位で指定する。
これは、もっぱら過去との互換性の維持を目的とした機能である。
省略されると、サイズは自動的に決定される。
11 以上か、65535 以下の値だけが指定可能である。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Check the device for bad blocks before creating the file system.  If any
.\"O are found, the count is printed.
ファイルシステムを作成する前に、
デバイスに不良ブロックがないかチェックする。
見付かったら、ブロックカウントを表示する。
.TP
.BI \-n " namelength"
.\"O Specify the maximum length of filenames.
.\"O Currently, the only allowable values are 14 and 30.
.\"O The default is 30.
.\"O The default is 30. Note that kernels older than 0.99p7
.\"O only accept namelength 14.
ファイル名の最大の長さを指定する。
現在指定できるのは 14 または 30 だけである。
デフォルトは 30。0.99p7 より前のカーネルでは
14 しか受けつけない。
.TP
.BI \-i " inodecount"
.\"O Specify the number of inodes for the filesystem.
ファイルシステムの i-ノードの個数を指定する。
.TP
.BI \-l " filename"
.\"O Read the bad blocks list from
.\"O .IR filename .
.\"O The file has one bad block number per line.  The count of bad blocks read
.\"O is printed.
.I filename
から不良ブロックのリストを読み込む
ファイルの一行に不良ブロックをひとつ書く。
読み込んだ不良ブロックのカウントが表示される。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Make a Minix version 2 filesystem.
Minix version 2 ファイルシステムを作成する。
.\"O .SH "EXIT CODES"
.SH 終了コード
.\"O The exit code returned by
.\"O .B mkfs.minix
.\"O is one of the following:
.B mkfs.minix
の返す終了コードは以下のどれかである:
.IP 0
.\"O No errors
エラーなし
.IP 8
.\"O Operational error
動作エラー
.IP 16
.\"O Usage or syntax error
利用法または文法のエラー
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR mkfs (8),
.BR fsck (8),
.BR reboot (8)

