.\" Copyright 1999 Andries E. Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\" May be freely distributed.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar 18 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" This man page is a part of util-linux.
.\"
.\"WORD:	inode		i-ノード
.\"
.TH MKFS.BFS 8 "12 Sept 1999" "Util-linux 2.9x" "Linux System Administrator's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O mkfs.bfs \- make an SCO bfs filesystem
.SH 名前
mkfs.bfs \- SCO bfs ファイルシステムを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR "mkfs.bfs [ \-N"
nr-of-inodes
.B ] [ \-V
volume-name
.B ] [ \-F
fsname
.B ]
device 
.B [ 
size-in-blocks
.B ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B mkfs.bfs
.\"O creates an SCO bfs file-system on a block device
.\"O (usually a disk partition or a file accessed via the loop device).
.B mkfs.bfs
は SCO bfs ファイルシステムをブロックデバイス
(通常はディスクパーティションか loop デバイスでアクセスされるファイル)
上に作成する。

.\"O The
.\"O .I size-in-blocks
.\"O parameter is the desired size of the file system, in blocks.
.\"O If nothing is specified, the entire partition will be used.
.I size-in-blocks
引数は、ファイルシステムのサイズの希望値をブロック単位で指定する。
省略されると、パーティションの全体が用いられる。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-N
.\"O Specify the desired number of inodes (at most 512).
.\"O If nothing is specified some default number in the range 48-512 is picked
.\"O depending on the size of the partition.
i-ノードの個数を指定する (最大 512)。
何も指定しないと、パーティションのサイズから計算された
デフォルトの数値 (48-512 の間) が用いられる。
.TP
.BI \-V " volume-label"
.\"O Specify the volume label. I have no idea if/where this is used.
ボリュームラベルを指定する。筆者はこの利用法・利用局面がわからない。
.TP
.BI \-F " fsname"
.\"O Specify the fsname. I have no idea if/where this is used.
fsname を指定する。筆者はこの利用法・利用局面がわからない。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Be verbose.
詳細に出力する。
.\"O .SH "EXIT CODES"
.SH 終了コード
.\"O The exit code returned by
.\"O .B mkfs.bfs
.\"O is 0 when all went well, and 1 when something went wrong.
.B mkfs.bfs
の返す終了コードは、
正常に終了した場合は 0、異常が発生した場合は 1 になる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR mkfs (8).
.BR mkfs (8)

