.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" This manual page is a part of util-linux.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Aug 28 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified & Updated Wed Jun 24 1998 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Oct 7 1999 by NAKANO Takeo 
.\"
.TH MKFS 8 "Jun 1995" "Version 1.9"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mkfs \- build a Linux file system
mkfs \- Linux のファイルシステムを構築する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mkfs
[
.B \-V
]
[
.B \-t
.I fstype
]
[
.B fs-options
]
.I filesys
[
.I blocks
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B mkfs
.\"O is used to build a Linux file system on a device, usually
.\"O a hard disk partition.
.\"O .I filesys
.\"O is either the device name (e.g.
.\"O .IR /dev/hda1 ,
.\"O .IR /dev/sdb2 )
.\"O or the mount point (e.g. 
.\"O .IR / ,
.\"O .IR /usr ,
.\"O .IR /home )
.\"O for the file system.
.\"O .I blocks
.\"O is the number of blocks to be used for the file system.
.B mkfs
は Linux のファイルシステムをデバイス (通常はハードディスクのパーティ
ション) 上に構築するために用いられる。
.I filesys
はファイルシステムを作成するデバイスの名前
.RI ( /dev/hda1 , /dev/sdb2
など) またはマウントポイント
.RI ( / , /usr , /home
など) である。
.I blocks
は作成するファイルシステムのブロック数である。
.PP
.\"O The exit code returned by
.\"O .B mkfs
.\"O is 0 on success and 1 on failure.
.B mkfs
の戻り値 (exit code) は成功すれば 0、失敗した場合は 1 である。
.PP
.\"O In actuality,
.\"O .B mkfs
.\"O is simply a front-end for the various file system builders
.\"O (\fBmkfs\fR.\fIfstype\fR)
.\"O available under Linux.
実際は
.B mkfs
は単なるフロントエンドにすぎない。 Linux で利用できるファイルシステム
には様々なものがあるが、実際のファイルシステムの作成はそれらファイル
システムに専用のプログラム
(\fBmkfs\fR.\fIfstype\fR)
が行う。
.\"O The file system-specific builder is searched for in a number
.\"O of directories like perhaps
.\"O .IR /sbin ,
.\"O .IR /sbin/fs ,
.\"O .IR /sbin/fs.d ,
.\"O .IR /etc/fs ,
.\"O .I /etc
.\"O (the precise list is defined at compile time but at least
.\"O contains
.\"O .I /sbin
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /sbin/fs ),
.\"O and finally in the directories
.\"O listed in the PATH enviroment variable.
.\"O Please see the file system-specific builder manual pages for
.\"O further details.
各ファイルシステム用の作成プログラムの探索は、いろいろなディレクトリで
行われる。
.IR /sbin , /sbin/fs , /sbin/fs.d , /etc/fs , /etc
などが対象となる 
(実際のリストはコンパイル時に決定されるが、少なくとも
.IR /sbin " と " /sbin/fs
は必ず含まれる)。
最後に環境変数 PATH 中のディレクトリが探索される。
詳細については各ファイルシステム用作成プログラムの
マニュアルページを見てほしい。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Produce verbose output, including all file system-specific commands
.\"O that are executed.
.\"O Specifying this option more than once inhibits execution of any
.\"O file system-specific commands.
.\"O This is really only useful for testing.
詳細な情報を表示する。ファイルシステム専用コマンドとして
どのようなものが実行されるかも表示する。
このオプションを 2 つ以上指定すると、専用コマンドの実行を行わない。
これはテスト用のものである。
.TP
.BI \-t \ fstype
.\"O Specifies the type of file system to be built.
.\"O If not specified, the default file system type
.\"O (currently ext2) is used.
作成するファイルシステムのタイプを指定する。指定されなかった場合は
デフォルトのファイルシステムタイプ (現在は ext2) が用いられる。
.TP
.B fs-options
.\"O File system-specific options to be passed to the real file 
.\"O system builder.
.\"O Although not guaranteed, the following options are supported
.\"O by most file system builders.
実際のファイルシステム作成を行うコマンドに渡す、ファイルシステム固
有のオプションを指定する。
保証されているわけではないが、以下のオプションはほとんどのファイルシス
テム作成プログラムでサポートされている。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Check the device for bad blocks before building the file system.
ファイルシステムを作成する前に、デバイスに対して不良ブロックの検査を行
う。
.TP
.BI \-l \ filename
.\"O Read the bad blocks list from
.\"O .I filename
不良ブロックのリストを
.I filename
から読み込む。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Produce verbose output.
詳細な表示を出力する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O All generic options must precede and not be combined with
.\"O file system-specific options.
.\"O Some file system-specific programs do not support the
.\"O .I -v
.\"O (verbose) option, nor return meaningful exit codes.
.\"O Also, some file system-specific programs do not automatically
.\"O detect the device size and require the
.\"O .I blocks
.\"O parameter to be specified.
mkfs  の全ての汎用オプションは、ファイルシステム固有のオプショ
ンに優先すべきである。また汎用のオプションと固有のオプションとを
組み合わせたりすべきでもない。
各種ファイルシステムの専用プログラムには、
.I \-v
(詳細表示) オプションをサポートしないものや、意味のある戻り値を返さな
いものもある。また専用プログラムには、自動的にデバイスのサイズを知るこ
とができず、
.I blocks
パラメータを必ず指定しなければならないものもある。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
David Engel (david@ods.com)
.br
Fred N. van Kempen (waltje@uwalt.nl.mugnet.org)
.br
Ron Sommeling (sommel@sci.kun.nl)
.br
.\"O The manual page was shamelessly adapted from Remy Card's version
.\"O for the ext2 file system.
本マニュアルページは (厚顔にも) Remy Card が作成した ext2 ファイルシス
テム向けの版を少々変更したものである。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連情報
.BR fs (5),
.BR badblocks (8),
.BR fsck (8),
.BR mkdosfs (8),
.BR mke2fs (8),
.BR mkfs.bfs (8),
.BR mkfs.ext2 (8),
.BR mkfs.ext3 (8),
.BR mkfs.minix (8),
.BR mkfs.msdos (8),
.BR mkfs.vfat (8),
.BR mkfs.xfs (8),
.BR mkfs.xiafs (8)
