.\" Copyright 1992 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 16 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SETFDPRM 8 "20 November 1993" "Linux 0.99" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O setfdprm \- sets user-provided floppy disk parameters
.SH 名前
setfdprm \- フロッピーディスクの定義可能なパラメータを設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "setfdprm [ \-p ]"
device name
.br
.B "setfdprm [ \-p ]"
device size sectors heads tracks stretch gap rate spec1 fmt_gap
.br
.B "setfdprm [ \-c ]"
device
.br
.B "setfdprm [ \-y ]"
device
.br
.B "setfdprm [ \-n ]"
device
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B setfdprm
.\"O is a utility that can be used to load disk parameters into the
.\"O auto-detecting floppy devices, to clear old parameter sets and to disable
.\"O or enable diagnostic messages.
.B setfdprm
は自動検知タイプのフロッピーデバイスにディスクのパラメーターをロードす
るユーティリティである。古いパラメーターセットをクリアしたり、診断メッ
セージを有効／無効にすることもできる。

.\"O Without any options,
.\"O .B setfdprm
.\"O loads the
.\"O .I device
.\"O (usually
.\"O .I /dev/fd0
.\"O or
.\"O .IR /dev/fd1 )
.\"O with a new parameter set with the
.\"O .I name
.\"O entry found in
.\"O .I /etc/fdprm
.\"O (usually named 360/360, etc.).  These parameters stay in effect until the
.\"O media is changed.
オプションなしで起動された場合、
.B setfdprm
は
.I device
(通常は \fI/dev/fd0\fP か \fI/dev/fd1\fP) に新たなパラメーターセットを
ロードする。
パラメーターセットは
.I /etc/fdprm
ファイル中にあるエントリ
.I name
で指定する (通常は 360/360 のような名前が付いている)。
これらのパラメーターはメディアが交換されるまで有効となる。

.\"O .OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-p " device name"
.\"O Permanently loads a new parameter set for the specified auto-configuring
.\"O floppy device for the configuration with
.\"O .I name
.\"O in
.\"O .IR /etc/fdprm .
.\"O Alternatively, the parameters can be given directly from the command line.
自動判別型のフロッピーデバイスに
.I /etc/fdprm
中の
.I name
によるパラメーターセットをロードし、以後これを有効にする。
.TP
.BI \-c " device"
.\"O Clears the parameter set of the specified auto-configuring floppy device.
指定された自動判別型フロッピーデバイスのパラメーターセットをクリアする。
.TP
.BI \-y " device"
.\"O Enables format detection messages for the specified auto-configuring floppy
.\"O device.
指定された自動判別型フロッピーデバイスのフォーマット検知メッセージを有
効にする。
.TP
.BI \-n " device"
.\"O Disables format detection messages for the specified auto-configuring
.\"O floppy device.
指定された自動判別型フロッピーデバイスのフォーマット検知メッセージを無
効にする。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O This documentation is grossly incomplete.
このドキュメントがはなはだしく不完全である。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/fdprm
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Werner Almesberger (almesber@nessie.cs.id.ethz.ch)

