.\" Copyright 1992 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Sep 1 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu 7 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo 
.\" Updated & Modified Wed 14 Jun 2000 by NAKANO Takeo 
.\" 
.TH SHUTDOWN 8 "2 March 2000" "Linux 2.0" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O shutdown \- close down the system
.SH 名前
shutdown \- システムを閉じて終了させる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.BR "shutdown [ \-h | \-r ] [ \-fqs ] [ now | " hh:ss " | " +mins " ] [ " message " ]"
.BR "reboot [ \-h | \-r ] [ \-fqs ] [ now | " hh:ss " | " +mins " ] [ " message " ]"
.BR "fastboot [ \-h | \-r ] [ \-fqs ] [ now | " hh:ss " | " +mins " ] [ " message " ]"
.BR "halt [ \-h | \-r ] [ \-fqs ] [ now | " hh:ss " | " +mins " ] [ " message " ]"
.BR "fasthalt [ \-h | \-r ] [ \-fqs ] [ now | " hh:ss " | " +mins " ] [ " message " ]"
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\" " for emacs hilit19
.\"O In general,
.\"O .B shutdown
.\"O prepares the system for a power down or reboot.  A absolute or delta time
.\"O can be given, and periodic messages will be sent to all users warning of
.\"O the shutdown. If no message is specified on the command line,
.\"O .B shutdown
.\"O will ask for a message to be sent, unless the 
.\"O .B \-q
.\"O option is set.
.B shutdown
はシステムの電源停止やリブートの準備をする。いつ停止するかを、時刻また
は現在からの待ち時間で指定できる。すべてのユーザーに、シャットダウンの
警告メッセージが送られる。コマンドラインでメッセージが指定されなかった
場合には、
.B shutdown
は送信するメッセージを尋ねてくる。ただし
.B \-q
オプションをセットした場合には尋ねない。

.\"O .B halt
.\"O is the same as
.\"O .B "shutdown -h -q now"
.B halt
は
.B "shutdown -h -q now"
と同じ。

.\"O .B fasthalt
.\"O is the same as
.\"O .B "shutdown -h -q -f now"
.B fasthalt
は
.B "shutdown -h -q -f now"
と同じ。

.\"O .B reboot
.\"O is the same as
.\"O .B "shutdown -r -q now"
.B reboot
は
.B "shutdown -r -q now"
と同じ。

.\"O .B fastboot
.\"O is the same as
.\"O .B "shutdown -r -q -f now"
.B fastboot
は
.B "shutdown -r -q -f now"
と同じ。

.\"O The default delta time, if none is specified, is 2 minutes.
何も指定されなかった場合、デフォルトの待ち時間は 2 分になる。

.\"O Five minutes before shutdown (or immediately, if shutdown is less than five
.\"O minutes away), the
.\"O .I /etc/nologin
.\"O file is created with a message stating that the system is going down and
.\"O that logins are no longer permitted.  The
.\"O .B login (1)
.\"O program will not allow non-superusers to login during this period.  A
.\"O message will be sent to all users at this time.
シャットダウンの 5 分前に (あるいはシャットダウンが 5 分以内に行われる
場合には直ちに)、
.I /etc/nologin
ファイルが作成され、「システムがダウンするのでログインはできない」旨の
メッセージが書き込まれる。
.BR login (1)
プログラムはこれ以降、スーパーユーザー以外のログインを許可しない。また
このとき、すべてのユーザーにメッセージが送信される。

.\"O When the shutdown time arrives,
.\"O .B shutdown
.\"O notifies all users, tells
.\"O .BR init (8)
.\"O not to spawn more
.\"O .BR getty (8)'s,
.\"O writes the shutdown time into the
.\"O .I /var/log/wtmp
.\"O file, kills all other processes on the system,
.\"O .BR sync (2)'s,
.\"O unmounts all the disks,
.\"O .BR sync (2)'s
.\"O again, waits for a second, and then either terminates or reboots the
.\"O system.
シャットダウンの時間になると、
.B shutdown
はすべてのユーザーに通知を出し、
以降
.BR getty (8)
プロセスを再生成 (spawn) しないように
.BR init (8)
に伝える。
その後
.I /var/log/wtmp
ファイルにシャットダウンの時間を書き込み、
他のすべてのプロセスを kill し、
.BR sync (2)
を実行してすべてのディスクをアンマウントし、再び
.BR sync (2)
を実行、少し待ってシステムを終了させるかリブートさせる。

.\"O Prior to unmounting all discs, the \fBSIGQUIT\fP signal is sent to the
.\"O \fBinit\fP process, which will in turn exec \fBshutdown\fP(8). This
.\"O allows for clean unmounting, even if the old inode for the \fBinit\fP
.\"O process was unlinked. If the current process ID (PID) equals 1, then
.\"O \fBshutdown\fP(8) will pause forever.
全てのディスクのアンマウントに先立ち、
.B SIGQUIT
シグナルが
.B init
プロセスに送られ、これによって
.BR shutdown (8)
が起動される。こうすれば、
.B init
の古い inode が unlink された場合でもクリーンにアンマウントを行うことができる。
カレントのプロセス ID (PID) が 1 の場合は、
.BR shutdown (8)
は永久に停止する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-h
.\"O Halt the system.  Do not reboot.  This option is used when powering down
.\"O the system.
システムを停止 (halt) する。リブートしない。
このオプションはシステムの電源を落とすときに用いられる。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Reboot the system.
システムをリブートする。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Fast.  When the system is rebooted, the file systems will not be checked.
.\"O This is arranged by creating
.\"O .IR /fastboot ,
.\"O which
.\"O .I /etc/rc
.\"O must detect (and delete).
高速指定。システムがリブートするとき、
ファイルシステムをチェックしないようにする。
具体的には
.I /fastboot
を作成する。このファイルは
.I /etc/rc
によって検知（および消去）されるようになっていなければならない。
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Quiet.  This uses a default broadcast message, and does not prompt the user
.\"O for one.
メッセージ抑制。このオプションが指定されるとデフォルトのブロードキャス
トメッセージが用いられる。メッセージの入力を求めるプロンプトをユーザー
に出さない。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Reboot in single user mode.  This is arranged by creating
.\"O .IR /etc/singleboot ,
.\"O which
.\"O .BR simpleinit (8)
.\"O detects (and deletes).
シングルユーザーモードでリブートする。
具体的には
.I /etc/singleboot
を作成する。このファイルは
.BR simpleinit (8)
によって検知（および消去）されるようになっていなければならない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.nf
.I /etc/rc
.I /fastboot
.I /etc/singleboot
.I /etc/nologin
.I /var/log/wtmp
.I /etc/shutdown.conf
.fi
.\"O .SH CONFIG
.SH 設定
.\"O The configuration file \fI/etc/shutdown.conf\fP is used to determine
.\"O the action to take when halting the machine. The currently supported
.\"O file format is extremely primitive. The first line must contain two
.\"O strings separated by whitespace. The first string must be
.\"O \fBHALT_ACTION\fP and the second specifies the action you wish to take
.\"O on halt. The options allowed are:
設定ファイル \fI/etc/shutdown.conf\fP を用いれば
マシンを停止するときの動作を決定することができる。
現在サポートされているファイル形式は非常に単純なものである。
第一行には空白で区切った二つの文字列を記述する。
最初の文字列は \fBHALT_ACTION\fP とし、第二の文字列には
停止時の動作を指定する。以下のオプションが適用できる。
.TP
.B halt
.\"O This will simply halt the system. This is the default behaviour.
.\"O Note also that this is the fallback if another option fails.
単にシステムを停止する。デフォルトの動作である。
他のオプションが失敗した場合にもこの動作が行われる。
.TP
.B power_off
.\"O This will use the kernel power shutdown facility. This is usually only
.\"O available on machines with Advanced Power Management (APM).
カーネルの電源断機能を利用しようとする。
APM (Advanced Power Management) 機能のあるマシンでのみ利用できる。
.TP
.I programname
.\"O This specifies a command to run to shut down the power. The first
.\"O character must be a "/". Bear in mind that this command will be run
.\"O with only the root filesystem mounted (and it will be read-only), and
.\"O no daemons running.
電源を切るために動作させるコマンドを指定する。
最初の文字は "/" でなければならない。
このコマンドはルートファイルシステムだけで (かつリードオンリーで)、
さらにデーモンがない状態で動作する必要がある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR umount (8),
.BR login (1),
.BR reboot (2),
.BR simpleinit (8),
.BR init (8)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Unlike the BSD
.\"O .BR shutdown ,
.\"O users are notified of shutdown only once or twice, instead of many times,
.\"O and at shorter and shorter intervals as "apocalypse approaches."
.\"O Some would construe this as a feature.
BSD 版の
.BR shutdown
と異なり、ユーザーはシャットダウンの通知を一度または二度しか受け取らない。
BSD 版ではこの通知は何度も、しかも「黙示のとき」が近づくにつれ、
ますます頻繁に発送される。
これを仕様であるとみなしている人もいるかもしれない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This page documents the version of
.\"O .B shutdown
.\"O originally written by Peter Orbaek (poe@daimi.aau.dk).
このページは、
Peter Orbaek (poe@daimi.aau.dk)
によって書かれた
.B shutdown
の解説である。
