.\" Copyright 1992, 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\" " for emacs's hilit19 mode :-)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Feb 26 22:49:20 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Jun  5 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH SIMPLEINIT 8 "25 February 2001" "Linux 0.99" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O simpleinit \- process control initialization
simpleinit \- プロセス制御の初期化を行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "init [ single ] [ script ]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B init
.\"O is invoked as the last step in the Linux boot sequence.  If the
.\"O .B single
.\"O option is used, or if the file
.\"O .I /etc/singleboot
.\"O exists, then single user mode will be entered, by starting
.\"O .IR /bin/sh .
.B init
は Linux ブートシーケンスの最終ステップとして起動される。
.B single
オプションが使われた場合、またはファイル
.I /etc/singleboot
がある場合、
.IR /bin/sh
を起動することでシングルユーザーモードに入る。
.\"O If the file
.\"O .I /etc/securesingle
.\"O exists, then the root password will be required to start single user mode.
.\"O If the root password does not exist, or if
.\"O .I /etc/passwd
.\"O does not exist, the checking of the password will be skipped.
ファイル
.I /etc/securesingle
がある場合、シングルユーザーモードを開始するために
root パスワードが必要とされる。
root パスワードがない場合、または
.I /etc/passwd
がない場合、パスワードのチェックは省かれる。

.\"O If the file
.\"O .I /etc/TZ
.\"O exists, then the contents of that file will be read, and used to set the TZ
.\"O environment variable for each process started by
.\"O .BR simpleinit .
.\"O This "feature" is only available if it's configured at compile-time. It's
.\"O not normally needed.
ファイル
.I /etc/TZ
がある場合、その内容が読み込まれ、
.B simpleinit
によって開始される各プロセスの環境変数
TZ を設定するために使われる。
「この機能」はコンパイル時に設定されている場合にのみ使用可能である。
通常は必要とされない。

.\"O After single user mode is terminated, the
.\"O .I /etc/rc
.\"O file is executed, and the information in
.\"O .I /etc/inittab
.\"O will be used to start processes. Alternatively, the \fI/etc/inittab\fP
.\"O file may be configured to run a different boot script. See below for
.\"O details.
シングルユーザーモードが終了した後、
.I /etc/rc
ファイルが実行される。
.I /etc/inittab
にある情報は、プロセスを開始するために使われる。
別の方法として、他のブートスクリプトを実行するように
\fI/etc/inittab\fP ファイルを設定してもよい。
詳細は下記を参照すること。

.\"O .SH "THE INITTAB FILE"
.SH INITTAB ファイル
.\"O Because of the number of init programs which are appearing in the Linux
.\"O community, the documentation for the
.\"O .I /etc/inittab
.\"O file, which is usually found with the
.\"O .BR inittab (5)
.\"O man page, is presented here:
Linux コミュニティではいくつもの init プログラムが出現しているので、
通常
.BR inittab (5)
の man ページに書かれている
.I /etc/inittab
ファイルについてのドキュメントをここに載せる:

.\"O The format is
フォーマットは次のようになっている。

.RS
.\"O .B bootprog=file
.\"O 
.\"O .B fileprefix=string
.\"O 
.\"O .B PATH=search path
.\"O 
.\"O .B INIT_PATH=search path
.\"O 
.\"O .B "ttyline:termcap-entry:getty-command"
.\"O 
.\"O .B finalprog=path
.B bootprog=ファイル

.B fileprefix=文字列

.B PATH=検索パス

.B INIT_PATH=検索パス

.B "tty ライン:termcap エントリ:getty コマンド"

.B finalprog=パス
.RE

.\"O An example is as follows:
以下に例を示す:

.nf
.RS
bootprog     =
fileprefix   =  /sbin/init.d/
PATH         =  /usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
INIT_PATH    =  /sbin/init.d

tty1:linux:/sbin/getty 9600 tty1
tty2:linux:/sbin/getty 9600 tty2
tty3:linux:/sbin/getty 9600 tty3
tty4:linux:/sbin/getty 9600 tty4
# tty5:linux:/sbin/getty 9600 tty5
# ttyS1:dumb:/sbin/getty 9600 ttyS1
# ttyS2:dumb:/sbin/getty -m -t60 2400 ttyS2

finalprog   = /sbin/rc.xdm
.RE
.fi

.\"O Lines beginning with the
.\"O .B #
.\"O character are treated as comments.  Please see documentation for the
.\"O .B getty (8)
.\"O command that you are using, since there are several of these in the Linux
.\"O community at this time.
.B #
文字で始まる行はコメントとして扱われる。
現在のところ Linux コミュニティでは
.B getty (8)
のようなコマンドがいくつかあるため、
あなたが使っている
.B getty (8)
コマンドのドキュメントを参照すること。

.\"O The \fBbootprog\fP value is appended to the \fBfileprefix\fP value,
.\"O and the result specifies the boot programme (script) to run. If
.\"O unspecified, the default is \fI/etc/rc\fP. If the boot programme is a
.\"O directory, then all scripts in that directory tree are executed, in
.\"O parallel. See the \fBneed\fP(8) programme for details on how to
.\"O elegantly control order of execution and manage dependencies.
\fBbootprog\fP の値は、\fBfileprefix\fP の値に追加される。
その結果は、実行するブートプログラム (スクリプト) を指定するのに使われる。
指定されない場合、デフォルトは \fI/etc/rc\fP である。
ブートプログラムがディレクトリである場合、
ディレクトリツリーにある全てのスクリプトが並列に実行される。
実行順の制御と依存性の管理をエレガントにする方法の詳細は、
\fBneed\fP(8) プログラムを参照すること。

.\"O The \fBPATH\fP value is assigned to the PATH environment variable of
.\"O child processes (boot scripts).
\fBPATH\fP の値は、
子プロセス (ブートスクリプト)の環境変数 PATH に割り当てられる。

.\"O The \fBINIT_PATH\fP value is used by simpleinit(8) itself to find the
.\"O location of scripts to run (if an absolute path is not given). If
.\"O unset and the boot programme is a directory, that directory is used.
.\"O Finally, if the script cannot be found in this path, the standard
.\"O \fBPATH\fP is used. This separation allows boot scripts to invoke
.\"O programmes of the same name without conflict and without needing to
.\"O specify absolute paths.
(絶対パスが与えられない場合)
\fBINIT_PATH\fP は実行するスクリプトの場所を見付けるために
simpleinit(8) 自身によって使われる。
デフォルトの値を unset して、ブートプログラムがディレクトリの場合、
そのディレクトリが使われる。
最後に、このパスでスクリプトが見つからなかった場合、
標準の \fBPATH\fP が使われる。
\fBPATH\fP と \fBINIT_PATH\fP を分けることにより、
ブートスクリプトは同じ名前のプログラムを
衝突や絶対パスの指定なしに起動できる。

.\"O The \fBfinalprog\fP value specifies the path of the programme to run
.\"O after all \fBgetty\fP(8) instances are spawned. At bootup, it is
.\"O passed a single argument: "start". At shutdown, it is called again,
.\"O this time with the argument: "stop".
\fBfinalprog\fP の値は、
全ての \fBgetty\fP(8) インスタンスが生成された後で
実行されるプログラムのパスを指定する。
ブート時には、"start" という 1 個の引き数が渡される。
シャットダウン時にも、"stop" という引き数で呼ばれる。
.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O \fBsimpleinit\fP(8) responds to signals in a variety of ways:
\fBsimpleinit\fP(8) は、いろいろな方法でシグナルに応答する:
.TP
.B SIGHUP
.\"O The \fI/etc/inittab\fP configuration file will be read again.
設定ファイル \fI/etc/inittab\fP が再度読み込まれる。
.TP
.B SIGTSTP
.\"O This flips a toggle, which controls whether more processes will be
.\"O spawned.
プロセスを更に生成するかどうかを決めるトグルを切替える。
.TP
.B SIGINT
.\"O \fBsimpleinit\fP(8) will sync a few times, and try to start
.\"O \fBreboot\fP(8). Failing this, it will execute the system
.\"O \fBreboot\fP(2) call. Under Linux, it is possible to configure the
.\"O Ctrl-Alt-Del sequence to send a signal to the \fBinit\fP process
.\"O instead of rebooting the system (\fBsimpleinit\fP(8) does this by
.\"O default).
\fBsimpleinit\fP(8) は数回 sync を実行し、
\fBreboot\fP(8) を開始しようとする。
失敗した場合は、システムの \fBreboot\fP(2) コールを実行する。
Linux では、Ctrl-Alt-Del シーケンスが、
システムのリブートではなく、
\fBinit\fP プロセスにシグナルを送るように設定できる
(\fBsimpleinit\fP(8) はデフォルトでこのようにしている)。
.TP
.B SIGQUIT
.\"O The \fBreboot\fP(8) programme is executed in place of the
.\"O \fBsimpleinit\fP(8) programme. This allows \fBreboot\fP(8) to cleanly
.\"O remount (read-only) the root filesystem, even if the old inode for the
.\"O \fBinit\fP process was unlinked.
\fBsimpleinit\fP(8) プログラムの代わりに、
\fBreboot\fP(8) プログラムが実行される。
これにより、\fBinit\fP プロセスの古い i ノードが unlink されない場合でも、
\fBreboot\fP(8) はルートファイルシステムを
(読み込みのみで) 正しく再マウントできる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/inittab
.br
.I /etc/singleboot
.br
.I /etc/securesingle
.br
.I /etc/TZ
.br
.I /etc/passwd
.br
.I /etc/rc
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR inittab (5),
.BR ctrlaltdel (8)
.BR reboot (8),
.BR termcap (5),
.BR getty (8),
.BR agetty (8),
.BR shutdown (8),
.BR initctl (8)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O This program is called
.\"O .B simpleinit
.\"O to distinguish it from the System V compatible versions of init which are
.\"O starting to appear in the Linux community.
.\"O .B simpleinit
.\"O should be linked to, or made identical with,
.\"O .I init
.\"O for correct functionality.
このプログラムは、Linux コミュニティに出現し始めた
System V 互換版の init と区別するために、
.B simpleinit
と呼ばれる。
.B simpleinit
を正しく機能させるためには、
.I init
としてリンクするか、同一にするべきである。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Peter Orbaek (poe@daimi.aau.dk)
.br
.\"O Version 1.20, with patches for singleuser mode by Werner Almesberger
Version 1.20, Werner Almesberger による
シングルユーザーモードのパッチ。
.br
Richard Gooch <rgooch@atnf.csiro.au>
.br
.\"O Dependency support
依存性のサポート。
