.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)swapon.8	6.3 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"
.\" Sun Dec 27 12:31:30 1992: Modified by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Sat Mar  6 20:46:02 1993: Modified by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Sat Oct  9 09:35:30 1993: Converted to man format by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Sat Nov 27 20:22:42 1993: Updated authorship information, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Mon Sep 25 14:12:38 1995: Added -v and -p information
.\" Tue Apr 30 03:32:07 1996: Added some text from A. Koppenhoefer
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Aug 21 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu 7 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo 
.\" Updated & Modified Wed 14 Jun 2000 by NAKANO Takeo 
.\" Updated & Modified Wed May  5 13:08:03 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon May  9 03:47:14 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH SWAPON 8 "25 September 1995" "Linux 1.x" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O swapon, swapoff \- enable/disable devices and files for paging and swapping
.SH 名前
swapon, swapoff \- デバイスやファイルへのページング、スワッピングを有効 / 無効にする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /sbin/swapon [\-h \-V]
.br
.B /sbin/swapon \-a [\-v] [\-e]
.br
.BI "/sbin/swapon [\-v] [\-p " "priority" "] " " specialfile " ...
.br
.B /sbin/swapon [\-s]
.br
.B /sbin/swapoff [\-h \-V]
.br
.B /sbin/swapoff \-a
.br
.BI /sbin/swapoff " specialfile " ...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Swapon
.\"O is used to specify devices on which paging and swapping are to take place.
.B swapon
は、ページング (paging) やスワッピング (swapping) を行うデバイスを
指定するために用いられる。

.\"O The device or file used is given by the
.\"O .I specialfile
.\"O parameter. It may be of the form
.\"O .BI \-L " label"
.\"O or
.\"O .BI \-U " uuid"
.\"O to indicate a device by label or uuid.
使用されるデバイスまたはファイルは、
.I specialfile
引き数で指定される。
.BI \-L " label"
または
.BI \-U " uuid"
という形式で、ラベルまたは uuid でデバイスを指定することができる。

.\"O Calls to
.\"O .B swapon
.\"O normally occur in the system multi-user initialization file
.\"O .I /etc/rc
.\"O making all swap devices available, so that the paging and swapping activity
.\"O is interleaved across several devices and files.
.B swapon
の呼び出しは、通常システムをマルチユーザ用に初期化するファイル
.I /etc/rc
で行われる。普通はここですべてのスワップデバイスを有効にし、ページング
やスワッピングが複数のデバイスやファイルにまたがってインターリーブ 
(interleave) 動作できるようにする。

.\"O Normally, the first form is used:
通常は
.B swapon \-a
の書式で実行されることが多い。
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O All devices marked as ``swap'' swap devices in
.\"O .I /etc/fstab
.\"O are made available, except for those with the ``noauto'' option.
.\"O Devices that are already running as swap are silently skipped.
.I /etc/fstab
中で ``swap'' マークが付いているスワップデバイスをすべて有効にする。
ただし ``noauto'' オプションが付いているものは除く。
スワップとして既に動作しているデバイスは、黙ってスキップされる。
.TP 
.B \-e
.\"O When 
.\"O .B \-a 
.\"O is used with swapon, 
.\"O .B \-e 
.\"O makes swapon silently skip devices that do not exist.
swapon に
.B \-a 
オプションが指定されている場合、
.B \-e
オプションが指定されると、存在しないデバイスを黙ってスキップする。
.TP
.B \-h
.\"O Provide help
ヘルプメッセージを呼び出す。
.TP
.BI \-L " label"
.\"O Use the partition that has the specified
.\"O .IR label .
.\"O (For this, access to
.\"O .I /proc/partitions
.\"O is needed.)
指定された
.I label
のパーティションを使う。
(これを使用するためには
.I /proc/partitions
にアクセスする必要がある。)
.TP
.BI \-p " priority"
.\"O Specify priority for
.\"O .BR swapon .
.\"O This option is only available if
.\"O .B swapon
.\"O was compiled under and is used under a 1.3.2 or later kernel.
.B swapon
の優先度 (priority) を指定する。
このオプションは
.B swapon
が 1.3.2 以降のカーネル下でコンパイルされ、かつ使用される場合にのみ有効である。
.\"O .I priority
.\"O is a value between 0 and 32767. Higher numbers indicate higher
.\"O priority. See
.\"O .BR swapon (2)
.\"O for a full description of swap priorities. Add
.\"O .BI pri= value
.\"O to the option field of
.\"O .I /etc/fstab
.\"O for use with
.\"O .BR "swapon -a" .
.I priority
は 0 から 32767 の間の数値である。
数値が大きいほど優先度が高い。
スワップ優先度の詳細な説明に関しては
.BR swapon (2)
を見よ。
.I /etc/fstab
のオプションフィールドに
.BI pri= value
を記述すれば、
.B "swapon -a" 
の際にその値が用いられる。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Display swap usage summary by device. Equivalent to "cat /proc/swaps".
.\"O Not available before Linux 2.1.25.
スワップの使用状況をデバイス毎に表示する。
"cat /proc/swaps" と等しい。
Linux 2.1.25 より前では利用できない。
.TP
.BI \-U " uuid"
.\"O Use the partition that has the specified
.\"O .IR uuid .
.\"O (For this, access to
.\"O .I /proc/partitions
.\"O is needed.)
指定された
.I uuid
のパーティションを使う。
(これを使用するためには
.I /proc/partitions
にアクセスする必要がある。)
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Be verbose.
詳細に表示する。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Display version
バージョンを表示する。
.PP
.\"O .B Swapoff
.\"O disables swapping on the specified devices and files.
.\"O When the
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O flag is given, swapping is disabled on all known swap devices and files
.\"O (as found in
.\"O .I /proc/swaps
.\"O or
.\"O .IR /etc/fstab ).
.B swapoff
は指定したデバイスやファイルのスワッピングを無効にする。
.B \-a
フラグが指定された場合には、
.RI ( /proc/swaps
または
.I /etc/fstab
中の) すべての既知のスワップデバイスやファイルのスワッピングを無効にする。
.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.\"O You should not use
.\"O .B swapon
.\"O on a file with holes.
.\"O Swap over NFS may not work.
ホールのあるファイルに
.B swapon
を用いるべきではない。
NFS 上の swap は動作しないかもしれない。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR swapon (2),
.BR swapoff (2),
.BR fstab (5),
.BR init (8),
.BR mkswap (8),
.BR rc (8),
.BR mount (8)
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /dev/hd??
.\"O standard paging devices
標準のページングデバイス
.br
.I /dev/sd??
.\"O standard (SCSI) paging devices
標準のページングデバイス (SCSI)
.br
.I /etc/fstab
.\"O ascii filesystem description table
ファイルシステムを ascii で記述した表。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .B swapon
.\"O command appeared in 4.0BSD.
.B swapon
コマンドは 4.0BSD から導入された。
