.\" This file Copyright (C) 1992-1997 Michael K. Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com>
.\" This file Copyright (C) 1998      Andrea Arcangeli   <andrea@e-mind.com>
.\" It may be distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License,
.\" version 2, or any higher version.  See section COPYING of the GNU General
.\" Public license for conditions under which this file may be redistributed.
.\"
.\" Polished a bit - aeb
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Koso Fukuba
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 27 12:00:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Koso Fukuba <koso@ga2.so-net.or.jp>
.\" Updated Thu Mar 16 JST 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Thu May 10 JST 2005 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.TH tunelp 8 "7 May 1999" "tunelp" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
tunelp \- lp デバイスへのパラメータの設定
.SH 書式
\fBtunelp\fP \fI<device>\fP [-i \fI<IRQ>\fP | -t \fI<TIME>\fP | -c \fI<CHARS>\fP | -w \fI<WAIT>\fP | -a [on|off] | -o [on|off] | -C [on|off] | -r | -s | -q [on|off] | - T [on|off] ]
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBtunelp\fP sets several parameters for the /dev/lp\fI?\fP devices,
.\"O  for better
.\"O performance (or for any performance at all, if your printer won't work
.\"O without it...)  Without parameters, it tells whether the device is using
.\"O interrupts, and if so, which one.  With parameters, it sets the device
.\"O characteristics accordingly.  The parameters are as follows:
\fBtunelp\fP は、よりよいパフォーマンスを得るために(あるいは
そのままでは動作しないプリンターを動作させるために)、
/dev/lp\fI?\fP デバイスに各種パラメータを設定する。引数無
しで起動すると、デバイスが使用している割り込み番号などを出力する。
引数を指定すると、その引数に従ってデバイスの特性を設定する。
引数には、次のものが指定できる。
 
.TP
.BI \-i " <IRQ>"
.\"O specifies the IRQ to use for the parallel port in question.  If this
.\"O is set to something non-zero, \-t and \-c have no effect.  If your port
.\"O does not use interrupts, this option will make printing stop.
このオプションは、パラレルポートが使用する IRQ を指定する。
IRQ に 0 以外の値を指定すると、\-z および \-c オプションは無効になる。
ポートが IRQ を使用しない場合にこのオプションを指定すると、プリン
トされなくなる。
.\"O The command
.\"O .B tunelp -i 0
.\"O restores non-interrupt driven (polling) action, and your printer should
.\"O work again.  If your parallel port does support interrupts,
.\"O interrupt-driven printing should be somewhat faster and efficient, and
.\"O will probably be desirable.
この場合に
.\"nakano: 原文にはないですが
.B tunelp -i 0
とすると、再び割り込み無しの制御(ポーリング)を行うように設定され、プリンタ
が再度動作するようになる。一般に、パラレルポートが割り込みをサポートし
ている場合、割り込みを使った方が印刷動作は早く、効率良く、好ま
しい結果となる。

.\"O NOTE: This option will have no effect with kernel 2.1.131 or later since
.\"O the irq is handled by the parport driver. You can change
.\"O the parport irq for example via
.\"O .IR /proc/parport/*/irq .
カーネル 2.1.131 以降では IRQ は parport ドライバで扱われることになったため、
このオプションは無効となった。
.\"O Read
.\"O .I /usr/src/linux/Documentation/parport.txt
.\"O for more details on parport.
parport に関する詳細は
.I /usr/src/linux/Documentation/parport.txt
を参照すること。

.TP
.BI \-t " <TIME>"
.\"O is the amount of time in jiffies that the driver waits if the
.\"O printer doesn't take a character for the number of tries dictated by
.\"O the \-c parameter.  10 is the default value.  If you want fastest
.\"O possible printing, and don't care about system load, you may set this
.\"O to 0.  If you don't care how fast your printer goes, or are printing
.\"O text on a slow printer with a buffer, then 500 (5 seconds) should be
.\"O fine, and will give you very low system load.  This value generally
.\"O should be lower for printing graphics than text, by a factor of
.\"O approximately 10, for best performance.
プリンタが文字を受け取れなかったとき、
プリンタドライバーは \-c オプションで指定した回数までデータを再送するが、
それでも送信が成功しないと、ドライバはこのオプションで指定した時間だけ待つ。
時間は jiffy 単位で指定する。デフォルトでは、この値は 
10 である。できる限り早く印刷したい場合、システムの負荷を気にしないなら、
この値を 0 にしても構わない。プリンタへの印字速度を気にしないなら、
500 (5 秒)というのは妥当な値で、システムの負荷をとても低く押えるこ
とができる。グラフィクスの印刷をするときには、
テキスト印字のときに比べ、より小さな値 (およそ 10 分の 1 ぐらい)
にすると最大の性能が得られるだろう。

.TP
.BI \-c " <CHARS>"
.\"O is the number of times to try to output a character to the
.\"O printer before sleeping for \-t \fI<TIME>\fP.  It is the number of times around
.\"O a loop that tries to send a character to the printer.  120 appears to
.\"O be a good value for most printers in polling mode.  1000 is the default,
.\"O because there are some printers that become jerky otherwise, but you \fImust\fP
.\"O set this to `1' to handle the maximal CPU efficiency if you are using
.\"O interrupts. If you have a very fast printer, a value of 10 might make more
.\"O sense even if in polling mode.
.\"O If you have a \fIreally\fP old printer, you can increase this further.
このオプションは、\-t \fI<TIME>\fP で指定した時間待つ前に、
何回プリンターに出力を試みるかを指定する。
数字は、プリンターにデータを送る試行回数を示す。
ポーリングモードのプリンタには、120 程度が適当だろう。
デフォルトでは 1000 である
(こうしないと動きがぎくしゃくするプリンターがあるため)。
割り込みを使う場合は、 CPU の能力を最大限に生かすためには
この値を `1' に \fIしなければならない\fP。
とても高速なプリンターを持っているなら、
ポーリングモードで使う場合でも 10 で大丈夫だろう。
\fI本当に\fP古いプリンターの場合、この値をずっと増やす必要がある。

.\"O Setting \-t \fI<TIME>\fP to 0 is equivalent to setting \-c \fI<CHARS>\fP
.\"O to infinity.
\-t \fI<TIME>\fP を 0 にすることは、 \-c \fI<CHARS>\fP を無限大にするのと
同じ意味となる。

.TP
.BI \-w " <WAIT>"
.\"O is the number of usec we wait while playing with the strobe signal.
.\"O While most printers appear to be able to deal with an extremely
.\"O short strobe, some printers demand a longer one.  Increasing this from
.\"O the default 1 may make it possible to print with those printers.  This may also
.\"O make it possible to use longer cables. It's also possible to decrease this
.\"O value to 0 if your printer is fast enough or your machine is slow enough.
このオプションは、storobe シグナルを扱う時のウェイトを
マイクロ秒単位で指定する。
ほとんどのプリンタは非常に短いタイミングでも良いようだが、
プリンターによっては長いタイミングを必要とすることもある。
このため、デフォルトの 1 から徐々に増加させながら、そのプリンター
で印刷できるタイミングを求めることになる。このようなタイミングの調
整をすると、長いケーブルでも使えるようになる。
また、もしプリンターが十分早く、コンピューターが十分遅い場合は、
値を 0 にすることも可能である。

.TP
.B \-a [on|off]
.\"O This is whether to abort on printer error - the default
.\"O is not to.  If you are sitting at your computer, you probably want to
.\"O be able to see an error and fix it, and have the printer go on
.\"O printing.  On the other hand, if you aren't, you might rather that
.\"O your printer spooler find out that the printer isn't ready, quit
.\"O trying, and send you mail about it.  The choice is yours.
このオプションは、プリンターのエラー時にアボートするかどうかを指定する。
デフォルトではアボートしない。コンピュータの前に座っているなら、
エラーをみてそれを直し、プリンターに引続き出力させることを望むだろう。
一方、コンピュータから離れているときには、
プリンターがレディ状態でないことをプリンタースプーラが検出すると、
すぐに終了してそのことをメールで知らせてくれるほうが良いこともある。
好きな方を選択すること。

.TP
.B \-o [on|off]
.\"O This option is much like \-a.  It makes any
.\"O .I open()
.\"O of this device check to see that the device is on-line and not reporting any
.\"O out of paper or other errors.  This is the correct setting for most
.\"O versions of lpd.
このオプションは、\-a に良く似ている。デバイスを
.I open()
する時に、デバイスがオンライン状態で、
紙切れなどのエラーが通知されないかをチェックする。
これは、ほとんどのバージョンの lpd に対して正しい設定である。

.TP
.B \-C [on|off]
.\"O This option adds extra ("careful") error checking.  When
.\"O this option is on, the printer driver will ensure that the printer is
.\"O on-line and not reporting any out of paper or other errors before
.\"O sending data.  This is particularly useful for printers that normally
.\"O appear to accept data when turned off.
このオプションは、特別な ("注意深い") エラーチェックを追加する。
このオプションを on にすると、プリンタードライバーはプリンターが
オンライン状態かどうか確認し、紙切れなどのエラーを通知してこない
ことを確認してからデータを送信する。
この機能は、オフライン状態でもデータを受け付けるように
見えるプリンタを使っている場合には、特に有効である。

.\"O NOTE: This option is obsolete because it's the default in 2.1.131 kernel
.\"O or later.
注意: 2.1.131 以降のカーネルではこれがデフォルトとなったため、
このオプションは古いものである。

.TP
.B \-s
.\"O This option returns the current printer status, both as a 
.\"O decimal number from 0..255, and as a list of active flags.  When
.\"O this option is specified, \-q off, turning off the display of the
.\"O current IRQ, is implied.
このオプションは、現在のプリンターのステータスを返す。ステータスは、
0 から 255 までの 10 進数と、有効なフラグのリストである。このオプション
が指定されると、\-q off (現在の IRQ を表示しない) も指定されたものとし
て処理される。

.TP
.B \-T [on|off]
.\"O This option is obsolete. It was added in Linux 2.1.131,
.\"O and removed again in Linux 2.3.10. The below is for these
.\"O old kernels only.
このオプションは古いものである。これは Linux 2.1.131 で追加され、
Linux 2.3.10 で削除された。
以下の説明はこれらの古いカーネルのためのものである。

.\"O This option tells the lp driver to trust or not the IRQ.
このオプションは lp ドライバに IRQ を信頼させるかどうかを指定する。
.\"O This option makes sense only if you are using interrupts.
このオプションは割り込みを使う時にのみ意味がある。
.\"O If you tell the lp driver to trust the irq, then, when the lp driver will
.\"O get an irq, it will send the next pending character to the printer
.\"O unconditionally, even if the printer still claims to be BUSY.
lp ドライバに IRQ を信頼させると、 lp ドライバが IRQ を得た時、
たとえプリンターがまだ BUSY だとしていても、
送信待ちキャラクタを無条件にプリンターに送信する。
.\"O This is the only way to sleep on interrupt (and so the handle the irq
.\"O printing efficiently) at least on Epson Stylus Color Printers.
これは、少なくとも Epson Stylus Color Printers を使っている場合に
割り込みをスリープさせる(そして IRQ 印刷を効率的に行なう)
唯一の方法である。
.\"O The lp driver automagically detects if you could get improved
.\"O performance by setting this flag, and in such case it will warn you
.\"O with a kernel message.
lp ドライバはこのオプションを設定することによって性能が向上するかどうかを
自動的に検出し、向上する場合はカーネルメッセージで警告する。

.\"O NOTE: Trusting the irq is reported to corrupt the printing on some hardware,
.\"O you must try to know if your printer will work or not...
注意: IRQ を信頼させることによって印刷がおかしくなるハードウェアもあるという
報告もある。自分のプリンターで正しく動作するかどうかを必ず実験すること。

.TP
.B \-r
.\"O This option resets the port.  It requires a Linux kernel version of
.\"O 1.1.80 or later.
このオプションは、ポートをリセットする。このオプションを使用するには、
Linux の カーネルのバージョンが、1.1.80 以降である必要がある。

.TP
.B \-q [on|off]
.\"O This option sets printing the display of the current IRQ setting.
現在の IRQ の設定を表示するかどうかを設定する。


.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O \-o, \-C, and \-s all require a Linux kernel version of 1.1.76 or later.
\-o 、\-C および \-s オプションを使用するには、Linux のカーネルのバージョ
ンが、1.1.76 以降である必要がある。

.\"O \-C requires a Linux version prior to 2.1.131.
\-C オプションを使用するためには Linux バージョンが 2.1.131 より前である必要がある。

.\"O \-T requires a Linux version of 2.1.131 or later.
\-T オプションを使用するためには Linux バージョンが 2.1.131 以降である必要がある。

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O By some unfortunate coincidence the ioctl LPSTRICT of 2.0.36 has the same
.\"O number as the ioctl LPTRUSTIRQ introduced in 2.1.131. So, use of the \-T option
.\"O on a 2.0.36 kernel with an tunelp compiled under 2.1.131 or later may have
.\"O unexpected effects.
不幸な偶然により、2.0.36 での ioctl LPSTRICT は
2.1.131 で導入された ioctl LPTRUSTIRQ と同じ番号である。
従って、
2.1.131 以降でコンパイルされた tunelp を使って、
2.0.36 カーネル上で \-T オプションを使うと、予測できない結果となるだろう。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /dev/lp?
.br
.I /proc/parport/*/*
