.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Andries Brouwer
.\" This page is somewhat derived from a page that was
.\" (c) 1980, 1989, 1991 The Regents of the University of California
.\" and had been heavily modified by Rik Faith and myself.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998-2001 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jan 15 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Feb 18 2001 by  NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Jan 25 05:24:17 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Mar 10 05:03:44 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon May  9 04:01:21 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH UMOUNT 8 "26 July 1997" "Linux 2.0" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O umount \- unmount file systems
.SH 名前
umount \- ファイルシステムをアンマウントする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI "umount [\-hV]"
.LP
.BI "umount -a [\-dflnrv] [\-t " vfstype "] [\-O " options ]
.br
.BI "umount [\-dflnrv] " "dir " | " device " [...]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B umount
.\"O command detaches the file system(s) mentioned from the file hierarchy.
.\"O A file system is specified by giving the directory where it
.\"O has been mounted. Giving the special device on which the file system lives
.\"O may also work, but is obsolete, mainly because it will fail
.\"O in case this device was mounted on more than one directory.
.B umount
コマンドは、ファイルの階層構造から指定したファイルシステムを切り離す。
ファイルシステムの指定には、システムをマウントしたディレクトリを与える。
またファイルシステムの実体が存在するスペシャルデバイスを与えることもできるが、
このやり方は古く、デバイスが 2 つ以上のディレクトリに
マウントされている場合に失敗するだろう。
.PP
.\"O Note that a file system cannot be unmounted when it is `busy' -
.\"O for example, when there are open files on it, or when some process
.\"O has its working directory there, or when a swap file on it is in use.
.\"O The offending process could even be
.\"O .B umount
.\"O itself - it opens libc, and libc in its turn may open for example
.\"O locale files.
ファイルシステムが `busy' である時にはアンマウントは実行できない。
例えばそのファイルシステム上で、
ファイルがオープンされている
(あるいはスワップファイルが使用中である) 場合や、
あるプロセスのワーキングディレクトリがそこにある場合などが該当する。
この原因となるプロセスが
.B umount
自身の場合もありうる。
.B umount
は libc をオープンするし、
libc はまた多くのファイル (locale ファイルなど)
をオープンする可能性がある。
.\"O A lazy unmount avoids this problem.
lazy アンマウントにより、この問題は回避できる。
.PP
.\"O Options for the
.\"O .B umount
.\"O command:
.B umount
コマンドのオプションは以下の通り:
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Print version and exit.
バージョンを表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-h
.\"O Print help message and exit.
ヘルプメッセージを表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose mode.
詳細表示モード。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Unmount without writing in
.\"O .IR /etc/mtab .
アンマウントの際、
.I /etc/mtab
への書き込みを行わない。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O In case unmounting fails, try to remount read-only.
アンマウントが失敗した場合、リードオンリーでの再マウントを試みる。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O In case the unmounted device was a loop device, also
.\"O free this loop device.
アンマウント対象のデバイスが loop デバイスの場合、
loop デバイスの解放も行う。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Don't call the /sbin/umount.<filesystem> helper even if it exists. By default /sbin/umount.<filesystem> helper is called if one exists.
/sbin/umount.<filesystem> ヘルパがあっても、呼び出さない。
デフォルトでは /sbin/umount.<filesystem> ヘルパがある場合は、
それが呼び出される。
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O All of the file systems described in
.\"O .I /etc/mtab
.\"O are unmounted. (With
.\"O .B umount
.\"O version 2.7 and later: the
.\"O .I proc
.\"O filesystem is not unmounted.)
.I /etc/mtab
に記述されているすべてのファイルシステムをアンマウントする。
.RB ( umount
バージョン 2.7 以降では、
.I proc
ファイルシステムはアンマウントされない。)
.TP
.BI \-t " vfstype"
.\"O Indicate that the actions should only be taken on file systems of the
.\"O specified type.  More than one type may be specified in a comma separated
.\"O list.  The list of file system types can be prefixed with
.\"O .B no
.\"O to specify the file system types on which no action should be taken.
指定したタイプのファイルシステムにのみに対して動作を行う。
複数のファイルシステムをコンマで区切ったリストで指定することもできる。
ファイルシステムのリストに
.B no
を前置することもでき、
この場合は動作を行わないファイルシステムのタイプを指定したことになる。
.TP
.BI \-O " options"
.\"O Indicate that the actions should only be taken on file systems with
.\"O the specified options in
.\"O .IR /etc/fstab .
このオプションが
.I /etc/fstab
で指定されているファイルシステムについてのみ動作を行う。
.\"O More than one option type may be specified in a comma separated
.\"O list.  Each option can be prefixed with
.\"O .B no
.\"O to specify options for which no action should be taken.
コンマで区切ることで 2 つ以上のオプションを指定できる。
オプションに
.B no
を前置することもでき、
この場合は動作を行わないオプションを指定したことになる。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Force unmount (in case of an unreachable NFS system).
.\"O (Requires kernel 2.1.116 or later.)
強制的にアンマウントする (到達不可能な NFS システムの場合)。
(カーネル 2.1.116 以降である必要がある。)
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Lazy unmount. Detach the filesystem from the filesystem hierarchy now,
.\"O and cleanup all references to the filesystem as soon as it is not busy
.\"O anymore.
.\"O (Requires kernel 2.4.11 or later.)
lazy アンマウント。
現在のファイルシステムの階層構造から指定されたファイルシステムを切り離し、
ファイルシステムへの全ての参照が busy でなくなった時点ですぐに整理する。
(カーネル 2.4.11 以降である必要がある。)
.\"O 
.\"O .SH "THE LOOP DEVICE"
.SH "LOOP デバイス"
.\"O The
.\"O .B umount
.\"O command will free the loop device (if any) associated
.\"O with the mount, in case it finds the option `loop=...' in
.\"O .IR /etc/mtab ,
.\"O or when the \-d option was given.
.\"O Any pending loop devices can be freed using `losetup -d', see
.\"O .BR losetup (8).
.B umount
コマンドはマウントされている loop デバイスがあれば、
それを解放しようとする。
これが行われるのは、
.I /etc/mtab
中に `loop=..." というオプションが記述されている場合か、
オプションとして \-d が与えられた場合である。
マウントされていない
loop デバイスは `losetup -d' によって解放することができる。
詳細は
.BR losetup (8)
を見よ。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/mtab
.\"O table of mounted file systems
マウントされているファイルシステムの一覧
.\"O 
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR umount (2),
.BR mount (8),
.BR losetup (8)
.\"O 
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O A
.\"O .B umount
.\"O command appeared in Version 6 AT&T UNIX.
.B umount
コマンドは Version 6 の AT&T UNIX から導入された。
