.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, 
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Daniel Jacobowitz <dan@debian.org>
.\"
.\" Japanese version copyright (c) 2003
.\"    System Design and Research Institute Co.,Ltd. All rights reserved
.\" 
.\" Translated on Fri May  2 13:41:33 JST 2003 JST
.\"     by System Design and Research Institute Co.,Ltd <info@sdri.co.jp>
.Dd March 8, 2001
.Dt VSFTPD 8
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm vsftpd
.\"O .Nd Very Secure FTP Daemon
.Nd とても安全な FTP デーモン
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm vsftpd
.Op Ar 設定ファイル
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Nm vsftpd
.\"O is the Very Secure File Transfer Protocol Daemon. The server can be launched
.\"O via a
.\"O .Dq super-server
.\"O such as
.\"O .Xr inetd 8
.\"O or
.\"O .Xr xinetd 8 .
.Nm vsftpd
とは Very Secure File Transfer Protocol Daemon
(;とても安全なファイル転送プロトコルデーモン)のことである。
サーバーは
.Xr inetd 8
や
.Xr xinetd 8
のような
.Dq スーパーサーバー
から起動することができる。
.\"O Alternatively, vsftpd can be launched in standalone mode, in which case vsftpd
.\"O itself will listen on the network. This latter mode is easier to use, and
.\"O recommended. It is activated by setting
.\"O .Pa listen=YES
.\"O in
.\"O .Pa /etc/vsftpd.conf .
.\"O Direct execution of the
.\"O .Nm vsftpd
.\"O binary will then launch the FTP service ready for immediate client connections.
別の手段として、スタンドアロンモードで起動することもできる。
その場合には、vsftpd は自力でネットワークからの接続を待ち受ける。
後者のモードの方が簡単に利用でき、また望ましくもある。
このモードは、
.Pa /etc/vsftpd.conf
ファイルにおいて
.Pa listen=YES
と設定することで有効になる。
.Nm vsftpd
を直接実行した場合には、クライアントからの接続を受け付ける準備ができた状態で
FTP サービスを起動する。
.\"O .Sh OPTIONS
.\"O An optional
.\"O .Op configuration file
.\"O may be given on the command line.  The default configuration file is
.\"O .Pa /etc/vsftpd.conf .
.Op 設定ファイルは
コマンドラインで指定することができる。
デフォルトの設定ファイルは
.Pa /etc/vsftpd.conf
である。
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.\"O .Xr vsftpd.conf 5
.\"O 
.Xr vsftpd.conf 5
