.\" /***********************************************************
.\" 	Copyright 1988, 1989 by Carnegie Mellon University
.\" 
.\"                       All Rights Reserved
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its 
.\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, 
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
.\" both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in 
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of CMU not be
.\" used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.  
.\" 
.\" CMU DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" CMU BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR
.\" ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION,
.\" ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" ******************************************************************/
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Mar 14 16:41:04 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SNMPBULKGET 1 "23 May 2000"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O snmpbulkget - communicates with a network entity using SNMP BULK Requests.
snmpbulkget - SNMP BULK リクエストを使ってネットワークエントリと通信する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
snmpbulkget [common arguments] [objectID]...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O In addition to the common arguments,
.\"O .I snmpbulkget
.\"O takes one specific argument
一般的な引き数に加え、
.I snmpbulkget
は 1 つの特別な引き数をとる。
.IP "-B <nonrep> <rep>"
.\"O where
.\"O .I nonrep
.\"O specifies the number of input variables that should not repeat, and
.\"O .I rep
.\"O is the maximum number of repetitions of the rest of the variables.
.\"O The default is
.\"O .IR "-B 0 100" .
ここで、
.I nonrep
は繰り返しを行わない入力変数の数を指定する。
.I rep
は残りの変数の最大繰り返し回数である。
デフォルトは
.I "-B 0 100"
である。
.PP
.\"O For example
例えば
.PP
.I snmpbulkwalk -v 2c -B 1 10 zeus public system interfaces
.PP
.\"O will retrieve the variable system.sysDescr.0 (which is the lexicographically
.\"O next object to system) and the first 10 objects of the interfaces group.
では、変数 system.sysDescr.0 (辞書順で system の次のオブジェクト) と
インターフェースグループの最初の 10 個のオブジェクトを取得する。
.PP
.I system.sysDescr.0
= "SunOS zeus.net.cmu.edu 4.1.3_U1 1 sun4m"
.br
.I interfaces.ifNumber.0
= 2
.br
.I interfaces.ifTable.ifEntry.ifIndex.1
= 1
.br
.I interfaces.ifTable.ifEntry.ifIndex.2
= 2
.br
.I interfaces.ifTable.ifEntry.ifDescr.1
= "lo0"
.br
.\"O et cetera.
等々
.PP
.\"O If the network entity has an error processing the request packet, an error
.\"O packet will be returned and a message will be shown, helping to pinpoint why
.\"O the request was malformed.
リクエストパケットを処理するときにネットワークエントリにエラーがあった場合、
エラーパケットが返されて、メッセージが表示される。
これは、リクエストがなぜ機能しなかったかを正確に示す助けとなる。
.PP
.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.\"O As the name implies, snmpbulkget utilizes the SNMP GETBULK message,
.\"O which is not available in SNMP v1.
名前が暗に示しているように、
snmpbulkget は SNMP v1 では使用できない SNMP GETBULK メッセージを使う。
.PP
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
snmpcmd(1), variables(5).
