.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Mar 15 17:05:39 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SNMPGET 1 "01 Dec 2000"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O snmpconf - creates and modifies snmp configuration files
snmpconf - snmp の設定ファイルを作成・修正する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
snmpconf [options] [fileToCreate]
.\"O .IP "Start with:"
.IP "次の書式で開始する:"
snmpconf -g basic_setup
.\"O .IP "Or even just:"
.IP "または、単に次のようにする:"
snmpconf
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O snmpconf is a simple perl script that walks you through setting up a
.\"O configuration file step by step.  It should be fairly straight forward
.\"O to use.  Merely run it and answer its questions.
snmpconf は簡単な perl スクリプトで、
設定ファイルの設定を段階を踏んで簡単に行う。
かなり容易に使えるだろう。
実行して質問に答えるだけでよい。
.PP
.\"O In its default mode of operation, it prompts the user with menus
.\"O showing sections of the various configuration files it knows about.
.\"O When the user selects a section, a sub-menu is shown listing of the
.\"O descriptions of the tokens that can be created in that section.  When
.\"O a description is selected, the user is prompted with questions that
.\"O construct the configuration line in question.
デフォルトモードの操作では、
ユーザーにメニューを出し、このプログラムで操作できる
いろいろな設定ファイルのセクションを示す。
ユーザーがセクションを選択すると、サブメニューが表示され、
そのセクションで作成されるトークンの説明の一覧を示す。
説明が選択されると、ユーザーに質問のプロンプトを出し、
問題とされている設定行を作成する。
.PP
.\"O Finally, when the user quits the program any configuration files that
.\"O have been edited by the user are saved to the local directory, fully
.\"O commented.
最終的に、ユーザーがプログラムを終了すると、
ユーザーが編集した全ての設定ファイルは、
コメントを加えてローカルディレクトリに保存される。
.PP
.\"O A particularly useful option is the -g switch, which walks a user
.\"O through a specific set of configuration questions.  Run
.\"O .B "snmpconf -g basic_setup"
.\"O for an example.
特に便利なオプションは、
ユーザーに対して、指定した設定の質問を行う -g スイッチである。
例えば、
.B "snmpconf -g basic_setup"
を実行せよ。
.\"O .SH "OPTIONS"
.SH オプション
.IP -f
.\"O Force overwriting existing files in the current directory without
.\"O prompting the user if this is a desired thing to do.
もし望むならば、ユーザーにプロンプトを出さずに、
カレントディレクトリに既にあるファイルを強制的に上書きする。
.IP -i
.\"O When finished, install the files into the location where the global
.\"O system commands expect to find them.
終了したときに、グローバルシステムコマンドが探す場所に
ファイルをインストールする。
.IP -p
.\"O When finished, install the files into the users home directory's .snmp
.\"O subdirectory (where the applications will also search for
.\"O configuration files).
終了したときに、ユーザーのホームディレクトリにある
\&.snmp サブディレクトリにファイルをインストールする。
.IP "-I DIRECTORY"
.\"O When finished, install the files into the directory DIRECTORY.
終了したときに、ディレクトリ DIRECTORY にファイルをインストールする。
.IP -a
.\"O Don't ask any questions.  Simply read in the various known
.\"O configuration files and write them back out again.  This has the
.\"O effect of "auto-commenting" the configuration files for you.  See
.\"O the
.\"O .I "neat tricks"
.\"O section below.
質問をしない。
既知のいろいろな設定ファイルを読み込み、再び書き出すだけである。
設定ファイルに「自動的コメント」を行うという効果がある。
下記の
.I 「さらなる方法」
のセクションを参照すること。
.IP "-r all|none"
.\"O Read in either all or none of the found configuration files.  Normally
.\"O snmpconf prompts you for which files you wish to read in.  Reading in
.\"O these configuration files will merge these files with the results of
.\"O the questions that it asks of you.
見つかった設定ファイルを全て読み込む、または全く読み込まない。
通常 snmpconf は、どのファイルを読み込みたいかを尋ねる。
これらの設定ファイルを読み込むと、尋ねられた質問の結果とマージされる。
.IP "-R file,..."
.\"O Read in a specific list of configuration files.
指定した設定ファイルの一覧を読み込む。
.IP "-g groupname"
.\"O Groups of configuration entries can be created that can be used to
.\"O walk a user through a series of questions to create an initial
.\"O configuration file.  There are no menus to navigate, just a list of
.\"O questions.  Run
.\"O .B "snmpconf -g basic_setup"
.\"O for a good example.
設定エントリのグループが作成される。
このグループは、初期設定ファイルを作成するために、
ユーザーに一連の質問を行うために使われる。
方針を指示するメニューはなく、質問の一覧だけがある。
良い例として
.B "snmpconf -g basic_setup"
を実行してみよ。
.IP -G
.\"O List all the known groups
全ての既知の (設定エントリ) グループを一覧する。
.IP "-c configdir"
.\"O snmpconf uses a directory of configuration information to learn about
.\"O the files and questions that it should be asking.  This option tells
.\"O snmpconf to use a different location for configuring itself.
snmpconf は、尋ねるべき質問とそのファイルを知るために、
設定情報のあるディレクトリを使う。
このオプションにより、snmpconf はそれ自身を設定するために
別の (ここで指定された) ディレクトリを使う。
.IP -q
.\"O Run slightly more quietly.  Since this is an interactive program, I
.\"O don't recommend this option since it only removes information from the
.\"O output that is designed to help you.
いくらか出力を抑えて実行する。
これは対話的なプログラムなので、このオプションは推奨しない。
なぜなら、このオプションは助けになるように設計された
出力からの情報を削除してしまうだけだからである。
.IP -d
.\"O Turn on *lots* of debugging output.
「たくさんの」デバッグ出力を有効にする。
.IP -D
.\"O Add even more debugging output in the form of perl variable dumps.
より多くのデバッグ出力を perl 変数ダンプの形式で追加する。
.IP
.\"O .SH "NEAT TRICKS"
.SH さらなる方法
.IP "snmpconf -g basic_setup"
.\"O Have I mentioned this command enough yet?  It's designed to walk
.\"O someone through an initial setup for the snmpd demon.  Really, you
.\"O should try it.
このコマンドに付いて既に十分に述べただろうか?
これは snmpd デーモンの初期設定を大まかにするために設計されている。
実際に実行してみるべきである。
.IP "snmpconf -R /usr/local/snmp/snmpd.conf -a -f snmpd.conf"
.\"O Automatically reads in a snmpd.conf file (for example) and adds
.\"O comments to them describing what each token does.  Try it.  It's cool.
(例えば) snmpd.conf ファイルを読み込んで、
各トークンが行うことを説明したコメントを追加する。
試してみよ。素晴らしい。
.\"O .SH "NOTES"
.SH 注意
.\"O snmpconf is actually a very generic utility that could be easily
.\"O configured to help construct just about any kind of configuration
.\"O file.  Its default configuration set of files are snmp based.
snmpconf はとても包括的なユーティリティで、
全ての設定ファイルの作成を助けて、簡単に設定できるだろう。
ファイルのデフォルトの設定セットは snmp ベースのものである。
