.\" Copyright (c) 1997--1999 Martin Mares <mj@atrey.karlin.mff.cuni.cz>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, 
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese version copyright (c) 1999 Tatsuo SEKINE <tsekine@isoternet.org>
.\"	all rights reserved
.\" 
.\" Translated on Fri Dec 24 13:57:00 JST 1999
.\"	by Tatsuo SEKINE <tsekine@isoternet.org>
.\" Modified on Thu Feb 10 15:40:00 JST 1999
.\"     by Takeyasu Wakabayashi <twakaba@eco.toyama-u.ac.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified on Tue Mar 13 01:39:48 JST 2001
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified on Sun Mar  7 23:08:25 JST 2004
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	direct hardware access	ダイレクトハードウェアアクセス
.\"WORD:	PCI configuration space	PCI 設定空間
.\"WORD:	machine readable form	機械可読形式
.\"WORD:	vendor			ベンダ
.\"WORD:	bus mapping mode	バスマッピングモード
.\"WORD:	parse			パース
.\"WORD:	verbose			詳細な
.\"WORD:	modulo			モジュール関連の
.\"
.TH lspci 8 "04 January 2003" "pciutils-2.1.11" "Linux PCI Utilities"
.IX lspci
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O lspci \- list all PCI devices
lspci \- 全ての PCI デバイスを表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B lspci
.RB [ options ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B lspci
.\"O is a utility for displaying information about all PCI buses in the system and
.\"O all devices connected to them.
.B lspci
はシステムの全ての PCI バスと、そこにつながっている全てのデバイスに関する
情報を表示するユーティリティである。

.\"O If you are going to report bugs in PCI device drivers or in
.\"O .I lspci
.\"O itself, please include output of "lspci -vvx".
もし、PCI デバイスのドライバ、または
.I lspci
自身についてのバグを報告するなら、
"lspci -vvx" の出力を含めるようにして欲しい。
.\"O
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -v
.\"O Tells
.\"O .I lspci
.\"O to be verbose and display detailed information about all devices.
.I lspci
の出力を詳細にして、全てのデバイスに関して詳しい情報を表示する。
.TP
.B -vv
.\"O Tells
.\"O .I lspci
.\"O to be very verbose and display even more information (actually everything the
.\"O PCI device is able to tell). The exact meaning of these data is not explained
.\"O in this manual page, if you want to know more, consult
.\"O .B /usr/include/linux/pci.h
.\"O or the PCI specs.
.I lspci
の出力をより詳細にし、さらに多くの情報
(PCI デバイスが渡す情報の本当に全て) を表示する。
これらのデータの正確な意味は、このマニュアルページでは説明しない。
詳しく知りたければ
.B /usr/include/pci.h
または、PCIの規格を参照せよ。
.TP
.B -n
.\"O Show PCI vendor and device codes as numbers instead of looking them up in the
.\"O PCI ID database.
PCI ID データベースを調べる代わりに、
PCI ベンダとデバイスコードを数字で表示する。
.TP
.B -x
.\"O Show hexadecimal dump of first 64 bytes of the PCI configuration space (the standard
.\"O header). Useful for debugging of drivers and
.\"O .I lspci
.\"O itself.
(標準のヘッダである) PCI 設定空間 (PCI configuration space) の
先頭 64 バイトの 16 進ダンプを表示する。
ドライバまたは
.I lspci
自身のデバッグに有用である。
.TP
.B -xxx
.\"O Show hexadecimal dump of whole PCI configuration space. Available only for root
.\"O as several PCI devices
.\"O .B crash
.\"O when you try to read undefined portions of the config space (this behaviour probably
.\"O doesn't violate the PCI standard, but it's at least very stupid).
PCI 設定空間の全ての 16 進ダンプを表示する。
これは root のみが利用できる。
何故ならば、幾つかの PCI デバイスは
設定空間の未定義部分を読み込もうとすると
.B クラッシュ
するからである
(この動作は多分 PCI 標準には違反しないが、少なくとも恐ろしく間抜けではある)。
.TP
.B -b
.\"O Bus-centric view. Show all IRQ numbers and addresses as seen by the cards on the
.\"O PCI bus instead of as seen by the kernel.
バスから見た表示をする。
カーネルから見える IRQ とアドレスの代わりに、
カードと PCI バスから見える IRQ とアドレスを全て表示する。
.TP
.B -t
.\"O Show a tree-like diagram containing all buses, bridges, devices and connections
.\"O between them.
全てのバス・ブリッジ・デバイスと、それらの間の接続を含む図を木構造で表示する。
.TP
.B -s [[<bus>]:][<slot>][.[<func>]]
.\"O Show only devices in specified bus, slot and function. Each component of the device
.\"O address can be omitted or set as "*" meaning "any value". All numbers are
.\"O hexadecimal.  E.g., "0:" means all devices on bus 0, "0" means all functions of device 0
.\"O on any bus, "0.3" selects third function of device 0 on all buses and ".4" shows only
.\"O fourth function of each device.
指定されたバス (bus)・スロット (slot)・機能 (func) のデバイスのみを表示する。
デバイスの指定の各要素は省略可能で、また "*" は「任意の値」を意味する。
全ての数値は 16 進数で入力する。 
例えば、"0:" はバス 0 の全てのデバイスを、
"0" は全てのバスのデバイス 0 で全ての機能を意味し、
"0.3" は全てのバスのデバイス 0 で 3 番目の機能を選択し、
".4" は各デバイスの 4 番目の機能を表示する。
.TP
.B -d [<vendor>]:[<device>]
.\"O Show only devices with specified vendor and device ID. Both ID's are given in
.\"O hexadecimal and may be omitted or given as "*" meaning "any value".
指定されたベンダ ID とデバイス ID を持つデバイスのみを表示する。
両 ID とも 16 進で与えられる。省略も可能である。
また、「任意の値」を意味する "*" を指定することも可能である。
.TP
.B -i <file>
.\"O Use
.\"O .B
.\"O <file>
.\"O as PCI ID database instead of /usr/share/pci.ids.
.B <file>
を /usr/share/pci.ids の代わりの PCI ID データベースとして用いる。
.TP
.B -p <dir>
.\"O Use
.\"O .B <dir>
.\"O as directory containing PCI bus information instead of /proc/bus/pci.
.B <dir>
を /proc/bus/pci の代わりに、PCI バスの情報を持つディレクトリとして用いる。
.TP
.B -m
.\"O Dump PCI device data in machine readable form (both normal and verbose format supported)
.\"O for easy parsing by scripts.
スクリプトで簡単にパースできるように、
機械可読形式で PCI デバイスのデータをダンプする
(通常のフォーマットと、詳細なフォーマットとの両方がサポートされている)。
.TP
.B -M
.\"O Invoke bus mapping mode which scans the bus extensively to find all devices including
.\"O those behind misconfigured bridges etc. Please note that this is intended only for
.\"O debugging and as it can crash the machine (only in case of buggy devices, but
.\"O unfortunately these happen to exist), it's available only to root. Also using
.\"O -M on PCI access methods which don't directly touch the hardware has no
.\"O sense since the results are (modulo bugs in lspci) identical to normal listing
.\"O modes.
バスマッピングモード (bus mapping mode) で起動する。
これは設定に失敗したブリッジの後にあるものを含めて、
全てのデバイスを見つけるために広範囲にスキャンする。
これはデバッグのみを意図している事に注意すること。
これはマシンをクラッシュさせるかもしれない
(バグのあるデバイスの場合のみではあるが、不幸にもそれは存在する) ので、
root のみが使える。
ハードウェアに直接は触らないような PCI のアクセス方法において、
-M を使う事は意味がない。
何故ならば、(lspci のモジュール関連バグを除けば) 実行結果は
通常の表示モードと同じだからである。
.TP
.B --version
.\"O Shows 
.\"O .I lspci
.\"O version. This option should be used standalone.
.I lspci
のバージョンを表示する。このオプションは、単独で使用すべきである。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH PCILIB OPTIONS
.SH PCILIB のオプション
.\"O The PCI utilities use PCILIB (a portable library providing platform-independent
.\"O functions for PCI configuration space access) to talk to the PCI cards. The following
.\"O options control parameters of the library, especially what access method it uses.
PCI utilities は PCI カードとやりとりするために
PCILIB (PCI 設定空間にアクセスするための機能を提供する、
プラットフォームに依存せず移植性の高いライブラリ) を用いている。
以下のオプションはライブラリのパラメータ、
特にどのアクセス方法が使われるか、を制御する。
.\"O By default, PCILIB uses the first available access method and displays no debugging
.\"O messages. Each switch is accompanied by a list of hardware/software configurations
.\"O it's supported in.
デフォルトでは PCILIB はアクセス方法で可能なもののうち最初のものを用い、
何らデバッグ情報を表示しない。
各々のスイッチには、そのスイッチに対応している
ハードウェア/ソフトウェアの設定リストが付随する。
.\"O 
.TP
.B -P <dir>
.\"O Force use of Linux /proc/bus/pci style configuration access, using
.\"O .B <dir>
.\"O instead of /proc/bus/pci. (Linux 2.1 or newer only)
/proc/bus/pci の代わりに、
.B <dir>
を使った Linux /proc/bus/pci スタイルの設定でアクセスを行わせる。
(Linux 2.1 またはそれ以降でのみ有効)
.TP
.B -H1
.\"O Use direct hardware access via Intel configuration mechanism 1. (i386 and compatible only)
インテル設定メカニズム 1 (Intel configuration mechanism 1) を使って、
ハードウェアに直接アクセスする。(i386 及びその互換でのみ有効)
.TP
.B -H2
.\"O Use direct hardware access via Intel configuration mechanism 2. Warning: This method
.\"O is able to address only first 16 devices on any bus and it seems to be very
.\"O unrealiable in many cases. (i386 and compatible only)
インテル設定メカニズム 2 (Intel configuration mechanism 2) を使って、
ハードウェアに直接アクセスする。
警告: この方法では各バスの最初の 16 デバイスしか扱えず、
多くの場合殆んど信頼できない。(i386 及びその互換でのみ有効)
.TP
.B -S
.\"O Use PCI access syscalls. (Linux on Alpha and UltraSparc only)
PCI アクセスシステムコールを使う。(Alpha/Linux と UltraSparc でのみ有効)
.TP
.B -F <file>
.\"O Extract all information from given file containing output of lspci -x. This is very
.\"O useful for analysis of user-supplied bug reports, because you can display the
.\"O hardware configuration in any way you want without disturbing the user with
.\"O requests for more dumps. (All systems)
lspci -x の実行結果を格納しているファイルから、全ての情報を取り出す。
ユーザーから提供されたバグ報告の解析に役立つ。
なぜならば、さらなるダンプをユーザーに要求する事なく、
ハードウェアの設定をあなたの好きなやり方で表示する事ができる。
(全てのシステムで有効)
.TP
.B -G
.\"O Increase debug level of the library. (All systems)
ライブラリのデバッグレベルを上げる。(全てのシステムで有効)
.\"O 
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.B /usr/share/pci.ids
.\"O A list of all known PCI ID's (vendors, devices, classes and subclasses).
既知の PCI ID (ベンダ・デバイス・クラス・サブクラス) のリスト。
.TP
.B /proc/bus/pci
.\"O An interface to PCI bus configuration space provided by the post-2.1.82 Linux
.\"O kernels. Contains per-bus subdirectories with per-card config space files and a
.\"O .I devices
.\"O file containing a list of all PCI devices.
2.1.82 以降の Linux カーネルで提供される
PCI バス設定空間へのインタフェース。
バスごとのディレクトリには、カードごとの設定空間を表すファイルがあり、
さらに
.I devices
ファイルは全ての PCI デバイスのリストを表す。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR setpci (8), update-pciids (8)
.BR setpci (8), 
.BR update-pciids (8)
.\"O 
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O The Linux PCI Utilities are maintained by Martin Mares <mj@ucw.cz>.
Linux PCI Utilities は Martin Mares <mj@ucw.cz> に
よって保守されている。
