.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"WORD:	compression ratio		圧縮率
.\"WORD:	compression factor		圧縮比
.\"WORD:	cluster				クラスタ
.\"WORD:	entry				エントリー
.\"
.TH E2RATIO 1  "July 97" "E2Compr Utilities"

.\".SH NAME
.\"e2ratio \- display the compression ratio on a Linux second
.\" extended file system
.SH 名前
e2ratio \- Linux 2nd拡張ファイルシステム上のファイルの圧縮率の表示

.\".SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B e2ratio
[
.B \-abslf
]
[
files ...
]

.\".SH DESCRIPTION
.\".B e2ratio
.\"is similar to
.\".B du
.\"but displays the compression ratio for the given files instead of the
.\"number of blocks used.
.SH 説明
.B e2ratio
は、
.B du
に類似ている。しかし、ファイルが使用しているブロック数ではなく、
圧縮率を表示する。

.LP
.\".B e2ratio 
.\"recursively descends into directories.
.B e2ratio
は、ディレクトリを再帰的にたどって、表示を行う。

.LP
.\"The first field is the number of blocks the file would use if uncompressed.
.\"The second file is the number of blocks the file actually uses (same as
.\"the first field if the file is not compressed).
.\"The third field is the compression ratio, i.e., 
.\"the number of block actually used expressed as a percentage of the original size.
.\"The fourth field is the name of the file.
第1フィールドは、ファイルが圧縮されていなかったとしたら使用していたであろう、
ブロック数である。
第2フィールドは、ファイルが実際に使用している、ブロック数である。(ファイルが
圧縮されていなければ、この値は第1フィールドのものと同じである。)
第3フィールドは、圧縮率(つまり、ファイルが実際に占めているブロックの、オリジナルのサイズに対する、百分率)である。
第4フィールドは、ファイル名である。

.LP
.\"With the
.\".I -b
.\"option, only the last two fields are displayed.
.I -b
オプションを用いれば、第3、第4フィールドのみを表示できる。

.\".SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション

.TP
.I -a
.\"Generate an entry for each file.
.\"The default behaviour is to generate an entry only for directories.
個々のファイルに対してエントリー(entry)を作成する。
ディレクトリ毎にエントリー(entry)を作成するのが、デフォルトの振る舞いである。

.TP
.I -b
.\"Only show the last two fields (i.e. ratio and file name).
第3、第4フィールドのみを表示できる。(つまり、圧縮率とファイル名を表示する。)

.TP
.I -s
.\"Only display the grand total for each of the specified files.
指定のファイルに対する値の総計のみ表示する。

.TP
.I -f
.\"Display the compression factor instead of the compression ratio, i.e., the
.\"original size of the file divided by the actual size.
圧縮率の代わりに、圧縮比を表示する。（つまり、オリジナルのサイズを、実際のサイズで割った値が、表示される。)

.TP
.I -l
.\"Generate the usual four-field entries.  (Over-rides `-b'.)
すべてのフィールドを含むエントリー(entry)を作成する。(`-b'オプションを上書きする)

.\".SH BUGS
.\"The ratio is computed rather than stored in the inode.
.\"This is expensive because it requires to read every cluster head in the file.
.SH バグ
圧縮率は、inodeに格納せずに、計算している。このやり方は、ファイル中のクラスタ
(cluster)の先頭部をすべて読む必要があるため、処理が重い。

.LP
.\"Several files may appear more than once if they are hard links.
.\"The total ratio is probably false in this case, as well as the
.\" total number of blocks reported.
ハードリンクされたファイルは、二回以上処理されることがある。
このような場合、全体の圧縮率の表示はおそらく間違った値となる。ブロック数についても、同様である。

.\".SH AUTHOR
.\".B e2ratio
.\"has been quickly written by Antoine de Maricourt <dumesnil@etca.fr> as part
.\"of the e2compr patch.
.\"It could be improved.
.SH 著者
.B e2ratio
は、e2compr パッチの一部として、Antoine de Maricourt <dumesnil@etca.fr>
により、手早く作られた。改善の余地がある。

.\".SH AVAILABILITY
.\".B e2ratio
.\"is included in the e2compr distribution.
.SH 入手方法
.B e2ratio
は、e2compr パッケージに含まれている。

.\".SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR chattr (1)
,
.BR lsattr (1)
,
.BR e2compress (1)




















