.\"
.\" This is a ja translation of man page in ld.so-1.9.9 archive
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat May 23 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Sep 14 1999 by NAKANO Takeo 
.\"
.\"WORD:	verbose mode	饒舌モード
.\"WORD:	quiet mode	メッセージ抑制モード
.\"
.TH ldconfig 8 "14 March 1998"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ldconfig \- determine run-time link bindings
.SH 名前
ldconfig \- 実行時リンクの結合関係を決定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
ldconfig
.RB [ \-DvqnNX ]
.RB [ \-f\ conf ]
.RB [ \-C\ cache ]
.RB [ \-r\ root ]
.IR directory \ ...
.PD 0
.PP
.PD
ldconfig
.B \-l
.RB [ \-Dvq ]
.IR library \ ...
.PD 0
.PP
.PD
ldconfig
.B \-p
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ldconfig
.\"O creates the necessary links and cache (for use by the run-time linker,
.\"O .IR ld.so )
.\"O to the most recent shared libraries found in the directories specified
.\"O on the command line, in the file
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.conf ,
.\"O and in the trusted directories
.\"O .RI ( /usr/lib
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /lib ).
.B ldcofig
は最新の共有ライブラリに対して必要なリンクを作成したり、
ライブラリをキャッシュしたりする
(キャッシュは実行時リンカ
.I ld.so
が用いる)。
ライブラリは、コマンドラインや
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
ファイルで指定されたディレクトリや、共有ライブラリが
通常置かれるディレクトリ
.RI ( /usr/lib " と " /lib )
から検索される。
.\"O .B ldconfig
.\"O checks the header and file names of the libraries it encounters when
.\"O determining which versions should have their links updated.
.\"O .B ldconfig
.\"O ignores symbolic links when scanning for libraries. 
.B ldconfig
は処理するライブラリのヘッダ部分とファイル名をチェックし、
どのバージョンに対してリンクを更新すべきかを判断する。
.B ldconfig
はライブラリを検索するときシンボリックリンクを無視する。
.PP
.\"O .B ldconfig
.\"O will attempt to deduce the type of ELF libs (ie. libc5 or libc6/glibc)
.\"O based on what C libs if any the library was linked against, therefore when
.\"O making dynamic libraries, it is wise to explicitly link against libc (use -lc).
.B ldconfig
は ELF ライブラリの種類 (libc5 か libc6/glibc か) を判断するとき、
そのライブラリがリンクしている C ライブラリを参考にする。
したがってダイナミックライブラリを作成するときには、
libc に対するリンクを (\-lc をつかって) 明示しておくと良い。
.PP
.\"O Some existing libs do not contain enough information to allow the deduction of 
.\"O their type, therefore the 
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.conf 
.\"O file format allows the specification of an expected type.  This is 
.\"O .B only
.\"O used for those ELF libs which we can not work out. The format 
.\"O is like this "dirname=TYPE", where type can be libc4, libc5 or libc6.
.\"O (This syntax also works on the command line).  Spaces are 
.\"O .B not 
.\"O allowed.  Also see the 
.\"O .B -p 
.\"O option.
すでに存在しているライブラリの中には、種類を区別するために充分な
情報が含まれていないものもある。このため
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
ファイルでライブラリの形式を指定することができるようになっている。
これは区別不能な ELF ライブラリ\fBだけ\fPに用いるものである。
フォーマットは "dirname=TYPE" のようにする。ここで TYPE は
libc4, libc5, libc6 のいずれかである
(この書式はコマンドラインでも使える)。\fBスペースを入れてはならない\fP。
.B \-p
オプションも見ておくこと。
.PP 
.\"O Directory names containing an
.\"O .B = are no longer legal
.\"O unless they also have an expected type specifier.
名前に
.B  =
が含まれているディレクトリは、形式指定をしない限り
用いることができなくなった。
.PP
.\"O .B ldconfig
.\"O should normally be run by the super-user as it may require write 
.\"O permission on some root owned directories and files.
.\"O It is normally run automatically at bootup, from /etc/rc, or manually
.\"O whenever new DLL's are installed.
.B ldconfig
は通常スーパーユーザー権限で実行しなければならない。
root が所有しているディレクトリやファイルへの書き込み権限が
必要になるからである。
.B ldconfig
は通常、起動時に /etc/rc スクリプトから自動的に実行される。ただし新し
い DLL をインストールしたときには必ず手動で実行しなければならない。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-D
.\"O Debug mode.
.\"O Implies
.\"O .B \-N
.\"O and
.\"O .BR \-X .
デバッグモード。
.B \-N
と
.B \-X
が暗黙のうちに指定される。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose mode.
.\"O Print current version number, the name of each directory as it
.\"O is scanned and any links that are created.
.\"O Overrides quiet mode.
饒舌モード。現在のバージョン番号を表示する。またそれぞれのディレクト
リをスキャンし、新しいリンクを生成するたびに、その内容を表示する。
メッセージ抑制モードを上書きする。
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Quiet mode.
.\"O Don't print warnings.
メッセージ抑制モード。
警告を表示しない。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Only process directories specified on the command line.
.\"O Don't process the trusted directories
.\"O .RI ( /usr/lib
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /lib )
.\"O nor those specified in
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.conf .
.\"O Implies
.\"O .BR \-N .
コマンドラインで指定されたディレクトリのみを処理する。通常共有ライブラリが
置かれるディレクトリ
.RI ( /usr/lib " と " /lib )
や
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
で指定されたディレクトリは処理しない。暗黙のうちに
.B \-N
が指定される。
.TP
.B \-N
.\"O Don't rebuild the cache.
.\"O Unless
.\"O .B \-X
.\"O is also specified, links are still updated.
キャッシュを再構成しない。同時に
.B \-X
が同時に指定されなければ、リンクのほうは更新される。
.TP
.B \-X
.\"O Don't update links.
.\"O Unless
.\"O .B \-N
.\"O is also specified, the cache is still rebuilt.
リンクを更新しない。
.B \-N
が同時に指定されなければ、キャッシュのほうは再構成される。
.TP
.B \-f conf
.\"O Use
.\"O .B conf
.\"O instead of
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.conf .
.B conf
を
.I /etc/ld.so.conf
の代わりに用いる。
.TP
.B \-C cache
.\"O Use
.\"O .B cache
.\"O instead of
.\"O .IR /etc/ld.so.cache .
.B cache
を
.I /etc/ld.so.cache
の代わりに用いる。
.TP
.B \-r root
.\"O Change to and use
.\"O .B root
.\"O as the root directory.
.B root
にカレントディレクトリを変更し、ここをルートディレクトリとして用いる。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Library mode.
.\"O Manually link individual libraries.
.\"O Intended for use by experts only.
ライブラリモード。それぞれのライブラリを手動でリンクする。
熟練者のみが用いるべきである。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Print the lists of directories and candidate libraries stored in
.\"O the current cache.
現在のキャッシュに保存されているディレクトリのリストと、
ライブラリの候補を表示する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O In the bootup file
.\"O .I /etc/rc
.\"O having the line
起動ファイル
.I /etc/rc
に以下のような行
.RS

/sbin/ldconfig -v

.RE
.\"O will set up the correct links for the shared binaries and rebuild
.\"O the cache.
があると、共有バイナリへの正しいリンクが生成され、キャッシュが再構成さ
れる。
.TP
.\"O On the command line
コマンドラインから
.RS

# /sbin/ldconfig -n /lib

.RE
.\"O as root after the installation of a new DLL, will properly update the
.\"O shared library symbolic links in /lib.
を root 権限で実行すると、 /lib に新しくインストールされた DLL に対し
て、正しいシンボリックリンクを生成する。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B /lib/ld.so
.\"O execution time linker/loader
実行時リンカ/ローダー。
.TP 20
.B /etc/ld.so.conf
.\"O File containing a list of colon, space, tab, newline, or comma spearated
.\"O directories in which to search for libraries.
コロン・スペース・タブ・改行・コンマで区切られたディレクトリのリスト。
それぞれのディレクトリでライブラリが検索される。
.TP 20
.B /etc/ld.so.cache
.\"O File containing an ordered list of libraries found in the directories
.\"O specified in
.\"O .BR /etc/ld.so.conf .
.B /etc/ld.so.conf
で指定されたディレクトリで見つかったライブラリの順序付きリスト。
.TP
.B lib*.so.version
.\"O shared libraries
共有ライブラリ。
.PD
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR ldd (1),
.\"O .BR ld.so (8).
.BR ld.so (8)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.LP
.\"O .BR ldconfig 's
.\"O functionality, in conjunction with
.\"O .BR ld.so ,
.\"O is only available for executables compiled using libc version 4.4.3 or greater.
.B ldconfig
の
.B ld.so
に関連した機能は、 libc バージョン 4.4.3 以上でコンパイルされた実行ファ
イルでしか利用できない。
.PP
.\"O .BR ldconfig ,
.\"O being a user process, must be run manually and has no means of dynamically
.\"O determining and relinking shared libraries for use by
.\"O .BR ld.so
.\"O when a new DLL is installed.
.B ldconfig
はユーザープロセスなので、手動で実行しなければならない。また新たな DLL 
がインストールされたときには、そのライブラリを
.B ld.so
が利用できるように共有ライブラリの再調整やリンクの
張りかえをしなければならないが、これを動的に行う手段は存在しない。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.\"O David Engel and Mitch D'Souza.
.SH 著者
David Engel と Mitch D'Souza。
