.\" senda ここから
.\" senda ここまで
.\"	dhcpd.leases.5
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996-2001 Internet Software Consortium.
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The Internet Software Consortium nor the names
.\"    of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM AND
.\" CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM OR
.\" CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
.\" USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
.\" ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" This software has been written for the Internet Software Consortium
.\" by Ted Lemon in cooperation with Vixie Enterprises and Nominum, Inc.
.\" To learn more about the Internet Software Consortium, see
.\" ``http://www.isc.org/''.  To learn more about Vixie Enterprises,
.\" see ``http://www.vix.com''.   To learn more about Nominum, Inc., see
.\" ``http://www.nominum.com''.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2003
.\"        NAKANO Takeo and SENDA Yoshikazu all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Dec 24 2001 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Mar 15 2003 by SENDA Yoshikazu <senda@mocha.freemail.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"O .TH dhcpd.leases 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.TH dhcpd.leases 5
.SH 名前
.\"O dhcpd.leases - DHCP client lease database
dhcpd.leases \- DHCP クライアントへの貸し出しデータベース
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The Internet Software Consortium DHCP Server keeps a persistent
.\"O database of leases that it has assigned.  This database is a free-form
.\"O ASCII file containing a series of lease declarations.  Every time a
.\"O lease is acquired, renewed or released, its new value is recorded at
.\"O the end of the lease file.  So if more than one declaration appears
.\"O for a given lease, the last one in the file is the current one.
割り当てたアドレスの貸し出し記録を永続的なデータベースに保持しています。
このデータベースはフリーフォームの ASCII ファイルで、
一連の貸し出し宣言 (declaration) からなります。
貸し出しが要求・更新・破棄されると、
その新しい値がこの貸し出しファイルの末尾に記録されます。
よって、ひとつの貸し出しに対して複数の宣言があった場合は、
ファイルの後ろの方にあるものが現在のものになります。
.\" senda ここから
.\"O .PP
.\"O When dhcpd is first installed, there is no lease database.   However,
.\"O dhcpd requires that a lease database be present before it will start.
.\"O To make the initial lease database, just create an empty file called
.\"O DBDIR/dhcpd.leases.   You can do this with:
.\"O .PP
.\"O .nf
.\"O 	touch DBDIR/dhcpd.leases
.\"O .fi
.PP
最初に dhcpd がインストールされたときは、
貸し出しデータベースは存在していません。
しかし dhcpd は、貸し出しデータベースが存在していないと起動しません。
この目的の初期データベースには、
DBDIR/dhcpd.leases. という空のファイルを作るだけでかまいません。
これは、次のようにして実現できます。
.PP
.nf
	touch DBDIR/dhcpd.leases
.fi
.\" senda ここまで
.\"O .PP
.\"O In order to prevent the lease database from growing without bound, the
.\"O file is rewritten from time to time.   First, a temporary lease
.\"O database is created and all known leases are dumped to it.   Then, the
.\"O old lease database is renamed DBDIR/dhcpd.leases~.   Finally, the
.\"O newly written lease database is moved into place.
.PP
貸し出しデータベースが際限なく大きくなるのを防ぐため、
このファイルは時々書き換えられます。
まず一時的な貸し出しデータベースが作成され、
現在わかっている貸し出し記録がすべてそこにダンプされます。
次に、古い貸し出しデータベースが DBDIR/dhcpd.leases~
という名前に変更されます。
最後に、新たに書き出された貸し出しデータベースが適切な場所に移動されます。
.\"O .SH FORMAT
.SH フォーマット
.\"O Lease descriptions are stored in a format that is parsed by the same
.\"O recursive descent parser used to read the
.\"O .B dhcpd.conf(5)
.\"O and
.\"O .B dhclient.conf(5)
.\"O files.
貸し出し宣言が保存されるフォーマットは、
.BR dhcpd.conf (5)
や
.BR dhclient.conf (5)
ファイルの読み込みに用いられるのと同じ再帰パーサによって解釈されます。
.\" senda ここから
.\"O Lease files can contain lease declarations, 
.\"O and also group and subgroup declarations, 
.\"O host declarations and failover state declarations. 
.\"O Group, subgroup and host declarations are 
.\"O used to record objects created using the OMAPI protocol.
貸し出しファイルには貸し出し宣言を含むことができます。
さらに、グループとサブグループの宣言、
ホスト宣言およびフェイルオーバー状態宣言を含むことができます。。
グループ、サブグループおよびホスト宣言は、OMAPIプロトコルを使用して
作成されたオブジェクトを記録するために使用されます。
.\"O .PP
.\"O The lease file is a log-structured file - whenever a lease changes,
.\"O the contents of that lease are written to the end of the file. 
.\"O This means that it is entirely possible and quite reasonable for there
.\"O to be two or more declarations of the same lease 
.\"O in the lease file at the same time. 
.\"O In that case, the instance of that particular lease 
.\"O that appears last in the file is the one that is in effect.
.PP
貸し出しファイルはログの構造のファイルです。
貸し出しが変わる場合はいつも、
その貸し出しの内容がファイルの終端に書かれています。
これは、
貸し出しファイル中に同じ貸し出しに対する2つ以上の宣言が同時に存在することが
完全に可能で合理的であることを
意味します。
その場合、ファイルにおいて最後に現れる貸し出しの項目が、
実施されているものです。
.\"O .PP
.\"O Group, subgroup and host declarations in the lease file 
.\"O are handled in the same manner,
.\"O  except that if any of these objects are deleted, 
.\"O a \fIrubout\fR is written to the lease file.   
.PP
貸し出しファイル中のグループ、サブグループおよびホスト宣言は、
これらのオブジェクトのうちのどれかが削除されている場合や、
貸し出しファイル中に \fIrubout\fR が書かれている場合を除いて
同じ方法で扱われます。
.\"O This is just the same declaration, 
.\"O with \fB{ deleted; }\fR in the scope of the declaration.
これは宣言の範囲において、\fB{ deleted; }\fRと書かれている状態と
同じになります。
.\"O When the lease file is rewritten, 
.\"O any such rubouts that can be eliminated are eliminated.   
貸し出しファイルが書き直された場合、
除去することができるようなどんな rubouts も除去されます。
.\"O It is possible to delete a declaration in the \fBdhcpd.conf\fR file; 
.\"O in this case, the rubout can never be eliminated 
.\"O from the \fBdhcpd.leases\fR file.
\fBdhcpd.conf\fR ファイル中で宣言を削除することが可能です;
この場合、
rubout は \fBdhcpd.leases\fR ファイルから削除されません。
.\"O .SH THE LEASE DECLARATION
.SH 貸し出し宣言
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B lease \fIip-address\fB { \fIstatements...\fB }
.PP
.B lease \fIip-address\fB { \fIstatements...\fB }
.\" senda ここまで
.\"O .PP
.\"O Each lease declaration include the single IP address that has been
.\"O leased to the client.   The statements within the braces define the
.\"O duration of the lease and to whom it is assigned.
.PP
各貸し出し宣言には、
クライアントに貸し出されている IP アドレスがひとつ含まれます。
括弧の内部の文は、貸し出しの有効期間と割り当て先とを定義します。
.\" senda ここから
.\"O .PP
.\"O .nf
.\"O .B starts \fIdate\fB;\fR
.\"O .B ends \fIdate\fB;\fR
.\"O .B tstp \fIdate\fB;\fR
.\"O .B tsfp \fIdate\fB;\fR
.\"O .fi
.PP
.nf
.B starts \fIdate\fB;\fR
.B ends \fIdate\fB;\fR
.B tstp \fIdate\fB;\fR
.B tsfp \fIdate\fB;\fR
.fi
.\"O .PP
.\"O The start and end time of a lease are recorded using 
.\"O the \fBstarts\fR and \fBends\fR statements.   
.PP
貸し出しの開始および終了時間は、
\fBstarts\fR および \fBends\fR 文を使用して記録されます。
.\"O The \fBtstp\fR statement is specified 
.\"O if the failover protocol is being used, 
.\"O and indicates what time the peer has been told the lease expires.   
failover プロトコルが使用されており、
peer にいつ貸し出しの期限切れを伝えられたかを示した場合、
\fBtstp\fR 文が指定されます。
.\"O The \fBtsfp\fR statement is also specified 
.\"O if the failover protocol is being used, 
.\"O and indicates the lease expiry time that the peer has acknowledged.   
また、failover プロトコルが使用されて、
peer が認めた貸し出しの期限切れ時間を示しいる場合、
\fBtsfp\fR 文が指定されます。
.\"O The \fIdate\fR is specified as follows:
\fIdate\fR は次のように指定されます:
.\"O .PP
.\"O .I weekday year\fB/\fImonth\fB/\fIday hour\fB:\fIminute\fB:\fIsecond\fR
.PP
.I weekday year\fB/\fImonth\fB/\fIday hour\fB:\fIminute\fB:\fIsecond\fR
.\" senda ここまで
.\"O .PP
.\"O The weekday is present to make it easy for a human to tell 
.\"O when a lease expires - 
.\"O it's specified as a number from zero to six, 
.\"O with zero being Sunday.  
.\"O The day of week is ignored on input.  
.\"O The year is specified with the century, 
.\"O so it should generally be four digits except for really long leases.  
.\"O The month is specified as a number starting with 1 for January.  
.\"O The day of the month is likewise specified starting with 1.  
.\"O The hour is a number between 0 and 23, 
.\"O the minute a number between 0 and 59, 
.\"O and the second also a number between 0 and 59.
.PP
曜日 (weekday) は、
貸し出しの期限切れを人間にわかりやすくするために書かれています。
番号 0 から 6 で指定され、0 が日曜日に対応しています。
曜日は入力では無視されます。年 (year) は世紀の部分とともに指定され、
よって通常は (ものすごく長い貸し出しでない限り)  4 桁になります。
月 (month) は 1 から始まり、1 が 1 月に対応します。
月内日 (day) も同じく 1 から始まります。
時 (hour) は 0 から 23 の数値で、
分 (minute) は 0 から 59 の数値で、
秒 (second) も同じく 0 から 59 の数値で、それぞれ指定します。
.\" senda ここから
.\"O .PP
.\"O Lease times are specified in Universal Coordinated Time (UTC), 
.\"O not in the local time zone.  
.PP
貸し出し時間は、現地時間ゾーンでではなく万国標準時 (UTC) で指定され、
ローカルのタイムゾーンではありません。
.\" senda ここまで
.\"O There is probably nowhere in the world  where 
.\"O the times recorded on a lease are always the same as wall clock times.  
実はグリニッジは年内のある期間サマータイムになるので、
貸し出しの時刻が常に壁時計時刻と同じになるところは、
世界中のどこにも存在しません。
.\" senda ここから
.\"O On most unix machines, 
.\"O you can display the current time in UTC by typing \fBdate -u\fR.
Unix マシンでは、UTC での現時刻は
\fBdate -u\fR と入力すればわかります。
.\"O .PP
.\"O If a lease will never expire, 
.\"O \fIdate\fR is \fBnever\fR instead of an actual date.
.PP
貸し出しが終了しない場合、
\fIdate\fR は実際の日時の代わりには\fBなりません\fR。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B hardware \fIhardware-type mac-address\fB;\fR
.PP
.B hardware \fIhardware-type mac-address\fB;\fR
.\"O .PP
.\"O The hardware statement records 
.\"O the MAC address of the network interface on which the lease will be used.
.PP
ハードウェア文は、
貸し出しに使用されるネットワークインターフェイスの MAC アドレスを記録します。
.\" senda ここまで
.\"O It is specified as a series of hexadecimal octets, seperated by colons.
MAC アドレスは、コロンで区切られた 16 進のオクテットで指定されます。
.\" senda ここから
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B uid \fIclient-identifier\fB;\fR
.PP
.B uid \fIclient-identifier\fB;\fR
.\"O .PP
.\"O The \fBuid\fR statement records the client identifier used by the
.\"O client to acquire the lease.
.PP
\fBuid\fR 文は、貸し出しを際クライアントの使用する
クライアント識別子を記録します。
.\"O Clients are not required to send client identifiers, 
.\"O and this statement only appears if the client did in fact send one.
クライアントはクライアント識別子を送ることを必要とされません。
そして、クライアントが実際に識別子を送った場合のみ、
この記述が現れます。
.\"O Client identifiers are normally an ARP type (1 for ethernet)
.\"O followed by the MAC address, 
.\"O just like in the \fBhardware\fI statement, but this is not required.
クライアント識別子は通常\fBhardware\fI 文と同様に、
MAC アドレスに後続する ARP のタイプ (1 は ethernet のため) です。
しかしこれは必要とされません。
.\"O .PP
.\"O The client identifier is recorded as a colon-seperated hexadecimal
.\"O list or as a quoted string.   
.PP
クライアント識別子は、コロンで区切られた 16 進のリストとして、
あるいは引用符付き文字列として記録されます。
.\"O If it is recorded as a quoted string and 
.\"O it contains one or more non-printable characters, 
.\"O those characters are represented as octal escapes - 
.\"O a backslash character followed by three
.\"O octal digits.
引用符付き文字列で記録され、
さらにそれが 1 つ以上の印刷可能でない文字を含んでいる場合、
それらの文字は 8 進によって表わされます。つまり、
バックスラッシュ文字に続いた 3 つの 8 進法で表わされます。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B client-hostname "\fIhostname\fB";\fR
.PP
.B client-hostname "\fIhostname\fB";\fR
.\"O .PP
.\"O Most DHCP clients will send their hostname 
.\"O in the \fIhost-name\fR option.  
.PP
ほとんどの DHCP クライアントは、
\fIhost-name\fR オプションでホスト名を送るでしょう。
.\"O If a client sends its hostname in this way, 
.\"O the hostname is recorded on the lease with 
.\"O a \fBclient-hostname\fR statement.   
クライアントがこのようにそのホスト名を送る場合、
ホスト名は、\fBclient-hostname\fR 文によって貸し出しファイルに記録されます。
.\"O This is not required by the protocol, however, 
.\"O so many specialized DHCP clients do not send a host-name option.
しかし、これはプロトコルによって必ずしも要求されないので、
多くの専門 DHCP クライアントがホスト名オプションを送りません。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B abandoned;
.PP
.B abandoned;
.\"O .PP
.\"O The \fBabandoned\fR statement indicates that the DHCP server has
.\"O abandoned the lease.   
.PP
\fBabandoned\fR 文は、DHCP サーバが貸し出しを破棄したことを示します。
.\"O In that case, the \fBabandoned\fR statement will be used to indicate 
.\"O that the lease should not be reassigned.
その場合は、
\fBabandoned\fR 文が貸し出しが再び譲与してはならないことを
示すために使用されます。
.\"O Please see the \fBdhcpd.conf(5)\fR manual page 
.\"O for information about abandoned leases.
破棄された貸し出しに関する情報については、
マニュアル \fBdhcpd.conf(5)\fR を参照してください。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B binding state \fIstate\fB;
.\"O .B next binding state \fIstate\fB;
.PP
.B binding state \fIstate\fB;
.B next binding state \fIstate\fB;
.\"O .PP
.\"O The \fBbinding state\fR statement declares the lease's binding state.
.PP
\fBbinding state\fR 文は貸し出しが割り当てられている状態を示します。
.\"O When the DHCP server is not configured to use the failover protocol, 
.\"O a lease's binding state will be either \fBactive\fR or \fBfree\fR.
DHCP サーバが failover プロトコルを使用するような設定になっていないとき、
binding state は \fBactive\fR あるいは \fBfree\fR のどちらかになるでしょう。
.\"O The failover protocol adds some additional transitional states, 
.\"O as well as the \fBbackup\fR state, 
.\"O which indicates that the lease is 
.\"O available for allocation by the failover secondary.
failover プロトコルは、\fBbackup\fR 文と同様、
セカンダリ failover によってその貸し出しが割り当て二利用できることを示す
いくつかの追加の推移の文を付け加えます。
.\"O .PP
.\"O The \fBnext binding state\fR statement indicates 
.\"O what state the lease will move to when the current state expires.   
.PP
\fBnext binding state\fR 文は、
現在の状態が期限切れになったとき、貸し出しがどのような状態に移るかを
示します。

.\"O The time when the current state expires is 
.\"O specified in the \fIends\fR statement.
期限切れの時間は \fIends\fR 文で指定されます。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B option agent.circuit-id \fIstring\fR;
.\"O .B option agent.remote-id \fIstring\fR;
.PP
.B option agent.circuit-id \fIstring\fR;
.B option agent.remote-id \fIstring\fR;
.\"O .PP
.\"O The \fBoption agent.circuit-id\fR and 
.\"O \fBoption agent.remote-id\fR statements 
.\"O are used to record the circuit ID and remote ID options 
.\"O send by the relay agent, 
.\"O if the relay agent uses the \fIrelay agent information option\fR.   
.PP
\fBoption agent.circuit-id\fR と \fBoption agent.remote-id\fR 文は
.\"O senda circuit ID と remote ID ってなんでしょうか？？
これは、中継エージェントが \fIrelay agent information option\fR を
使用しているならば、中継エージェントによって送られる
遠隔 ID オプションと回路 ID を記録するために使用されます。
.\"O This allows these options to be used consistently 
.\"O in conditional evaluations 
.\"O even when the client is contacting the server directly 
.\"O rather than through its relay agent.
中継エージェントによってではなく
クライアントがサーバと直接連絡をとっている時でさえ、
条件付き評価の中で常にこれらのオプションが使用されることが許されます。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B set \fIvariable\fB = \fIvalue\fB;
.PP
.B set \fIvariable\fB = \fIvalue\fB;
.\"O .PP
.\"O The \fBset\fR statement sets the value of a variable on the lease.
.PP
\fBset\fR 文は、貸し出しの変数の値を設定します。
.\"O For general information on variables, 
.\"O see the \fBdhcp-eval(5)\fR manual page.
変数についての一般的な情報については、
マニュアル \fBdhcp-eval(5)\fR を参照してください。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B The \fIddns-text\fB variable
.PP
.B The \fIddns-text\fB variable
.\"O .PP
.\"O The \fIddns-text\fR variable is used to record 
.\"O the value of the client's TXT identification record 
.\"O when the interim ddns update style has been used to update 
.\"O the DNS for a particular lease.
.PP
\fIddns-text\fR 変数は
一時的な動的 dns 更新スタイルが
特別の貸し出し用の DNS を更新するために使用された場合に、
クライアントの TXT 識別レコードの値を
記録するために使用されます。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B The \fIddns-fwd-name\fB variable
.PP
.B The \fIddns-fwd-name\fB variable
.\"O .PP
.\"O The \fIddns-fwd-name\fB variable records the value of the name 
.\"O used in updating the client's A record 
.\"O if a DDNS update has been successfully done by the server.   
.PP
\fIddns-fwd-name\fB 変数は、サーバによって動的 DNS 更新が成功した際、
クライアントの A レコードの更新において使われた名前の値を記録します。
.\"O The server may also have used this name to
.\"O update the client's PTR record.
サーバは、さらにクライアントの PTR レコードを更新するために
この名前を使用することが可能です。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B The \fIddns-client-fqdn\fB variable
.PP
.B The \fIddns-client-fqdn\fB variable
.\"O .PP
.\"O If the server is configured to use the interim ddns update style, 
.\"O and is also configured to allow clients to update their own fqdns, 
.\"O and the client did in fact update its own fqdn, 
.\"O then the \fIddns-client-fqdn\fR variable records the name 
.\"O that the client has indicated it is using.
.PP
サーバが一時的な動的 dns 更新スタイルを使用するよう設定されていて、
そしてクライアントが自分の fqdns を更新することも可能なように設定されていて、
さらにクライアントが実際に自身の fqdn の更新を行った場合、
\fIddns-client-fqdn\fR 変数は、
そのクライアントがそれをすでに使っている名前であることを物語っている。
.\"O This is the name that the server will have used to 
.\"O update the client's PTR record in this case.
この場合クライアントの PTR レコードを更新するために
サーバが使用している名前です。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B The \fIddns-rev-name\fB variable
.PP
.B The \fIddns-rev-name\fB variable
.\"O .PP
.\"O If the server successfully updates the client's PTR record, 
.\"O this variable will record the name 
.\"O that the DHCP server used for the PTR record.   
.PP
サーバがクライアントの PTR レコードを更新することに成功すれば、
この変数は DHCP サーバが PTR レコードのために使用した名前を記録します。
.\"O The name to which the PTR record points will be either the
.\"O \fIddns-fwd-name\fR or the \fIddns-client-fqdn\fR.
PTR レコードが指す名前は \fIddns-fwd-name\fR
あるいは \fIddns-client-fqdn\fR のどちらかになるでしょう。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .B on \fIevents\fB { \fIstatements...\fB }
.PP
.B on \fIevents\fB { \fIstatements...\fB }
.\"O The \fBon\fI statement records a list of statements 
.\"O to execute if a certain event occurs.   
\fBon\fR 文は、
特定の事象が生じる場合に実行するべき文のリストを記録します。
.\"O The possible events that can occur 
.\"O for an active lease are \fBrelease\fR and \fBexpiry\fR.   
動作中の貸し出しに対して発生させることができる事象は
\fBrelease\fR および \fBexpiry\fR です。
.\"O More than one event can be specified 
.\"O - if so, the events are seperated by '|' characters.
1 つ以上の事象も指定することができます。
指定したいときは事象を'|'で区切って下さい。
.\"O .SH THE FAILOVER PEER STATE DECLARATION
.SH FAILOVER PEER 文宣言
.\"O The state of any failover peering arrangements 
.\"O is also recorded in the lease file, 
.\"O using the \fBfailover peer\fR statement:
任意の failover peer の配置状態も
\fBfailover peer\fR 文を使用して、
貸し出しファイルに記録されます:
.\"O .PP
.\"O .nf
.\"O .B failover peer "\fIname\fB" state {
.\"O .B   my   state \fIstate\fB at \fIdate\fB;
.\"O .B   peer state \fIstate\fB at \fIdate\fB;
.\"O .B }
.\"O .fi
.PP
.nf
.B failover peer "\fIname\fB" state {
.B   my   state \fIstate\fB at \fIdate\fB;
.B   peer state \fIstate\fB at \fIdate\fB;
.B }
.fi
.\"O .PP
.\"O The states of the peer named \fIname\fR is being recorded.   
.PP
 \fIname\fR という名の peer の状態が記録されます。
.\"O Both the state of the running server (\fBmy state\fR) and the other 
.\"O failover partner (\fIpeer state\fR) are recorded.   
実行中のサーバ (\fBmy state\fR) の状態および別の failover パートナー
(\fIpeer state\fR) の両方が記録されます。
.\"O The following states are possible: 
.\"O \fBunknown-state\fR, \fBpartner-down\fR, \fBnormal\fR, 
.\"O \fBcommunications-interrupted\fR, \fBresolution-interrupted\fR, 
.\"O \fBpotential-conflict\fR, \fBrecover\fR, \fBrecover-done\fR,
.\"O \fBshutdown\fR, \fBpaused\fR, and \fBstartup\fR.
次の状態が可能です:
\fBunknown-state\fR, \fBpartner-down\fR, \fBnormal\fR,
\fBcommunications-interrupted\fR, \fBresolution-interrupted\fR,
\fBpotential-conflict\fR, \fBrecover\fR, \fBrecover-done\fR,
\fBshutdown\fR, \fBpaused\fR, and \fBstartup\fR.
.\"O .B DBDIR/dhcpd.leases
.B DBDIR/dhcpd.leases
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.\"O dhcpd(8), dhcp-options(5), dhcp-eval(5), dhcpd.conf(5), RFC2132, RFC2131.
.SH 関連項目
dhcpd(8), dhcp-options(5), dhcp-eval(5), dhcpd.conf(5), RFC2132, RFC2131.
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B dhcpd(8)
.\"O was written by Ted Lemon under a contract with Vixie Labs.   
.B dhcpd(8)
は Vixie Labs と契約を結んだ Ted Lemon により書かれました。
.\"O Funding for this project was provided by the Internet Software Consortium.
このプロジェクトの資金は、
Internet Software Consortium によって提供されました。
.\"O Information about the Internet Software Consortium can be found at:
.\"O .B http://www.isc.org/
Internet Software Consortium の情報は
.B http://www.isc.org/isc
にあります。
