.\"	dhcpd.conf.5
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1998, 1999
.\" The Internet Software Consortium.    All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of The Internet Software Consortium nor the names
.\"    of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM AND
.\" CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM OR
.\" CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
.\" USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
.\" ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" This software has been written for the Internet Software Consortium
.\" by Ted Lemon <mellon@fugue.com> in cooperation with Vixie
.\" Enterprises.  To learn more about the Internet Software Consortium,
.\" see ``http://www.isc.org/isc''.  To learn more about Vixie
.\" Enterprises, see ``http://www.vix.com''.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Sep 9 2001 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH dhcpd.conf 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O dhcpd.conf - dhcpd configuration file
.SH 名前
dhcpd.conf \- dhcpd の設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The dhcpd.conf file contains configuration information for
.\"O .IR dhcpd,
.\"O the Internet Software Consortium DHCP Server.
dhcpd.conf は、Internet Software Consortium DHCP サーバ
.I dhcpd
の設定情報が書かれたファイルです。
.PP
.\"O The dhcpd.conf file is a free-form ASCII text file.   It is parsed by
.\"O the recursive-descent parser built into dhcpd.   The file may contain
.\"O extra tabs and newlines for formatting purposes.  Keywords in the file
.\"O are case-insensitive.   Comments may be placed anywhere within the
.\"O file (except within quotes).   Comments begin with the # character and
.\"O end at the end of the line.
dhcpd.conf ファイルは自由形式の ASCII テキストファイルです。
dhcpd に組み込まれた再帰下降型のパーザによって解釈されます。
このファイルには、整形の目的で余分なタブや改行を入れてもかまいません。
このファイルでは、キーワードの大文字小文字は区別されません。
コメントはファイルのどこにでも入れられます (クォートの内部を除く)。
コメントは # 文字で始まり、行末で終わります。
.PP
.\"O The file essentially consists of a list of statements.   Statements
.\"O fall into two broad categories - parameters and declarations.
このファイルは基本的には文 (statement) のリストからなります。
文は大きく二つのカテゴリに分けられます。パラメータ文と宣言文です。
.PP
.\"O Parameter statements either say how to do something (e.g., how long a
.\"O lease to offer), whether to do something (e.g., should dhcpd provide
.\"O addresses to unknown clients), or what parameters to provide to the
.\"O client (e.g., use gateway 220.177.244.7).
パラメータ文は、
なにかをどの様に行うか (例えば提供するリースの長さ)、
なにかを行うかどうか
(例えば素性のわからないクライアントにもアドレスを与えるかどうか)、
クライアントにどの様なパラメータを与えるか
(例えばゲートウェイとして 220.177.244.7)、
などを決めます。
.PP
.\"O Declarations are used to describe the topology of the
.\"O network, to describe clients on the network, to provide addresses that
.\"O can be assigned to clients, or to apply a group of parameters to a
.\"O group of declarations.   In any group of parameters and declarations,
.\"O all parameters must be specified before any declarations which depend
.\"O on those parameters may be specified.
宣言文は、
ネットワークのトポロジーを記述したり、
ネットワークのクライアントを記述したり、
クライアントに割り当て可能なアドレスを決めたり、
ひとまとまりのパラメータを宣言文のグループに与えたりするために用います。
パラメータ文や宣言文のグループにおいては、
ある宣言文が依存するパラメータ文は、
その宣言文よりも前に指定しなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O Declarations about network topology include the
.\"O  \fIshared-network\fR and the \fIsubnet\fR
.\"O declarations.   If clients on a subnet are to be assigned addresses
.\"O dynamically, a \fIrange\fR declaration must appear within the
.\"O \fIsubnet\fR declaration.   For clients with statically assigned
.\"O addresses, or for installations where only known clients will be
.\"O served, each such client must have a \fIhost\fR declaration.   If
.\"O parameters are to be applied to a group of declarations which are not
.\"O related strictly on a per-subnet basis, the \fIgroup\fR declaration
.\"O can be used.
ネットワークトポロジーに関する宣言には
\fIshared-network\fR 文と \fIsubnet\fR 文があります。
サブネットにあるクライアントがアドレスを動的に割り当ててもらう場合は、
\fIsubnet\fR 宣言の内部に \fIrange\fR 宣言文も必要になります。
静的にアドレスが割り当てられたクライアントや、
素性のわかっているクライアントにのみアドレスを提供するような設定では、
このようなクライアントに対して \fIhost\fR 宣言文が必要です。
特にサブネットに関連付けられていない宣言グループに
何らかのパラメータを与えたい場合は、
\fIgroup\fR 宣言文が使えます。
.PP
.\"O For every subnet which will be served, and for every subnet
.\"O to which the dhcp server is connected, there must be one \fIsubnet\fR
.\"O declaration, which tells dhcpd how to recognize that an address is on
.\"O that subnet.  A \fIsubnet\fR declaration is required for each subnet
.\"O even if no addresses will be dynamically allocated on that subnet.
サービスを受けるサブネットや、dhcp サーバが接続するサブネットには、
すべて \fIsubnet\fR 宣言が必要となります。これによって dhcpd は、
あるアドレスがそのサブネットにあることを認識するのです。
\fIsubnet\fR 宣言は、
そのサブネットに動的割り当てを受けるアドレスがなくても必要です。
.PP
.\"O Some installations have physical networks on which more than one IP
.\"O subnet operates.   For example, if there is a site-wide requirement
.\"O that 8-bit subnet masks be used, but a department with a single
.\"O physical ethernet network expands to the point where it has more than
.\"O 254 nodes, it may be necessary to run two 8-bit subnets on the same
.\"O ethernet until such time as a new physical network can be added.   In
.\"O this case, the \fIsubnet\fR declarations for these two networks may be
.\"O enclosed in a \fIshared-network\fR declaration.
場合によっては、一つの物理的なネットワークに上で
2 つ以上の IP サブネットが動作することがあります。
例えば、組織のルールで 8 ビットのサブネットマスクを使っているとしましょう。
このときある部門で、
一つの物理イーサネットネットワークに接続するノードが 254 を越えてしまったら、
新しい物理ネットワークが追加できるまでは、
そのイーサネットで 8 ビットのサブネットを 2 つ走らせなければならないでしょう。
このような場合には、
これらの 2 つのネットワークに対する \fIsubnet\fR 宣言は、
\fIshared-network\fR (共有ネットワーク) 宣言で囲うことができます。
.PP
.\"O Some sites may have departments which have clients on more than one
.\"O subnet, but it may be desirable to offer those clients a uniform set
.\"O of parameters which are different than what would be offered to
.\"O clients from other departments on the same subnet.   For clients which
.\"O will be declared explicitly with \fIhost\fR declarations, these
.\"O declarations can be enclosed in a \fIgroup\fR declaration along with
.\"O the parameters which are common to that department.   For clients
.\"O whose addresses will be dynamically assigned, there is currently no
.\"O way to group parameter assignments other than by network topology.
サイトによっては、
ある部門のクライアントが 2 つ以上のサブネットに接続されていることもあるでしょう。
このときこれらのクライアントに共通のパラメータを与え、
かつ同じサブネットにいる別の部門のクライアントには
違うパラメータを与えたいとしましょう。
\fIhost\fR 宣言によって明示的に宣言するクライアントでは、
これらを \fIgroup\fR 宣言によって囲って、
その部門に共通のパラメータを与えることができます。
アドレスが動的に割り当てられるクライアントでは、
今のところネットワークトポロジーによる他には、
グループ単位でのパラメータ割り当てを行う方法はありません。
.PP
.\"O When a client is to be booted, its boot parameters are determined by
.\"O first consulting that client's \fIhost\fR declaration (if any), then
.\"O consulting the \fIgroup\fR declaration (if any) which enclosed that
.\"O \fIhost\fR declaration, then consulting the \fIsubnet\fR declaration
.\"O for the subnet on which the client is booting, then consulting the
.\"O \fIshared-network\fR declaration (if any) containing that subnet, and
.\"O finally consulting the top-level parameters which may be specified
.\"O outside of any declaration.
あるクライアントがブートする場合、
そのブートパラメータを決定するには、
まずそのクライアントの \fIhost\fR 宣言が (存在すれば) 参照されます。
次にその \fIhost\fR 宣言を囲っている
\fIgroup\fR 宣言が (存在すれば) 参照されます。
その次にはブートするクライアントが所属するサブネットの
\fIsubnet\fR 宣言が参照され、
さらにそのサブネットを囲っている
\fIshared-network\fR 宣言が (存在すれば) 参照されます。
最後に、すべての宣言の外部に置かれている、
トップレベルのパラメータが参照されます。
.PP
.\"O When dhcpd tries to find a \fIhost\fR declaration for a client, it
.\"O first looks for a \fIhost\fR declaration which has a
.\"O \fIfixed-address\fR parameter which matches the subnet or shared
.\"O network on which the client is booting.   If it doesn't find any such
.\"O entry, it then tries to find an entry which has no \fIfixed-address\fR
.\"O parameter.   If no such entry is found, then dhcpd acts as if there is
.\"O no entry in the dhcpd.conf file for that client, even if there is an
.\"O entry for that client on a different subnet or shared network.
dhcpd がクライアントに対応する \fIhost\fR 宣言を探すときには、
まずそのクライアントがブートしようとしているサブネット (または共有ネットワーク)
にマッチする \fIfixed-address\fR パラメータを含む \fIhost\fR 宣言を探します。
そのようなエントリがなければ、
\fIfixed-address\fR パラメータが含まれないエントリを探します。
そのようなエントリもなければ、
たとえそのクライアントのエントリが別のサブネットや共有ネットワークにあっても、
dhcpd はそのクライアントのエントリが
dhcpd.conf ファイルには存在しないかのように動作します。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.PP
.\"O A typical dhcpd.conf file will look something like this:
よくある dhcpd.conf ファイルの例を示します:
.nf

.I global parameters...

shared-network ISC-BIGGIE {
  \fIshared-network-specific parameters...\fR
  subnet 204.254.239.0 netmask 255.255.255.224 {
    \fIsubnet-specific parameters...\fR
    range 204.254.239.10 204.254.239.30;
  }
  subnet 204.254.239.32 netmask 255.255.255.224 {
    \fIsubnet-specific parameters...\fR
    range 204.254.239.42 204.254.239.62;
  }
}

subnet 204.254.239.64 netmask 255.255.255.224 {
  \fIsubnet-specific parameters...\fR
  range 204.254.239.74 204.254.239.94;
}

group {
  \fIgroup-specific parameters...\fR
  host zappo.test.isc.org {
    \fIhost-specific parameters...\fR
  }
  host beppo.test.isc.org {
    \fIhost-specific parameters...\fR
  }
  host harpo.test.isc.org {
    \fIhost-specific parameters...\fR
  }
}

.ce 1
Figure 1

.fi
.PP
.\"O Notice that at the beginning of the file, there's a place
.\"O for global parameters.   These might be things like the organization's
.\"O domain name, the addresses of the name servers (if they are common to
.\"O the entire organization), and so on.   So, for example:
ファイルの先頭にはグローバルなパラメータのための
場所があることにお気づきになったかと思います。
ここでは組織のドメイン名、ネームサーバのアドレス
(組織全体に共通のものがあれば) などを指定します。
従って、例えば次のようになるでしょう。
.nf

	option domain-name "isc.org";
	option domain-name-servers ns1.isc.org, ns2.isc.org;

.ce 1
Figure 2
.fi
.PP
.\"O As you can see in Figure 2, it's legal to specify host addresses in
.\"O parameters as domain names rather than as numeric IP addresses.  If a
.\"O given hostname resolves to more than one IP address (for example, if
.\"O that host has two ethernet interfaces), both addresses are supplied to
.\"O the client.
Figure 2 にあるとおり、パラメータに与えるホストのアドレスは、
数値形式の IP アドレスではなくドメイン名で与えてもかまいません。
与えられたホスト名が 1 つ以上の IP アドレスに解決される
(例えばホストがイーサネットインターフェースを 2 つ持っているなど)
場合には、クライアントにはすべてのアドレスが渡されます。
.PP
.\"O In Figure 1, you can see that both the shared-network statement and
.\"O the subnet statements can have parameters.   Let us say that the
.\"O shared network \fIISC-BIGGIE\fR supports an entire department -
.\"O perhaps the accounting department.   If accounting has its own domain,
.\"O then a shared-network-specific parameter might be:
Figure 1 からわかるとおり、shared-network 文も
subnet 文もパラメータを取ることができます。
ここで共有ネットワーク \fIISC-BIGGIE\fR は部門 (例えば経理部門)
全体をサポートしているとしましょう。
経理部門には自前のドメインがあるとすると、
shared-network 専用のパラメータとして以下を与えるべきでしょう。
.nf

	option domain-name "accounting.isc.org";
.fi
.PP
.\"O All subnet declarations appearing in the shared-network declaration
.\"O would then have the domain-name option set to "accounting.isc.org"
.\"O instead of just "isc.org".
すると shared-network 宣言の内部にある subnet 宣言では、
domain-name オプションは単なる "isc.org" ではなく "accounting.isc.org"
になります。
.PP
.\"O The most obvious reason for having subnet-specific parameters as
.\"O shown in Figure 1 is that each subnet, of necessity, has its own
.\"O router.   So for the first subnet, for example, there should be
.\"O something like:
Figure 1 のように subnet に固有のパラメータを与えたいのは、
当然ながら、サブネットはそれぞれ違ったルータを必要とするからです。
したがって最初のサブネットには、
例えば以下のような文が置かれることになるでしょう。
.nf

	option routers 204.254.239.1;
.fi
.PP
.\"O Note that the address here is specified numerically.   This is not
.\"O required - if you have a different domain name for each interface on
.\"O your router, it's perfectly legitimate to use the domain name for that
.\"O interface instead of the numeric address.   However, in many cases
.\"O there may be only one domain name for all of a router's IP addresses, and
.\"O it would not be appropriate to use that name here.
ここではアドレスは数値で指定されています。
これは必須ではありません。
もしルータの各インターフェースが別々のドメイン名を持っているなら、
そのインターフェースの指定には、数値でなくドメイン名を用いても全くかまいません。
しかしながら、多くの場合ルータの IP アドレスそれぞれには
一つの同じドメイン名がつけられているでしょうから、
ここでその名前を用いるのは適切ではないでしょう。
.PP
.\"O In Figure 1 there is also a \fIgroup\fR statement, which provides
.\"O common parameters for a set of three hosts - zappo, beppo and harpo.
.\"O As you can see, these hosts are all in the test.isc.org domain, so it
.\"O might make sense for a group-specific parameter to override the domain
.\"O name supplied to these hosts:
Figure 1 では、\fIgroup\fR 文も使われており、
3 つのホスト (zappo, beppo, harpo) に共通のパラメータをあたえています。
おわかりのように、これらのホストはすべて test.isc.org ドメインに属しています。
したがってこれらのホストには、
グループ固有のパラメータとしてドメイン名を上書きするかたちで
与えるのが良いでしょう。
.nf

	option domain-name "test.isc.org";
.fi
.PP
.\"O Also, given the domain they're in, these are probably test machines.
.\"O If we wanted to test the DHCP leasing mechanism, we might set the
.\"O lease timeout somewhat shorter than the default:
また、所属するドメイン名から想像できるように、
これらはおそらくテスト用のマシンでしょう。
DHCP 貸し出し機構をテストする場合には、
貸し出しの期限をデフォルトよりは少々短くしておくのが良いでしょう。
.nf

	max-lease-time 120;
	default-lease-time 120;
.fi
.PP
.\"O You may have noticed that while some parameters start with the
.\"O \fIoption\fR keyword, some do not.   Parameters starting with the
.\"O \fIoption\fR keyword correspond to actual DHCP options, while
.\"O parameters that do not start with the option keyword either control
.\"O the behaviour of the DHCP server (e.g., how long a lease dhcpd will
.\"O give out), or specify client parameters that are not optional in the
.\"O DHCP protocol (for example, server-name and filename).
これまでのところで、\fIoption\fR キーワードによって始まるパラメータと、
そうでないパラメータとがあることにお気づきになったでしょうか。
\fIoption\fR キーワードで始まるパラメータは、
実際の DHCP オプションに関連したものです。
そうでないものは、
DHCP サーバの動作を制御するもの (例えば dhcpd が提供する貸し出しの期限など) か、
DHCP プロトコルでは提供されていないクライアント用のパラメータ
(例えばサーバ名やファイル名) です。
.PP
.\"O In Figure 1, each host had \fIhost-specific parameters\fR.   These
.\"O could include such things as the \fIhostname\fR option, the name of a
.\"O file to upload (the \fIfilename parameter) and the address of the
.\"O server from which to upload the file (the \fInext-server\fR
.\"O parameter).   In general, any parameter can appear anywhere that
.\"O parameters are allowed, and will be applied according to the scope in
.\"O which the parameter appears.
Figure 1 では、各ホストは「ホスト固有のパラメータ」を持っていました。
これらには例えば、\fIhostname\fR オプション、
取得するするファイル (\fIfilename\fR パラメータ)、
ファイルを取得するホスト (\fInext-server\fR パラメータ)
などが含まれます。
一般的には、パラメータを指定できる場所にはどんなパラメータでも指定でき、
そのパラメータは置かれた場所のスコープにしたがって適用されます。
.PP
.\"O Imagine that you have a site with a lot of NCD X-Terminals.   These
.\"O terminals come in a variety of models, and you want to specify the
.\"O boot files for each models.   One way to do this would be to have host
.\"O declarations for each server and group them by model:
NCD の X 端末がたくさんあるようなサイトを想像してください。
これらの端末にはさまざまなモデルがあるので、
それぞれのモデルに対して別々のブートファイルを指定したいとします。
これを行う一つの方法は、
各端末に host 宣言をさせ、それらをモデルごとに group 化することです。
.nf

group {
  filename "Xncd19r";
  next-server ncd-booter;

  host ncd1 { hardware ethernet 0:c0:c3:49:2b:57; }
  host ncd4 { hardware ethernet 0:c0:c3:80:fc:32; }
  host ncd8 { hardware ethernet 0:c0:c3:22:46:81; }
}

group {
  filename "Xncd19c";
  next-server ncd-booter;

  host ncd2 { hardware ethernet 0:c0:c3:88:2d:81; }
  host ncd3 { hardware ethernet 0:c0:c3:00:14:11; }
}

group {
  filename "XncdHMX";
  next-server ncd-booter;

  host ncd1 { hardware ethernet 0:c0:c3:11:90:23; }
  host ncd4 { hardware ethernet 0:c0:c3:91:a7:8; }
  host ncd8 { hardware ethernet 0:c0:c3:cc:a:8f; }
}
.fi
.\"O .SH REFERENCE: DECLARATIONS
.SH リファレンス: 宣言文
.PP
.\"O .B The 
.I shared-network
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
.nf
 \fBshared-network\fR \fIname\fR \fB{\fR
   [ \fIparameters\fR ]
   [ \fIdeclarations\fR ]
 \fB}\fR
.fi
.PP
.\"O The \fIshared-network\fR statement is used to inform the DHCP server
.\"O that some IP subnets actually share the same physical network.  Any
.\"O subnets in a shared network should be declared within a
.\"O \fIshared-network\fR statement.  Parameters specified in the
.\"O \fIshared-network\fR statement will be used when booting clients on
.\"O those subnets unless parameters provided at the subnet or host level
.\"O override them.  If any subnet in a shared network has addresses
.\"O available for dynamic allocation, those addresses are collected into a
.\"O common pool for that shared network and assigned to clients as needed.
.\"O There is no way to distinguish on which subnet of a shared network a
.\"O client should boot.
\fIshared-network\fR 文は、複数の IP サブネットが実際には
一つの物理ネットワークを共有していることを DHCP サーバに伝えるために用います。
共有ネットワーク内にあるサブネットは、
\fIshared-network\fR 文の内部で宣言するようにすべきです。
\fIshared-network\fR 文の内部で指定されたパラメータは、
それらのサブネットでブートしたクライアントによって用いられます
(ただしそのパラメータがサブネットやホストレベルで上書きされた場合を除く)。
共有ネットワークに属するサブネットに動的割り当て可能なアドレスがあると、
これらのアドレスは共有ネットワーク用の場所に共通にプールされ、
必要に応じてクライアントに提供されます。
あるクライアントが、(共有ネットワークに属する)
どのサブネットからブートさせるべきかを識別する方法はありません。
.PP
.\"O .I Name
.\"O should be the name of the shared network.   This name is used when
.\"O printing debugging messages, so it should be descriptive for the
.\"O shared network.   The name may have the syntax of a valid domain name
.\"O (although it will never be used as such), or it may be any arbitrary
.\"O name, enclosed in quotes.
.I name
には共通ネットワークの名前を指定しておきましょう。
この名前はデバッグメッセージの出力時に用いられるので、
その共通ネットワークの認識に役立ちます。
名前にはドメイン名として有効な書式 (ただしドメイン名としては用いられない)
が使えます。
あるいはクォートすればどんな名前でも使えます。
.PP
.\"O .B The 
.I subnet
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
.nf
 \fBsubnet\fR \fIsubnet-number\fR \fBnetmask\fR \fInetmask\fR \fB{\fR
   [ \fIparameters\fR ]
   [ \fIdeclarations\fR ]
 \fB}\fR
.fi
.PP
.\"O The \fIsubnet\fR statement is used to provide dhcpd with enough
.\"O information to tell whether or not an IP address is on that subnet.
.\"O It may also be used to provide subnet-specific parameters and to
.\"O specify what addresses may be dynamically allocated to clients booting
.\"O on that subnet.   Such addresses are specified using the \fIrange\fR
.\"O declaration.
\fIsubnet\fR 文は、
ある IP アドレスが特定のサブネットに属しているかどうか判断するための情報を
dhcpd に与えるために用います。
またサブネット固有のパラメータを指定したり、
そのサブネットでブートしたクライアントに
動的割り当て可能なアドレスを指定するためにも利用されます。
後者のようなアドレスは \fIrange\fR 宣言で指定されます。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I subnet-number
.\"O should be an IP address or domain name which resolves to the subnet
.\"O number of the subnet being described.   The 
.\"O .I netmask
.\"O should be an IP address or domain name which resolves to the subnet mask
.\"O of the subnet being described.   The subnet number, together with the
.\"O netmask, are sufficient to determine whether any given IP address is
.\"O on the specified subnet.
.I subnet-number
には IP アドレスか、
あるいは宣言するサブネットの IP 番号に解決されるドメイン名を与えます。
.I netmask
には IP アドレスか、
あるいは宣言するサブネットのサブネットマスクに解決されるドメイン名を与えます。
サブネット番号とネットマスクとを与えると、
ある与えられた IP 番号が
そのサブネットに属しているかどうかを判断できるようになります。
.PP
.\"O Although a netmask must be given with every subnet declaration, it is
.\"O recommended that if there is any variance in subnet masks at a site, a
.\"O subnet-mask option statement be used in each subnet declaration to set
.\"O the desired subnet mask, since any subnet-mask option statement will
.\"O override the subnet mask declared in the subnet statement.
ネットマスクはすべての subnet 宣言に必要ですが、
あるサイトの内部で用いているサブネットマスクに複数の種類がある場合は、
subnet-mask オプション文を各 subnet 宣言の内部で用いて、
適切なサブネットマスクを設定することもしておくべきです。
なぜかというと、subnet-mask オプション文は、
subnet 文で宣言されたサブネットマスクより優先されるからです。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I range
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
.nf
 \fBrange\fR [ \fBdynamic-bootp\fR ] \fIlow-address\fR [ \fIhigh-address\fR]\fB;\fR
.fi
.PP
.\"O For any subnet on which addresses will be assigned dynamically, there
.\"O must be at least one \fIrange\fR statement.   The range statement
.\"O gives the lowest and highest IP addresses in a range.   All IP
.\"O addresses in the range should be in the subnet in which the
.\"O \fIrange\fR statement is declared.   The \fIdynamic-bootp\fR flag may
.\"O be specified if addresses in the specified range may be dynamically
.\"O assigned to BOOTP clients as well as DHCP clients.   When specifying a
.\"O single address, \fIhigh-address\fR can be omitted.
動的に割り当てられるアドレスを含むサブネットでは、
少なくとも \fIrange\fR 文を一つ指定しなければなりません。
range 文には IP アドレスの範囲の最小値・最大値を与えます。
その範囲に入る IP アドレスのすべては、
\fIrange\fR 文が宣言されたサブネットの中に入っている必要があります。
指定した範囲のアドレスを DHCP クライアントと
BOOTP クライアントの両方に割り当てて良い場合は、
\fIdynamic-bootp\fR フラグを指定します。
アドレス 1 つだけを割り当てる場合は、
\fIhigh-address\fR は省略できます。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I host
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
.nf
 \fBhost\fR \fIhostname\fR {
   [ \fIparameters\fR ]
   [ \fIdeclarations\fR ]
 \fB}\fR
.fi
.PP
.\"O There must be at least one
.\"O .B host
.\"O statement for every BOOTP client that is to be served.   
.\"O .B host
.\"O statements may also be specified for DHCP clients, although this is
.\"O not required unless booting is only enabled for known hosts.
サービス対象となる BOOTP クライアントには、それぞれ
.B host
が最低ひとつづつ必要になります。
DHCP クライアントに対しても
.B host
文は指定できますが、
素性のわからないホストにはブートを許可しないような設定でなければ、
指定しなくてもかまいません。
.PP
.\"O If it is desirable to be able to boot a DHCP or BOOTP
.\"O client on more than one subnet with fixed addresses, more than one
.\"O address may be specified in the
.\"O .I fixed-address
.\"O parameter, or more than one
.\"O .B host
.\"O statement may be specified.
ある DHCP クライアントや BOOTP クライアントを、
複数のサブネットにおいて固定アドレスでブートさせたい場合には、
.I fixed-address
パラメータに複数のアドレスを指定するか、
あるいは
.B host
文を複数指定します。
.PP
.\"O If client-specific boot parameters must change based on the network
.\"O to which the client is attached, then multiple 
.\"O .B host
.\"O statements should
.\"O be used.
クライアント固有のブートパラメータを、
接続されたネットワークによって代えなければならない場合には、
.B host
文を複数用いるべきです。
.PP
.\"O If a client is to be booted using a fixed address if it's
.\"O possible, but should be allocated a dynamic address otherwise, then a
.\"O .B host
.\"O statement must be specified without a
.\"O .B fixed-address
.\"O clause.
.\"O .I hostname
.\"O should be a name identifying the host.  If a \fIhostname\fR option is
.\"O not specified for the host, \fIhostname\fR is used.
可能な場合にはクライアントを固定アドレスでブートさせたいが、
それができなければ動的なアドレスを割り当てたい、という場合には、
.B host
文の内部では
.B fixed-address
文を指定しないようにします。
.PP
.\"O \fIHost\fR declarations are matched to actual DHCP or BOOTP clients
.\"O by matching the \fRdhcp-client-identifier\fR option specified in the
.\"O \fIhost\fR declaration to the one supplied by the client, or, if the
.\"O \fIhost\fR declaration or the client does not provide a
.\"O \fRdhcp-client-identifier\fR option, by matching the \fIhardware\fR
.\"O parameter in the \fIhost\fR declaration to the network hardware
.\"O address supplied by the client.   BOOTP clients do not normally
.\"O provide a \fIdhcp-client-identifier\fR, so the hardware address must
.\"O be used for all clients that may boot using the BOOTP protocol.
\fIhost\fR 宣言を実際の DHCP クライアントや
BOOTP クライアントにマッチさせる際には、
\fIhost\fR 宣言の内部で指定された
\fIdhcp-client-identifier\fR オプションが、
クライアントが渡してきた識別子とマッチするかを確認します。
もし \fIhost\fR 宣言の内部に \fIdhcp-client-identifier\fR がなかったり、
クライアントがこの識別子を渡してこなかった場合には、
\fIhost\fR 宣言の内部で指定された
\fIhardware\fR パラメータが、
クライアントが渡してきたハードウェアアドレスとマッチするかを確認します。
BOOTP クライアントは通常
\fIdhcp-client-identifier\fR を渡さないので、
BOOTP プロトコルでブートさせるクライアントに対しては、
必ずハードウェアアドレスを用いなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I group
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
.nf
 \fBgroup\fR {
   [ \fIparameters\fR ]
   [ \fIdeclarations\fR ]
 \fB}\fR
.fi
.PP
.\"O The group statement is used simply to apply one or more parameters to
.\"O a group of declarations.   It can be used to group hosts, shared
.\"O networks, subnets, or even other groups.
.B group
文は、なんらかのパラメータを宣言のグループに適用するために用います。
ホスト、共有ネットワーク、サブネット等をまとめたり、
あるいは他のグループをまとめることもできます。
.\"O .SH REFERENCE: ALLOW and DENY
.SH リファレンス: ALLOW と DENY
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I allow
.\"O and
.\"O .I deny
.\"O statements can be used to control the behaviour of dhcpd to various
.\"O sorts of requests.
.I allow
文と
.I deny
文を使うと、
いろいろな要求に対する dhcpd の振る舞いを制御できます。
.PP
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I unknown-clients
.\"O .B keyword
.B キーワード
.PP
 \fBallow unknown-clients;\fR
 \fBdeny unknown-clients;\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fBunknown-clients\fR flag is used to tell dhcpd whether
.\"O or not to dynamically assign addresses to unknown clients.   Dynamic
.\"O address assignment to unknown clients is \fBallow\fRed by default.
.\fBunkown-clients\fR フラグは、
素性のわからない (unkown な) クライアントに動的にアドレスを割り当てるかどうかを
dhcpd に指示します。
デフォルトでは unkown なクライアントへの動的アドレス割り当ては
\fBallow\fR (許可) されています。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I bootp
.\"O .B keyword
.B キーワード
.PP
 \fBallow bootp;\fR
 \fBdeny bootp;\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fBbootp\fR flag is used to tell dhcpd whether
.\"O or not to respond to bootp queries.  Bootp queries are \fBallow\fRed
.\"O by default.
\fBbootp\fR フラグは、
bootp クエリ (問い合わせ) に答えるかどうかを
dhcpd に指示します。
デフォルトでは bootp クエリは
\fBallow\fR (許可) されています。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I booting
.\"O .B keyword
.B キーワード
.PP
 \fBallow booting;\fR
 \fBdeny booting;\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fBbooting\fR flag is used to tell dhcpd whether or not to respond
.\"O to queries from a particular client.  This keyword only has meaning
.\"O when it appears in a host declaration.   By default, booting is
.\"O \fBallow\fRed, but if it is disabled for a particular client, then
.\"O that client will not be able to get and address from the DHCP server.
\fBbooting\fR フラグは、
特定のクライアントからのクエリに答えるかどうかを
dhcpd に指示します。
このキーワードは、host 宣言の内部に置かれた場合にのみ意味を持ちます。
デフォルトでは booting は
\fBallow\fR (許可) されています。
しかしこれを特定のクライアントに対して無効にすると、
そのクライアントはこの DHCP サーバからはアドレスを取得できなくなります。
.\"O .SH REFERENCE: PARAMETERS
.SH リファレンス: パラメータ
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I default-lease-time
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBdefault-lease-time\fR \fItime\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O .I Time
.\"O should be the length in seconds that will be assigned to a lease if
.\"O the client requesting the lease does not ask for a specific expiration
.\"O time.
.I time
は秒単位の時間で、
貸し出しを要求しているクライアントが特に期限を求めなければ、
この時間が貸し出し時間になります。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I max-lease-time
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBmax-lease-time\fR \fItime\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O .I Time
.\"O should be the maximum length in seconds that will be assigned to a
.\"O lease if the client requesting the lease asks for a specific
.\"O expiration time.
.I time
は秒単位の時間で、
貸し出しを要求しているクライアントが期限を求めた場合に、
割り当て可能な最大の貸出時間です。
.PP
.\"O .B The 
.I hardware
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBhardware\fR \fIhardware-type\fR \fIhardware-address\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O In order for a BOOTP client to be recognized, its network hardware
.\"O address must be declared using a \fIhardware\fR clause in the
.\"O .I host
.\"O statement.
.\"O .I hardware-type
.\"O must be the name of a physical hardware interface type.   Currently,
.\"O only the
.\"O .B ethernet
.\"O and
.\"O .B token-ring
.\"O types are recognized, although support for a
.\"O .B fddi
.\"O hardware type (and others) would also be desirable.
.\"O The
.\"O .I hardware-address
.\"O should be a set of hexadecimal octets (numbers from 0 through ff)
.\"O seperated by colons.   The \fIhardware\fR statement may also be used
.\"O for DHCP clients.
BOOTP クライアントが認識されるためには、
.I host
文の内部で
.I hardware
指定によってそのネットワークハードウェアアドレスが
指定されていなければなりません。
.I hardware-type
は物理ハードウェアインターフェースの形式名です。
現在のところは
.B ethernet
と
.B token-ring
だけが認識されます
.RB ( fddi
などのハードウェア型も認識されると良いのでしょうが)。
.I hardware-address
は 16 進オクテット (0 から ff までの数値) のセットで、
区切りはコロンです。
.I hardware
文は DHCP クライアントにも用いることができます。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I filename
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBfilename\fR \fB"\fR\fIfilename\fR\fB";\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fIfilename\fR statement can be used to specify the name of the
.\"O initial boot file which is to be loaded by a client.  The
.\"O .I filename
.\"O should be a filename recognizable to whatever file transfer protocol
.\"O the client can be expected to use to load the file.
.B filename
文はクライアントにロードさせる初期ブートファイルの指定に使います。
.I filename
はクライアントが使うであろうファイル転送プロトコルで
認識されるファイル名でなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I server-name
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBserver-name\fR \fB"\fR\fIname\fR\fB";\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fIserver-name\fR statement can be used to inform the client of
.\"O the name of the server from which it is booting.   \fIName\fR should
.\"O be the name that will be provided to the client.
.B server-name
文はクライアントに接続中のサーバの名前を伝えるために用います。
.I name
はクライアントに渡される名前です。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I next-server
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBnext-server\fR \fIserver-name\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fInext-server\fR statement is used to specify the host address of
.\"O the server from which the initial boot file (specified in the
.\"O \fIfilename\fR statement) is to be loaded.   \fIServer-name\fR should
.\"O be a numeric IP address or a domain name.   If no \fInext-server\fR
.\"O parameter applies to a given client, the DHCP server's IP address is
.\"O used.
.B next-server
文は初期ブートファイル
.RI ( filename
文で指定したもの) をロードするサーバのホストアドレスを指定するために使います。
.I server-name
は数値の IP アドレスかドメイン名です。
接続してきたクライアントに対して与えるべき
.B next-server
パラメータがなければ、DHCP サーバの IP アドレスが用いられます。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I fixed-address
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBfixed-address\fR \fIaddress\fR [\fB,\fR \fIaddress\fR ... ]\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fIfixed-address\fR statement is used to assign one or more fixed
.\"O IP addresses to a client.  It should only appear in a \fIhost\fR
.\"O declaration.  If more than one address is supplied, then when the
.\"O client boots, it will be assigned the address which corresponds to the
.\"O network on which it is booting.  If none of the addresses in the
.\"O \fIfixed-address\fR statement are on the network on which the client
.\"O is booting, that client will not match the \fIhost\fR declaration
.\"O containing that \fIfixed-address\fR statement.  Each \fIaddress\fR
.\"O should be either an IP address or a domain name which resolves to one
.\"O or more IP addresses.
.B fixed-address
文は、あるクライアントに対して一つまたは複数の
IP アドレスを割り当てるために用います。
.I host
宣言の内部でのみ用いられます。
複数のアドレスが指定された場合には、
そのクライアントがブートするネットワークに所属するアドレスが割り当てられます。
クライアントがブートするネットワークに属するアドレスが
.B fixed-address
文にない場合は、そのクライアントはその
.B fixed-address
文が含まれる
.I host
宣言にマッチしないことになります。各
.I address
は IP アドレスか、
一つ (または複数) の IP アドレスに解決されるドメイン名です。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I dynamic-bootp-lease-cutoff
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBdynamic-bootp-lease-cutoff\fR \fIdate\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fIdynamic-bootp-lease-cutoff\fR statement sets the ending time
.\"O for all leases assigned dynamically to BOOTP clients.  Because BOOTP
.\"O clients do not have any way of renewing leases, and don't know that
.\"O their leases could expire, by default dhcpd assignes infinite leases
.\"O to all BOOTP clients.  However, it may make sense in some situations
.\"O to set a cutoff date for all BOOTP leases - for example, the end of a
.\"O school term, or the time at night when a facility is closed and all
.\"O machines are required to be powered off.
.I dynamic-bootp-lease-cutoff
文は、動的に割り当てた
BOOTP クライアントへのすべての貸し出しを終了させる時刻を設定します。
BOOTP クライアントは貸し出しを更新する機構を持たず、
また貸し出しがいつ期限切れになるかを知らないので、
デフォルトでは dhcpd は BOOTP クライアントへは無期限の貸し出しを行います。
しかし、ある場合には BOOTP の貸し出し停止に意味があるかもしれません。
例えば学期の最後や、夜中のある時間になると施設が閉まって、
すべてのマシンが電源停止になるような場合などです。
.PP
.\"O .I Date
.\"O should be the date on which all assigned BOOTP leases will end.  The
.\"O date is specified in the form:
.I date
は割り当てられた BOOTP 貸し出しのすべてが終了する時刻です。
date は以下の書式で指定します。
.PP
.ce 1
W YYYY/MM/DD HH:MM:SS
.PP
.\"O W is the day of the week expressed as a number
.\"O from zero (Sunday) to six (Saturday).  YYYY is the year, including the
.\"O century.  MM is the month expressed as a number from 1 to 12.  DD is
.\"O the day of the month, counting from 1.  HH is the hour, from zero to
.\"O 23.  MM is the minute and SS is the second.  The time is always in
.\"O Universal Coordinated Time (UTC), not local time.
W は曜日を数値で指定したもので、0 (日曜日) から 6 (土曜日) までです。
YYYY は年で、世紀の桁も指定します。
MM は月を数値で指定したもので、 1 から 12 マデです。
DD は月内日を数値で指定したもので、 1 から数えます。
HH は時間で、0 から 23 までです。
次の MM は分で、SS は秒です。
時刻は常に協定世界時 (UTC) で指定します (地方時ではありません)。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I dynamic-bootp-lease-length
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBdynamic-bootp-lease-length\fR \fIlength\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fIdynamic-bootp-lease-length\fR statement is used to set the
.\"O length of leases dynamically assigned to BOOTP clients.   At some
.\"O sites, it may be possible to assume that a lease is no longer in
.\"O use if its holder has not used BOOTP or DHCP to get its address within
.\"O a certain time period.   The period is specified in \fIlength\fR as a
.\"O number of seconds.   If a client reboots using BOOTP during the
.\"O timeout period, the lease duration is reset to \fIlength\fR, so a
.\"O BOOTP client that boots frequently enough will never lose its lease.
.\"O Needless to say, this parameter should be adjusted with extreme
.\"O caution.
.B dynamic-bootp-lease-length
文は BOOTP クライアントへの動的割り当ての貸し出し期間の設定に用います。
サイトによっては、一度アドレスを貸し出したクライアントから
一定の間 BOOTP や DHCP での再割り当て要求がなければ、
そのアドレスはもう使われない、とみなすことが可能かもしれません。
貸出機関は
.I length
に秒単位で指定します。
その期間のうちにクライアントが BOOTP を用いて再ブートすると、
貸し出し期間も
.I length
にリセットされます。
したがって頻繁にブートする BOOTP クライアントは、
割り当てられたアドレスをずっと保持し続けます。
言うまでもありませんが、このパラメータは細心の注意を払って決めてください。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I get-lease-hostnames
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBget-lease-hostnames\fR \fIflag\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O The \fIget-lease-hostnames\fR statement is used to tell dhcpd whether
.\"O or not to look up the domain name corresponding to the IP address of
.\"O each address in the lease pool and use that address for the DHCP
.\"O \fIhostname\fR option.  If \fIflag\fR is true, then this lookup is
.\"O done for all addresses in the current scope.   By default, or if
.\"O \fIflag\fR is false, no lookups are done.
.B get-lease-hostnames
文は、貸し出し用にプールされている
IP アドレスのドメイン名を引き、
そのアドレスを DHCP
.I hostname
オプションに用いるかどうかを dhcpd に伝えるために用います。
.I flag
が真ならば、現在のスコープにあるすべてのアドレスに対して
この名前引きが実行されます。
デフォルトでは
.I flag
は偽で、名前引きは行われません。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I use-host-decl-names
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBuse-host-decl-names\fR \fIflag\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O If the \fIuse-host-decl-names\fR parameter is true in a given scope,
.\"O then for every host declaration within that scope, the name provided
.\"O for the host declaration will be supplied to the client as its
.\"O hostname.   So, for example,
.I use-host-decl-names
パラメータがその置かれたスコープで真 (true) だと、
そのスコープに置かれたすべての host 宣言において、
宣言に使われた名前がホスト名としてクライアントに渡されます。
したがって例えば、
.PP
.nf
    group {
      use-host-decl-names on;

      host joe {
	hardware ethernet 08:00:2b:4c:29:32;
	fixed-address joe.fugue.com;
      }
    }

.\"O is equivalent to
は次と全く同じになります。

      host joe {
	hardware ethernet 08:00:2b:4c:29:32;
	fixed-address joe.fugue.com;
        option host-name "joe";
      }
.fi
.PP
.\"O An \fIoption host-name\fR statement within a host declaration will
.\"O override the use of the name in the host declaration.
host 宣言の内部に置かれた
.I option host-name
文は、宣言に用いられた名前よりも優先されます。
.PP
.\"HERE GOES
.\"O .B The
.I authoritative
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBauthoritative;\fR
.PP
 \fBnot authoritative;\fR
.PP
.\"O The DHCP server will normally assume that the configuration
.\"O information about a given network segment is known to be correct and
.\"O is authoritative.   So if a client requests an IP address on a given
.\"O network segment that the server knows is not valid for that segment,
.\"O the server will respond with a DHCPNAK message, causing the client to
.\"O forget its IP address and try to get a new one.
通常 DHCP サーバは、あるネットワークセグメントの設定情報は
正しくかつ信頼できるとみなしています。
よってクライアントがあるネットワークセグメントの IP アドレスを要求したとき、
サーバがそれがそのセグメントでは正しくないことを知っていると、
サーバは DHCPNAK メッセージを返します。
するとクライアントはその IP アドレスを忘れ、
新しいアドレスを取得しようとします。
.PP
.\"O If a DHCP server is being configured by somebody who is not the
.\"O network administrator and who therefore does not wish to assert this
.\"O level of authority, then the statement "not authoritative" should be
.\"O written in the appropriate scope in the configuration file.
DHCP サーバがネットワーク管理者ではない人間によって設定され、
よってこのレベルの権威を持たせたくない場合には、
設定ファイルの適切なスコープに "not authoritative"
という文を入れておくと良いでしょう。
.PP
.\"O Usually, writing \fBnot authoritative;\fR at the top level of the file
.\"O should be sufficient.   However, if a DHCP server is to be set up so
.\"O that it is aware of some networks for which it is authoritative and
.\"O some networks for which it is not, it may be more appropriate to
.\"O declare authority on a per-network-segment basis.
通常は、
.B not authoritative
をファイルのトップレベルに書いておけば十分です。
しかし、あるネットワークに対しては権威を持たせ、
別のネットワークに対しては持たせないように DHCP サーバを設定したい場合には、
ネットワークセグメント単位で authority を宣言するほうが良いでしょう。
.PP
.\"O Note that the most specific scope for which the concept of authority
.\"O makes any sense is the physical network segment - either a
.\"O shared-network statement or a subnet statement that is not contained
.\"O within a shared-network statement.  It is not meaningful to specify
.\"O that the server is authoritative for some subnets within a shared
.\"O network, but not authoritative for others, nor is it meaningful to
.\"O specify that the server is authoritative for some host declarations
.\"O and not others.
authority が意味を持つスコープは、物理ネットワークセグメントの単位です。
すなわち shared-network 文か、
shared-network 文の内部にはない subnet 文です。
共有ネットワークに属しているサブネットの一部のみに対して
サーバに権威を持たせても意味はありません。
また一部の host 宣言に対してのみサーバに権威を持たせても、
同じく意味はありません。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I use-lease-addr-for-default-route
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBuse-lease-addr-for-default-route\fR \fIflag\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O If the \fIuse-lease-addr-for-default-route\fR parameter is true in a
.\"O given scope, then instead of sending the value specified in the
.\"O routers option (or sending no value at all), the IP address of the
.\"O lease being assigned is sent to the client.   This supposedly causes
.\"O Win95 machines to ARP for all IP addresses, which can be helpful if
.\"O your router is configured for proxy ARP.
.B use-lease-addr-for-default-route
パラメータがその置かれたスコープで真だと、
routers オプションで指定した値を送る (あるいは値を全く送らない)
代わりに、割り当てようとしている IP アドレスをクライアントに送ります。
こうすると Win95 マシンはすべての IP アドレスを ARP するようになり、
使っているルータが proxy ARP に設定されている場合には役に立ちます。
.PP
.\"O If use-lease-addr-for-default-route is enabled and an option routers
.\"O statement are both in scope, the routers option will be preferred.
.\"O The rationale for this is that in situations where you want to use
.\"O this feature, you probably want it enabled for a whole bunch of
.\"O Windows 95 machines, and you want to override it for a few other
.\"O machines.   Unfortunately, if the opposite happens to be true for you
.\"O site, you are probably better off not trying to use this flag.
use-lease-addr-for-default-route が有効になっていて、
option routes 文も同じスコープにある場合には、
routes オプションが優先されます。
この理由は、この機能を使いたい局面では、
たくさんある Windows 95 マシンすべてにはこの機能を有効にし、
その他数台のマシンではこれを無効にしたくなるだろうからです。
不幸にして状況が逆の場合は、
このフラグは用いないほうがたぶん良いでしょう。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I always-reply-rfc1048
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBalways-reply-rfc1048\fR \fIflag\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O Some BOOTP clients expect RFC1048-style responses, but do not follow
.\"O RFC1048 when sending their requests.   You can tell that a client is
.\"O having this problem if it is not getting the options you have
.\"O configured for it and if you see in the server log the message
.\"O "(non-rfc1048)" printed with each BOOTREQUEST that is logged.
BOOTP クライアントの中には、受信には RFC1048 形式のものを期待するのに、
送信では RFC1048 を守らないものがあります。
あるクライアントがこの問題を抱えている場合には、
そのクライアントは設定したオプションを取得せず、
また BOOTREQUEST するたびに
サーバのログに "(non-rfc1048)" というメッセージが現れます。
.PP
.\"O If you want to send rfc1048 options to such a client, you can set the
.\"O .B always-reply-rfc1048
.\"O option in that client's host declaration, and the DHCP server will
.\"O respond with an RFC-1048-style vendor options field.   This flag can
.\"O be set in any scope, and will affect all clients covered by that
.\"O scope.
このようなクライアントに rfc1048 オプションを送信したい場合は、
そのクライアントの host 宣言に
.B always-reply-rfc1048
を設定します。すると DHCP サーバは
RFC-1048 形式のベンダーオプションフィールドを用いて応答します。
このフラグはどのスコープにも設定でき、
そのスコープでカバーされるすべてのクライアントに適用されます。
.PP
.\"O .B The
.I server-identifier
.\"O .B statement
.B 文
.PP
 \fBserver-identifier \fIhostname\fR\fB;\fR
.PP
.\"O The server-identifier statement can be used to define the value that
.\"O is sent in the DHCP Server Identifier option for a given scope.   The
.\"O value specified \fBmust\fR be an IP address for the DHCP server, and
.\"O must be reachable by all clients served by a particular scope.
.B server-identifier
文は、それが置かれたスコープ内において、
DHCP サーバ識別子オプションで送られる値を定義するために用います。
指定する値は DHCP サーバの IP アドレスでなければならず、
そのスコープにおいてサービスを受けるすべてのクライアントから
到達可能でなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O The use of the server-identifier statement is not recommended - the only
.\"O reason to use it is to force a value other than the default value to be
.\"O sent on occasions where the default value would be incorrect.   The default
.\"O value is the first IP address associated with the physical network interface
.\"O on which the request arrived.
server-identifier 文の使用は勧められません。
唯一の利用局面は、デフォルトで送られる値が間違っている場合に、
その値を別のものに変更する場合だけです。
デフォルトの値は、要求が到達した物理ネットワークインターフェースに
関連付けられた最初の IP アドレスです。
.PP
.\"O The usual case where the
.\"O \fIserver-identifier\fR statement needs to be sent is when a physical
.\"O interface has more than one IP address, and the one being sent by default
.\"O isn't appropriate for some or all clients served by that interface.
.\"O Another common case is when an alias is defined for the purpose of
.\"O having a consistent IP address for the DHCP server, and it is desired
.\"O that the clients use this IP address when contacting the server.
.I server-identifier
文が必要になるのは、物理インターフェースに複数の IP アドレスがついていて、
デフォルトで送られるアドレスが、
サービスを受ける一部または全部のクライアントにとって適切ではない場合です。
他にあり得る例としては、
DHCP サーバの IP アドレスを一貫させるために IP エイリアスが定義されており、
クライアントがサーバいん接続する際にはこの
IP アドレスを用いるのが望ましい場合があります。
.PP
.\"O Supplying a value for the dhcp-server-identifier option is equivalent
.\"O to using the server-identifier statement.
.\"O .SH REFERENCE: OPTION STATEMENTS
.SH リファレンス: オプション文
.PP
.\"O DHCP option statements are documented in the
.\"O .B dhcp-options(5)
.\"O manual page.
DHCP オプション文はマニュアルページ
.BR dhcp-options (5)
で説明されています。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
dhcpd.conf(5), dhcpd.leases(5), RFC2132, RFC2131.
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B dhcpd(8)
.\"O was written by Ted Lemon <mellon@vix.com>
.\"O under a contract with Vixie Labs.   Funding
.\"O for this project was provided by the Internet Software Corporation.
.\"O Information about the Internet Software Consortium can be found at
.\"O .B http://www.isc.org/isc.
.BR dhcpd (8)
は Ted Lemon <mellon@vix.com>
が Vixie Labs との契約のもとに書きました。
このプロジェクトの資金は、
Internet Software Corporation によって提供されました。
Internet Software Consortium の情報は
.B http://www.isc.org/isc
にあります。
