.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999, 2001 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\"  published bythe Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Sep 14 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ypmatch 1 "May 1999" "YP Tools 2.8"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ypmatch - print the values of one or more keys from a NIS map
.SH 名前
ypmatch \- NIS マップからひとつ以上のキーに対応する値を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSYS
.SH 書式
.B ypmatch
[
.BR \-kt
]
[
.BI \-d " domain"
]
.I key ... mapname
.br
.B ypmatch
.B \-x
.LP
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ypmatch
.\"O prints the values of one or more keys from the NIS database
.\"O specified by mapname, which may be a map name or a map nickname.
.B ypmatch
は
.I mapname
で指定した NIS データーベースから、ひとつ以上のキーとその値とを表示する。
.I mapname
にはマップ名またはマップのニックネームを指定できる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-d " domain"
.\"O Specify a domain other than the default domain as returned by
.\"O .BR domainname (1).
.BR domainname (1)
が返すデフォルトのドメイン以外を指定する。
.TP
.B \-k
.\"O Display map keys. This option is useful with maps in which the
.\"O values are null or the key is not part of the value.
マップのキーを表示する。このオプションは値が null のマップや、
キーが値の一部となっていないマップに対して便利である。
.TP
.B \-t
.\"O This option inhibits map nickname translation.
マップのニックネーム変換を抑制する。
.TP
.B \-x
.\"O Display the map nickname translation table.
マップニックネームの変換テーブルを表示する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.B /var/yp/nicknames
.\"O map nickname translation table.
マップのニックネームの変換テーブル。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR domainname (8),
.BR nicknames (5),
.BR ypbind (8),
.BR ypcat (1),
.BR yppoll (8),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR yset (8),
.BR ypwhich (1)
.LP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B ypmatch
.\"O is part of the
.\"O .B yp-tools
.\"O package, which was written by Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>.
.B ypmatch
は
.B yp-tools
パッケージの一部である。
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
