.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999, 2001 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\"  published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Sep 14 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH yppasswd 1 "May 1998" "YP Tools 2.8"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O yppasswd, ypchfn, ypchsh \- change your password in the NIS database
.SH 名前
yppasswd, ypchfn, ypchsh \- NIS データベースのパスワードを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "yppasswd [-f] [-l] [-p] [user]"
.br
.B "ypchfn [user]"
.br
.B "ypchsh [user]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The standard
.\"O .BR passwd (1),
.\"O .BR chfn (1)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR chsh (1)
.\"O cannot be used under Linux to change the users NIS password, shell and GECOS
.\"O information, because they only modify the password file on the local host.
NIS 環境下では、通常の
.BR passwd (1),
.BR chfn (1),
.BR chsh (1)
はユーザーのパスワード・シェル・GECOS 情報の変更を行えない。
なぜならこれらのコマンドはローカルなホストの passwd ファイルしか
変更できないからである。
.\"O For changing the NIS information, they are replaced by their NIS
.\"O counterparts,
.\"O .BR yppasswd ,
.\"O .B ypchfn
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ypchsh .
NIS 情報を変更するには、それぞれの NIS 版である
.BR yppasswd ,
.BR ypchfn ,
.B ypchsh
を代わりに用いる。
.P
.\"O These commands are the same program, linked to different names.
実際には、これらのコマンドは同じプログラムを
別々の名前でリンクしたものである。
.\"O Using the command line switches, you can choose whether to update your
.\"O password
.\"O .BR \-p ,
.\"O your login shell
.\"O .BR \-l ,
.\"O or your GECOS field
.\"O .BR \-f ,
.\"O or a combination of them.
コマンドラインスイッチを用いれば、
パスワード (\fB\-p\fP)、
ログインシェル (\fB\-l\fP)、
GECOS フィールド (\fB\-f\fP)
のどれを更新するか選択できる。
これらを組合せて指定することもできる。
.\"O .B yppasswd
.\"O implies the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option, if no other option is given. If you use the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O option, you also need to add the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O flag.
.B yppasswd
は他にオプションが与えられなければ \fB\-p\fP オプションを仮定する。
.B \-f
または
.B \-l
オプションを用いた場合には、
.B \-p
フラグも陽に指定しなければならない。
.\"O .B ypchfn
.\"O implies the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option, and
.\"O .B ypchsh
.\"O .BR \-l .
.B ypchfn
は
.B \-f
を、
.B ypchsh
は
.B \-l
をそれぞれ仮定する。
.P
.\"O When invoked without the
.\"O .I user
.\"O argument, the account information for the invoking user will be updated,
.\"O otherwise that of
.\"O .I user
.\"O will be updated. This option is only available to the super-user. If the
.\"O yppasswdd daemon on the server supports it, you can give the root password
.\"O of the server instead of the users [old] password.
実行時に引数
.I user
を省略されると、起動したユーザーのアカウント情報を更新しようとする。
.I user
を指定すると、そのユーザの情報が更新されるが、これを行えるのは
スーパーユーザーだけである。
サーバーで走っている yppasswdd デーモンがサポートしていれば、
そのユーザーの (古い) パスワードの代わりに、サーバーの
root パスワードを与えることができる。
.P
.\"O All tools will first prompt the user for the current NIS password needed
.\"O for authentication with the
.\"O .BR yppasswdd (8)
.\"O daemon. Subsequently, the
.\"O program prompts for the updated information:
すべてのコマンドは、最初のプロンプトで現在の NIS パスワードを要求する。
これは
.BR yppasswdd (8)
デーモンでの認証で必要とされる。
続いて更新する情報に対するプロンプトを出す。
.\"
.\"
.\"O .IP "\fByppasswd\fP or \fB-l\fP"
.IP "\fByppasswd\fP または \fB-p\fP"
.\"O Change the user's NIS password.	The user is prompted for the new password.
.\"O While typing the password, echoing is turned off, so the password does not
.\"O appear on the screen. An empty password is rejected, as are passwords shorter
.\"O than six characters. The user will then be requested to retype the
.\"O password to make sure it wasn't	misspelled the first time.
ユーザーの NIS パスワードを変更する。新しいパスワードの入力を促す
プロンプトが出される。パスワードの入力時には入力のエコーが切られるので、
入力中のパスワードはスクリーンには現われない。空のパスワードや、
6 文字より短いパスワードは拒否される。入力が終わると、
新しいパスワードを再入力するように促される。
これは最初のパスワード入力でミスタイプがなかったかを確認するためである。
.\"
.\"
.\"O .IP "\fBypchsh\fP or \fB-l\fP"
.IP "\fBypchsh\fP または \fB-l\fP"
.\"O Change the user's login shell. The user is prompted for a new shell,
.\"O offering the old one as default:
ユーザーのログインシェルを変更する。新しいシェルを入力するように
プロンプトが出される。このとき古いシェルがデフォルト値となる。
.IP
.in +2n
.ft B
.nf
Login shell [/bin/sh]: _
.fi
.ft
.in
.IP
.\"O To accept the default, simply press return. To clear the shell field in
.\"O your
.\"O .BR passwd (5)
.\"O file entry (so that the system's default shell is selected),
.\"O enter the string
.\"O .IR none .
デフォルトのままにしておくには、単にリターンを押せばよい。
.BR passwd (5)
ファイルの自分のエントリから shell フィールドの内容を削除するには
(こうするとシステムのデフォルトのシェルが用いられる)、
.I none
と入力する。
.\"
.\"
.\"O .IP "\fBypchfn\fP or \fB-f\fP"
.IP "\fBypchfn\fP または \fB-f\fP"
.\"O Change the user's full name and related information. Traditionally, some
.\"O applications expect the GECOS field (field 4) of the
.\"O .BR passwd (5)
.\"O file to
.\"O contain the user's real name (as opposed to the login name) plus some
.\"O additional information like the office phone number. This information is
.\"O displayed by
.\"O .BR finger (1)
.\"O and probably some other tools, too.
.IP
.\"O When setting the full name,
.\"O .B ypchfn
.\"O displays the following prompts, with the defaults in brackets:
.B ypchfn
はフルネームの登録の際に以下のようなプロンプトを表示する。
角括弧の中身はデフォルトの値である。
.IP
.in +2n
.ft B
.nf
Name [Joe Doe]:
Location [2nd floor, bldg 34]:
Office Phone [12345]:
Home Phone []:
.fi
.ft
.in
.IP
.\"O To accept a default, simply press return. To clear a field, enter the string
.\"O .IR none .
デフォルトのままにしておくには、単にリターンを押せばよい。
フィールドの内容を削除するには、
.I none
と入力する。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR chfn (1),
.BR chsh (1),
.BR finger (1),
.BR passwd (5),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR ypcat (1),
.BR yppasswdd (8),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR ypwhich (1)
.LP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B yppasswd
.\"O is part of the
.\"O .B yp-tools
.\"O package, which was written by Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>.
.B yppasswd
は
.B yp-tools
パッケージの一部である。
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
