.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Sep 14 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ypwhich 1 "May 1998" "YP Tools 2.8"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ypwhich - return name of NIS server or map master
.SH 名前
ypwhich \- NIS サーバーまたはマップマスターの名前を返す。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSYS
.SH 書式
.B ypwhich
[
.BI \-d " domain"
]
[
.BR \-V "n"
]
[
.I hostname
]
.br
.B ypwhich
[
.BI \-d " domain"
]
[
.B \-t
]
.B \-m
[
.I mname
]
.br
.B ypwhich
.B \-x
.LP
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ypwhich
.\"O returns the name of the NIS server that supplies the NIS
.\"O services to a NIS client, or which is the master for a map.
.\"O If invoked without arguments, it gives the NIS server for
.\"O the local machine. If
.\"O .I hostname
.\"O is specified, that machine is queried to find out which NIS
.\"O master it is using.
.B ypwhich
は NIS サービスをクライアントに与えている NIS サーバーの名前を返す。
またはマップに対するマスターを返す。
引数なしで起動されると、ローカルなマシンに対する NIS サーバを返す。
.I hostname
が指定されると、そのマシンの NIS マスターを問い合わせる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-d " domain"
.\"O Specify a domain other than the default domain.
デフォルトドメイン以外のドメインを指定する。
.TP
.B \-t
.\"O This option inhibits map nickname translation.
マップニックネームの変換を抑制する。
.TP
.BI \-m " mname"
.\"O Find the master NIS server for a map.
.\"O No
.\"O .I hostname
.\"O can be specified with the
.\"O .B \-m
.\"O option.
.\"O .I mname
.\"O can be a mapname or nickname for a map.
.\"O If
.\"O .I mname
.\"O is omitted,
.\"O .B ypwhich
.\"O will produce a list of available maps.
指定したマップに対するマスターの NIS サーバーを探す。
.I hostname
を同時に指定することはできない。
.I mname
はマップの名前である。マップのニックネームでもよい。
.I mname
が省略された場合は、
.B ypwhich
は利用可能なマップのリストを生成する。
.TP
.B \-x
.\"O Display the map nickname translation table.
マップニックネームの変換テーブルを表示する。
.TP
.B \-Vn
.\"O Version of
.\"O .BR ypbind (8),
.\"O V2 is default.
.BR ypbind (8)
のバージョンを指定する。デフォルトは V2 である。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.B /var/yp/nicknames
.\"O map nickname translation table.
マップのニックネームの変換テーブル。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR domainname (8),
.BR nicknames (5),
.BR ypbind (8),
.BR ypcat (1),
.BR ypmatch (1),
.BR yppoll (8),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR yset (8)
.LP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B ypwhich
.\"O is part of the
.\"O .B yp-tools
.\"O package, which was written by Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>.
.B ypwhich
は
.B yp-tools
パッケージの一部である。
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
