.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU cat man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH CAT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBcat\fR \- concatenate and write files 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cat 
.RB [ \-benstuvABET "] [" \-\-binary "] [" \-\-number "] [" \-\-number\-nonblank ]
.RB [ \-\-show\-all "] [" \-\-show\-ends "] [" \-\-show\-nonprinting ]
.RB [ \-\-show\-tabs "] [" \-\-squeeze\-blank "] [" \fIFILE...\fR ]

.BR cat " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cat
writes each 
.I FILE
to standard output.  If
.I FILE
is omitted or if is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-number\-nonblank
Number all nonblank output lines, starting with 1.
.TP
.B \-e
Equivalent to `\fB\-vE\fR'.
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-number
Number all output lines, starting with 1.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-squeeze\-blank
Replace multiple adjacent blank lines with a single blank line.
.TP
.B \-t
Equivalent to `\fB\-vT\fR'.
.TP
.B \-u
Ignored; for Unix compatibility.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-show\-nonprinting
Display control characters except for <LFD> and <TAB> using `^'
notation and precede characters that have the high bit set with
`M-'.		    
.TP
.B \-A, \-\-show\-all
Equivalent to `\fB\-vET\fR'.
.TP
.B \-B, \-\-binary
On DOS platforms only,  read and write files in binary mode.  See notes
below for details on binary and text modes.
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-show\-ends
Display a
.RB ` $ '
after the end of each line.
.TP
.B \-T, \-\-show\-tabs
Display <TAB> characters as `^I'.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH DOS TEXT/BINARY MODE
\fBcat\fR uses text mode by default, and binary mode when standard output is
redirected to a file or pipe.  This behaviour can be changed by specifying
\fB\-\-binary\-fR or \fB\-\-show\-nonprinting\fR to use binary mode, or 
\fB\-\-number\-blank\fR,  \fB\-\-show\-ends\fR and \fB\-\-number\fR to use
text mode.

Text mode involves character translation (for example <CR> to <CR><LF>), and
therefore is unsuitable for cat-copying files because it doesn't preserve
the original contents.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
