.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.TH CHGRP 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.SH NAME
chgrp \- change group ownership of files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "chgrp [" options "] " "group file..."
.sp
POSIX options:
.B [\-R]
.sp
GNU options (shortest form):
.B [\-cfvR] [\-\-dereference] [\-\-reference=\fIfile\fB]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chgrp
changes the group ownership of each given
.I file
to
.I group,
which can be either a group name, a numeric group ID, or an existing
referenced file.
.SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.TP
.B \-R
Recursively change the group ownership of directories and their contents.
(And continue even when errors are encountered.)
.SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-c, \-\-changes"
Verbosely describe the action for each
.I file
whose group actually changes.
.TP
.B "\-\-dereference"
Do not act on symlinks themselves but rather on what they point to.
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-silent, \-\-quiet"
Do not print error messages about files whose group cannot be changed.
.TP
.B "\-h, \-\-no\-dereference"
Act on symlinks themselves instead of what they point to.  This is the
default. If
.B lchown(2)
isn't available \fBchown\fR will fail.  If any symlinks
are found during a recursive transversal and \fB\-\-verbose\fR hasn't
been specified, no error message will be printed.
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-verbose"
Verbosely describe the action (or non-action) taken for every
.IR file .
.TP
.B "\-R, \-\-recursive"
Recursively change the group ownership of directories and their contents.
.TP
.B \-\-reference=\fIfile
Change specified files and directories to the same group as \fIfile\fR.
.SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-"
Terminate option list.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
usual meaning.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX 1003.2 only requires the \-R option. Use of other options
may not be portable.
.SH NOTES
set-uid and set-gid is preserved even on systems where
.BR chown(2)
resets these bits.

This page describes
.B chgrp
as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
aeb@cwi.nl, aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
