.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU chroot man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH chroot 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
chroot \- run command with a different root directory
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI chroot " directory " [ "command " [ args ]...]
.sp
.B chroot [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chroot
runs a command with a specified root directory. On many systems only the
super-user can do this. 

Ordinarily, filenames are looked up starting at the root of the
directory structure, i.e., `/'.
.B chroot
changes the root to the directory 
.I directory
(which must exist) and then runs 
.I command
with
optional 
.IR args.
If 
.I command
is not specified, the default is the value
of the 
.B SHELL
environment variable or `/bin/sh' if not set, invoked with the `\-i' option.

Note that it may be quite possible that processes started from the chroot
jail may not have access to the system libraries.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
