.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU cksum man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH CKSUM 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBcksum\fR \- print CRC checksum and byte counts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR cksum
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR cksum " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cksum
computes and prints a CRC checksum for each given
.IR FILE .
If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

.B cksum
prints the CRC checksum for each file along with the number
of bytes in the file, and the filename unless no arguments were given.

.B cksum
is typically used to ensure that files transferred by unreliable means
(e.g., netnews) have not been corrupted, by comparing the 
.B cksum
output for the received files with the 
.B cksum
output for the original files (typically given in the distribution).

The CRC (cyclic redundancy check) algorithm is specified by the POSIX.2
standard.  It is not  compatible with the BSD or System V
.BR sum (1)
algorithms; it is more robust.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
