.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"
.\"     GNU cmp man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH CMP 1 "October 2002" "GNU diff Utilities 2.8.1"
.SH NAME
\fBcmp\fP \- compare two files byte by byte
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "cmp " [ \-bls "] [" "\-i " \fIBYTES\fR[:\fIBYTES2\fP]]
.RB [ "\-n " \fIBYTES\fR]
.RB [ \-\-bytes\ \fIBYTES\fR]
.RB [ \-\-ignore\-initial= \fIBYTES\fR[:\fIBYTES2\fP]]
.RB [ \-\-print\-bytes "] [" \-\-quiet "] [" \-\-silent "] [" \-\-verbose ] 
.IR FILE1 " [" FILE2 ]
.sp
.BR "cmp " [ \-v "] [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cmp
compares two files of any type, byte by byte, and writes the results to the
standard output.  At most one of these three file names may be
.RB ` \- ',
which tells
.B cmp
to read the standard input for that file.

By default, \fBcmp\fP is silent if the files are the same; if they differ,
the byte and line number at which the first difference occurred is reported.
Bytes and lines are numbered beginning with one.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-b, \-\-print\-bytes" 
Print the differing bytes.  Display control characters as a `^' followed by
a letter and precede the bytes that have the high bit set with `M-' (which
stands for meta).
.TP
.BI "\-i " BYTES\fR[:\fIBYTES2\fR]] ", \-\-ignore\-initial=" BYTES\fR[:\fIBYTES2\fR]]
Ignore any differences in the the first \fIBYTES\fP bytes of the input files.
Treat files with fewer than \fIBYTES\fP bytes as if they are empty.  If
\fIBYTES2\fR is given, it also skips \fIBYTES2\fR from the second file
before comparing.
.TP 
.B "\-l, \-\-verbose"
Print the (decimal) offsets and (octal) values of all differing bytes.
.TP
.BI "\-n " BYTES ", \-\-bytes=" BYTES
Only compare up to \fIBYTES\fR.
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent"
Do not print anything; only return an exit status indicating
whether the files differ.	  
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.B cmp
exits with one of the following values:
.TP
.B 0
No differences were found.
.TP
.B 1
Some differences were found. If one file is shorter than the the other and
the \fB\-\-verbose\fP option has been specified, \fBcmp\fP will report that
EOF has been reached on the shorter file.
.TP
.B 2
Some error has occurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR diff "(1), " diff3 (1)
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
