.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU csplit man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH CSPLIT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBcsplit\fR \- split a file into context-determinted pieces
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B csplit 
.RB [ \-kqsz ]
[\fB\-b \fISUFFIX\fR] [\fB\-f \fIPREFIX\fR]
[\fB\-n \fIDIGITS\fR] [\fB\-\-digits=\fIDIGITS\fR]
[\fB\-\-elide\-empty\-files\fR] [\fB\-\-keep\-files\fR]
[\fB\-\-prefix=\fIPREFIX\fR]
[\fB\-\-quiet\fR]
[\fB\-\-silent\fR]
[\fB\-\-suffix=\fISUFFIX\fR]
[\fIFILE\fR]

.BR csplit " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B csplit
creates zero or more output files containing sections of \fIFILE\fR. If 
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

The contents of the output files are determined by the \fIPATTERN\fR
arguments.  An error occurs if a \fIPATTERN\fR argument refers to a
nonexistent line of the input file (e.g., if no remaining line matches a
given regular expression).  After every \fIPATTERN\fR has been matched, any
remaining input is copied into one last output file.

The output files' names consist of a prefix (`xx' by default)
followed by a suffix.  By default, the suffix is an ascending sequence
of two-digit decimal numbers from `00' and up to `99'.  In any case,
concatenating the output files in sorted order by filename produces the
original input file.

By default, \fBcsplit\fR prints the number of bytes written to each
output file after it has been created.

By default, if \fBcsplit\fR encounters an error or receives a hangup,
interrupt, quit, or terminate signal, it removes any output files that
it has created so far before it exits.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b \fISUFFIX\fB, \-\-suffix=\fISUFFIX
Use \fISUFFIX\fR as the output file name suffix.  When this option is
specified, the suffix string must include exactly one
\fBprintf\fR(3)-style conversion specification, possibly including
format specification flags, a field width, a precision
specifications, or all of these kinds of modifiers.
The format letter must convert a binary integer argument to readable form;
thus, only 
.RB ` d "', `" i "', `" u "', `" o "', `" x "', and `" X '
conversions are allowed.  The entire \fISUFFIX\fR is given (with the current
output file number) to \fBsprintf\fR(3) to form the file name suffixes
for each of the individual output files in turn.  If this option is used, the
\fB\-\-digits\fR option is ignored.
.TP
.B \-f \fIPREFIX\fB, \-\-prefix=\fIPREFIX
Use \fIPREFIX\fR as the output file name prefix.
.TP
.B \-k, \-\-keep\-files
Do not remove output files when errors are encountered.
.TP
.B \-n \fIDIGITS\fB, \-\-digits=\fIDIGITS
Use output file names containing numbers that are \fIDIGITS\fR digits
long instead of the default 2.
.TP
.B \-q, \-s, \--quiet, \--silent
Do not print counts of output file sizes.
.TP
.B \-z, \-\-elide\-empty\-files
Suppress the generation of zero-length output files.  (In cases
where the section delimiters of the input file are supposed to
mark the first lines of each of the sections, the first output
file will generally be a zero-length file unless you use this
option.)  The output file sequence numbers always run consecutively
starting from 0, even when this option is specified.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH PATTERN ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I N
Create an output file containing the input up to but not including
line \fIN\fR (a positive integer).  If followed by a repeat count, also
create an output file containing the next \fILINE\fR lines of the input
file once for each repeat.
.TP
\fB/\fIREGEXP\fB/\fR[\fIOFFSET\fR]
Create an output file containing the current line
up to (but not including) the next line of the input file that contains a
match for \fIREGEXP\fR.  The optional \fIOFFSET\fR is a
.RB ` + "' or `" - '
followed by a positive integer.  If it is given, the input up to the matching
line plus or minus \fIOFFSET\fR is put into the output file, and the
line after that begins the next section of input.
.TP
\fB%\fIREGEXP\fB%\fR[\fIOFFSET\fR]
Like the previous type, except that it does not create an output
file, so that section of the input file is effectively ignored.
.TP
\fB{\fIREPEAT\-COUNT\fB}
Repeat the previous pattern \fIREPEAT\-COUNT\fR additional times.
\fIREPEAT\-COUNT\fR can either be a positive integer or an asterisk,
meaning repeat as many times as necessary until the input is exhausted.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
