.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU cut man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH CUT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBcut\fR \- print selected parts of lines
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cut
.RB [ \-ns ]
.RB [ "\-b \fIBYTE\-LIST" ]
.RB [ "\-c \fICHARACTER\-LIST" ]
.RB [ "\-d \fIDELIM" ]
.RB [ "\-f \fIFIELD\-LIST" ]
.RB [ \-\-bytes=\fIBYTE\-LIST ]
.RB [ \-\-characters=\fICHARACTER\-LIST ]
.RB [ \-\-delimiter=\fIDELIM ]
.RB [ \-\-fields=\fIFIELD\-LIST ]
.RB [ \-\-only\-delimited ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR cut " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cut
writes to standard output selected parts of each line of each given 
.IR FILE .
If no
.I FILE
is given or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

\fIBYTE\-LIST\fR, \fICHARACTER\-LIST\fR, and \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR are one or
more numbers or ranges (two numbers separated by a dash) separated by
commas.  Bytes, characters, and fields are numbered from starting at 1.
Incomplete ranges may be given: `\-M' means `1\-M'; `N\-' means `N' through
end of line or last field.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b \fIBYTE\-LIST\fB, \-\-bytes=\fIBYTE\-LIST
Print only the bytes in positions listed in \fIBYTE\-LIST\fR.  Tabs and
backspaces are treated like any other character; they take up 1 byte.	       
.TP
.B \-c \fICHARACTER\-LIST\fB, \-\-characters=\fICHARACTER\-LIST
Print only characters in positions listed in \fICHARACTER\-LIST\fR.  The
same as \fB\-b\fR for now, but internationalization will change that.
Tabs and backspaces are treated like any other character; they take up 1
character.
.TP
.B \-d \fIDELIM\fB, delimiter=\fIDELIM
For \fB\-f\fR, fields are separated by the first character in \fIDELIM\fR
(default is <TAB>).	 
.TP
.B \-f \fIFIELD\-LIST\fB, \-\-fields=\fIFIELD\-LIST
Print only the fields listed in \fIFIELD\-LIST\fR.  Fields are separated
by a <TAB> by default.
.TP
.B \-n
Do not split multi-byte characters (no-op for now).
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-only\-delimited
For \fB\-f\fR, do not print lines that do not contain the field
separator character.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
