.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU date man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH date 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
date \- print or set the system date and time
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B date
.BI "[\-uR] [\-d " datestr "] [\-f " datefile "] [\-r " file "] [\-s " datestr ]
.BI "[\-I [" timespec ]]
.BI "[\-\-date=" datestr "] [\--file=" datefile ]
.BI [\-\-iso\-8601[= timespec ]]
.BI [\-\-reference= file ]
.BI "[\-\-set=" datestr ]
.B [--rfc-822] [\-\-universal] [\-\-utc]
.BI [+ format "] [" MMDDhhmm [[ CC ] YY ][. ss ]]
.sp
.B date [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B date
with no arguments prints the current time and date (in the format
of the `%c' directive described below).
.PP
If given an argument does not start with `+' and you have the appropiate
privileges,
.B date
sets the system clock to the time and date specified by that argument.
The 
.BR \-\-date " and " --set
options may not be used with
such an argument.  The 
.B --universal
option may be used with such an argument to indicate that the specified
time and date are relative to Coordinated Universal Time rather than to
the local time zone. The argument must consist entirely of digits, which
have the following meaning:
.IP \fBMM\fP
month
.IP \fBDD\fP
day within month
.IP \fBhh\fP
hour
.IP \fBmm\fP
minute
.IP \fBCC\fP
first two digits of year (optional)
.IP \fBYY\fP
last two digits of year (optional)
.IP \fBss\fP
second (optional)
.PP
If given an argument that starts with a `+',
.B date
prints the current time and date (or the time and date specified by the
.B \-\-date
option) in a format controlled by that argument, which has the
same format as the format string passed to the \fBstrftime\fP(3) function.
Except for fields, which start with `%', characters in the
.I format
string are printed unchanged.
.SS Time fields
.IP \fB%H\fP
hour (00..23)
.IP \fB%I\fP
hour (01..12)
.IP \fB%k\fP
hour ( 0..23)
.IP \fB%l\fP
hour ( 1..12)
.IP \fB%M\fP
minute (00..59)
.IP \fB%p\fP
locale's AM or PM
.IP \fB%r\fP
time, 12-hour (hh:mm:ss [AP]M)
.IP \fB%s\fP
seconds since 1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC (a nonstandard extension)
.IP \fB%S\fP
second (00..60)
.IP \fB%T\fP
time, 24-hour (hh:mm:ss)
.IP \fB%X\fP
locale's time representation (%H:%M:%S)
.IP \fB%Z\fP
time zone (e.g., EDT), or nothing if no time zone is determinable
.SS Date fields
.IP \fB%a\fP
locale's abbreviated weekday name (Sun..Sat)
.IP \fB%A\fP
locale's full weekday name, variable length (Sunday..Saturday)
.IP \fB%b\fP
locale's abbreviated month name (Jan..Dec)
.IP \fB%B\fP
locale's full month name, variable length (January..December)
.IP \fB%c\fP
locale's date and time (Sat Nov 04 12:02:33 EST 1989)
.IP \fB%d\fP
day of month (01..31)
.IP \fB%D\fP
date (mm/dd/yy)
.IP \fB%h\fP
same as %b
.IP \fB%j\fP
day of year (001..366)
.IP \fB%m\fP
month (01..12)
.IP \fB%U\fP
week number of year with Sunday as first day of week (00..53)
.IP \fB%w\fP
day of week (0..6) with 0 corresponding to Sunday
.IP \fB%W\fP
week number of year with Monday as first day of week (00..53)
.IP \fB%x\fP
locale's date representation (mm/dd/yy)
.IP \fB%y\fP
last two digits of year (00..99)
.IP \fB%Y\fP
year (1970...)
.SS Literal fields
.IP \fB%%\fP
a literal %
.IP \fB%n\fP
a newline
.IP \fB%t\fP
a horizontal tab
.SS Padding
By default,
.BR date
pads numeric fields with zeroes so that, for example, numeric months are
always output as two digits. GNU extends
.BR date
functionality to recognize the following nonstandard numeric modifiers
between the `%' 
and the field:
.IP \fB\-\fP
(hyphen) do not pad the field; useful if output is intended for human
consumption.
.IP \fB_\fP
(underscore) pad the field with spaces; useful if you need a fixed
number of characters in the output, but zeroes are too distracting.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-d " datestr ", \-\-date " datestr
Display the time and date specified in
.I datestr
instead of the current time and date.
.I datestr
can be in almost any common format.
It can contain month names, timezones, am' and pm', etc.
.TP
.BI "\-f " datefile ", \-\-file=" datefile
Parse each line in 
.I datefile as with 
.B \-d
and display the resulting time and date.  If 
.I datefile 
is `-', use standard input.  This is useful when you have many dates to
process, because the system overhead of starting up the 
.B date 
executable many times can be considerable.
.TP
.BI "\-r " file ", \-\-reference=" file
Display the time and date reference according to the last
modification time of FILE, instead of the current time and date.
.TP
.BI "\-s " datestr ", \-\-set " datestr
Set the time and date to
.IR datestr ", see
.B \-d
above.  Return 0 on success, nonzero on failure.
.TP
.B "\-u, \-\-universal, \-\-utc"
Consider TZ is set to UTC0 (Coordinated Universal Time, also
known as Greenwich Mean Time or GMT) instead of in local (wall clock) time.
.TP
.B \-I [\fItimespec\fB], \-\-iso\-8601[=\fItimespec\fB]
Display the date using the ISO 8601 specified format, `%Y\-%m\-%d', and any
time additions specified by \fItimespec\fR (default is \fBauto\fR) preceded
by `T' and concluded by `%z' (or `%Z' if \fB\-\-utc\fR is specified)
.RS
.TP
.B auto
No time additions.
.TP
.B hours
Append the hour of the day.
.TP
.B minutes
Append the hour and minutes.
.TP
.B seconds
Append the hour, minutes and seconds.
.RE
.TP
.B \-R, \-\-rfc-822
Display the time and date using the RFC-822 specified format, `%a,
%_d %b %Y %H:%M:%S %z'.  If
.B \-\-utc
is also specified, use `GMT' in place of %z.  Day and month names are
emitted according to the `C' locale.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
To print the date of the day before yesterday
.IP
date \-\-date \'2 days ago\'
.PP
To print the date of the day three months and one day hence
.IP
date \-\-date \'3 months 1 day\'
.PP
To print the day of year of Christmas in the current year
.IP
date --date \'25 Dec\' +%j
.PP
To print the current date in a format including the full month name and
the day of the month
.IP
date \'+%B %d\'
.PP
But this may not be what you want because for the first nine days
of the month, the \`%d\' expands to a zero-padded two-digit field,
for example \`date \-d 1-may \'+%B %d\'\' will print
\`May 01\'.
.PP
To print the same date but without the leading zero for one-digit
days of month, you can use the nonstandard \`\-\' modifier to suppress
the padding altogether.
.IP
date \-d 1-may \'+%B %-d\'
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
