.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.TH DD 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.SH NAME
dd \- convert and copy a file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dd
.B [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.BI [if= file ]
.BI [of= file ]
.BI [ibs= bytes ]
.BI [obs= bytes ]
.BI [bs= bytes ]
.BI [cbs= bytes ]
.BI [skip= blocks ]
.BI [seek= blocks ]
.BI [count= blocks ]
.B "[conv={ascii, ebcdic, ibm, block, unblock, lcase, ucase, swab, noerror, notrunc, sync}]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dd
copies a file (from standard input to standard output, by
default) using specific input and output blocksizes,
while optionally performing conversions on it.
.PP
It reads the input one block at a time, using the specified input
block size (the default is 512 bytes).
If the
.BI bs= bytes
option was given, and no conversion other than
.BR sync ", " noerror ", or " notrunc
was specified, it writes the amount of data read (which could be smaller
than what was requested) in a separate output block. This output block
has precisely the same length as was read unless the
.B sync
conversion was specified, in which case the data is padded with NULs
or spaces (see below).
.PP
Otherwise, the input, read one block at a time, is processed
and the resulting output is collected and written in blocks
of the specified output block size. The final output block
may be shorter.
.PP
The numeric-valued options below (bytes and blocks) can be followed
by a multiplier, as listed in \fBMULTIPLIERS\fR.  Two or more of such
numeric expressions can be multiplied by putting \fBx\fR in between.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "if=" file
Read from
.I file
instead of standard input.
.TP
.BI "of=" file
Write to
.I file
instead of standard output.  Unless
.B conv=notrunc
is given,
.B dd
truncates
.I file
to zero bytes (or the size specified with
.BR seek= ")."
.TP
.BI "ibs=" bytes
Read
.I bytes
bytes at a time. The default is 512.
.TP
.BI "obs=" bytes
Write
.I bytes
bytes at a time. The default is 512.
.TP
.BI "bs=" bytes
Both read and write
.I bytes
bytes at a time.  This overrides
.B ibs
and
.BR obs .
(And setting
.B bs
is not equivalent with setting both
.B ibs
and
.B obs
to this same value, at least when no conversion other than
.BR sync ,
.B noerror
and
.B notrunc
is specified, since it stipulates that each input block
shall be copied to the output as a single block
without aggregating short blocks.)
.TP
.BI "cbs=" bytes
Specify the conversion block size for
.B block
and
.BR unblock .
.TP
.BI "skip=" blocks
Skip
.I blocks
.BR ibs -byte
blocks in the input file before copying.
.TP
.BI "seek=" blocks
Skip
.I blocks
.BR obs -byte
blocks in the output file before copying.
.TP
.BI "count=" blocks
Copy
.I blocks
.BR ibs -byte
blocks from the input file, instead of everything
until the end of the file.
.TP
.BI "conv=" CONVERSION "[," CONVERSION "]..."
Convert the file as specified by the
.I CONVERSION
argument(s).  (No spaces around any comma(s).)
.RS
.PP
Conversions:
.PP
.TP
.B ascii
Convert EBCDIC to ASCII.
.TP
.B ebcdic
Convert ASCII to EBCDIC.
.TP
.B ibm
Convert ASCII to alternate EBCDIC.
.TP
.B block
For each line in the input, output
.B cbs
bytes, replacing the input newline with a space and padding
with spaces as necessary.
.TP
.B unblock
Replace trailing spaces in each
.BR cbs -sized
input block with a newline.
.TP
.B lcase
Change uppercase letters to lowercase.
.TP
.B ucase
Change lowercase letters to uppercase.
.TP
.B swab
Swap every pair of input bytes.
.SM GNU
.BR dd ,
unlike others, works when an odd number of bytes are read--the last
byte is simply copied (since there is nothing to swap it with).
.TP
.B noerror
Continue after read errors.
.TP
.B notrunc
Do not truncate the output file.
.TP
.B sync
Pad every input block to size of
.B ibs
with trailing NULs, unless \fBblock\fR or \fBunblock\fR was used.
.RE
.SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-"
Terminate option list.
.SH MULTIPLIERS
Numbers may be followed by a size letter to specify a multiple of that
size, and a \fBB\fR to select normal bytes or a \fBD\fR to select
decimal "commercial" bytes.  For example `1KB' is equal to `1024' and
`1KD' is equal to `1000'.  Exceptions are \fBb\fR (512 bytes), \fBc\fR (1
byte), and \fBw\fR (which should never be used - it means 2 in System V and
4 in 4.2BSD), which can't be followed by a \fBB\fR or \fBD\fR.
.TP
.B k
kilo: 2^10 = 1024 for normal bytes, or 10^3 = 1000 for decimal bytes
.TP
.B M
Mega: 2^20 = 1,048,576 or 10^6 = 1,000,000
.TP
.B G
Giga: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 or 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
.TP
.B T
Tera: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 or 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B P
Peta: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 or 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B E
Exa: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 or 10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Z
Zetta: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 or 10^21 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Y
Yotta: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 or 10^24 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
usual meaning.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX 1003.2
.SH NOTES
This page describes
.B dd
as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
