.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.TH DF 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.SH NAME
df \- report filesystem disk space usage
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "df [" options "] [" file... ]
.sp
POSIX options:
.B [\-kP]
.sp
GNU options (shortest form):
.B [\-ahiklmvHPT]
.BI "[\-t " fstype ]
.BI "[\-x " fstype ]
.B [\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fB]
.B [\-\-no\-sync]
.B [\-\-sync]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B df
reports the amount of disk space used and available on
filesystems.
.PP
With no arguments,
.B df
reports the space used and available on all
currently mounted filesystems (of all types).
Otherwise,
.B df
reports on the filesystem containing each argument
.IR file .
.SH "POSIX DETAILS"
The output is in 512-byte units by default, but in
1024-byte units when the \-k option is given.
The output format is undefined, unless the \-P option is given.
If
.I file
is not a regular file, a directory or a FIFO, the result
is unspecified.
.SH "GNU DETAILS"
If an argument
.I file
is a disk device file containing a mounted filesystem,
.B df
shows the space available on that filesystem rather
than on the filesystem containing the device node.
.SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-k"
Use 1024-byte units instead of the default 512-byte units.
.TP
.B "\-P"
Output in six columns, with heading `Filesystem N-blocks
Used Available Capacity Mounted on' (with N=512, but N=1024
when the \-k option is given).
.SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
Include in the listing filesystems that have a size of 0 blocks, or of type
`ignore' or `auto' which are omitted by default.
.TP
.B "\-h, \-\-human-readable"
Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.
Powers of 2 are used, not 10; \fBM\fR stands for 1,048,576 bytes.
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-inodes"
List inode usage information instead of block usage.
.TP
.B "\-k, \-\-kilobytes"
Print sizes in 1024-byte blocks, overriding the default block size.
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-local
List only local filesystems.
.TP
.B "\-m, \-\-megabytes"
Print sizes in megabyte (1,048,576 bytes) blocks.
.TP
.BI "\-t " "fstype, " "\-\-type=" "fstype"
List only filesystems of type
.I fstype.
Multiple types can be specified by giving multiple
.B \-t
options.  See \fB\-\-all\fR for ommited defaults.
.TP
.B "\-v"
Ignored; for compatibility with System V versions of
.B df.
.TP
.BI "\-x " "fstype, " "\-\-exclude\-type=" "fstype"
Exclude filesystems of type
.I fstype.
Multiple filesystem types can be eliminated by giving multiple
.B "\-x"
options.  By default, no filesystem types are excluded.  See \fB\-\-all\fR
for ommited defaults.
.TP
.B \-H, \-\-si
Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.  (SI
is the International System of Units, which defines these letters)  Powers
of 10 are used, not 2; \fBM\fR stands for 1,000,000 bytes.
.TP
.B "\-P, \-\-portability"
Use the
.SM POSIX
output format.  This is like the default format
except that a) the information about each filesystem is always
printed on exactly one line; a mount device is never put on a line
by itself.  This means that if the mount device name is more than
20 characters long (e.g., for some network mounts), the columns
are misaligned. b) Rounding is upwards. c) Column headers match POSIX.  
.TP
.B "\-T, \-\-print\-type"
Print each filesystem's type.  See
.BR mount (8).
.TP
.B \-\-block\-size=\fISIZE
Set the block size to \fISIZE\fR, overriding the value of the environment
variables.
.TP
.B "\-\-no\-sync"
Do not invoke
.B sync(2)
before getting any usage data.
This may make
.B df
run significantly faster, but on some systems (notably SunOS)
the results may be slightly out of date.  This is the default.
.TP
.B "\-\-sync"
Invoke
.B sync(2)
before getting any usage data.  On some systems 
(notably SunOS), doing this yields more up to date results,
but in general this option makes
.B df
much slower, especially when there are many or very busy filesystems.
.SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-"
Terminate option list.
.SH BLOCK SIZE
The default output file block size is 1024 bytes (or 512 if \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR).
You may change this value by setting any of the following environment
variables, which are overriden if a \fB\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR is given.
.TP
In order of precedence:
.BR DF_BLOCK_SIZE ", " BLOCK_SIZE ", " POSIXLY_CORRECT .
.PP
The values for these variables can be either a number, \fBhuman\-readable\fR, or
\fBsi\fR.  Numbers may be followed by a size letter to specify a multiple of that
size, and a \fBB\fR to select normal bytes or a \fBD\fR to select
decimal "commercial" bytes.  For example `BLOCK_SIZE=1KB' is equal to
`BLOCK_SIZE=1024' and `BLOCK_SIZE=1KD' is equal to `BLOCK_SIZE=1000'

The following letters are recognized (and used when printing with
\fB\-\-human\-readable\fR or \fB\-\-si\fR)
.TP
.B k
kilo: 2^10 = 1024 for \fB\-\-human-readable\fR, or 10^3 = 1000 for \fB\-\-si\fR
.TP
.B M
Mega: 2^20 = 1,048,576 or 10^6 = 1,000,000
.TP
.B G
Giga: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 or 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
.TP
.B T
Tera: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 or 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B P
Peta: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 or 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B E
Exa: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 or 10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Z
Zetta: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 or 10^21 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Y
Yotta: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 or 10^24 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The variables DF_BLOCK_SIZE, BLOCK_SIZE and POSIXLY_CORRECT determine the
choice of the output file block size.
The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
usual meaning.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX 1003.2
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mount (8)
.SH NOTES
Disk usage is rounded upwards, free space downwards.

This page describes
.B df
as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
