.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU diff3 man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH DIFF3 1 "October 2002" "GNU diff Utilities 2.8.1"
.SH NAME
\fBdiff3\fP \- find differences between three files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B diff3
[\fB\-3aeimxAETX\fP] [\fB-L\fP \fILABEL\fR] [\fB\-\-easy\-only\fP] [\fB\-\-ed\fP]
[\fB\-\-initial\-tab\fR] [\fB\-\-label=\fILABEL\fR] [\fB\-\-merge\fP]
[\fB\-\-overlap\-only\fP] [\fB\-\-show\-all\fP] [\fB\-\-show\-overlap\fP]
[\fB\-\-text\fP] \fIMINE OLDER YOUR

.B diff3
[\fB\-v\fP] [\fB\-\-help\fP] [\fB\-\-version\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B diff3
compares three files and outputs descriptions
of their differences.

The files to compare are
.IR MINE ,
.IR OLDER ,
and
.IR YOURS .
At most one of these three file names may be
.RB ` \- ',
which tells
.B diff3
to read the standard input for that file.

Normally \fBdiff3\fP invokes \fBdiff\fP(1) to do its work, but you can
change the program by setting the \fBDIFF\fP environment variable to the
name of other program.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-3, \-\-easy\-only
Like
.BR \-e ,
except output only the nonoverlapping changes.
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-text
Treat all files as text and compare them line-by-line, even if they
do not appear to be text.
.TP
.B \-e, \-\-ed
Generate an
.I ed
script that incorporates all the changes from
.I OLDER
to
.I YOURS
into
.IR MINE .
.TP
.B \-i
Generate `\fBw\fP' and `\fBq\fP' commands at the end of the
.B ed
script for System V compatibility.  This option must be combined with
one of the
.B \-AeExX3
options, and may not be combined with
.BR \-m .
.TP
.B \-m, -\-merge
Apply the edit script to the first file and send the result to standard
output.  Unlike piping the output from \fBdiff3\fP to \fBed\fP
this works even for binary files and incomplete lines. \fB\-A\fP is assumed
if no edit script option is specified. 
.TP
.B \-x, \-\-overlap\-only
Like
.BR \-e ,
except output only the overlapping changes.
.TP
.B \-A, \-\-show\-all
Incorporate all changes from
.I OLDER
to
.I YOURS
into
.IR MINE ,
surrounding all overlapping changes with bracket lines.
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-show\-overlap
Like
.BR \-e ,
except bracket lines from overlapping changes' first
and third files.  With
.BR \-e ,
an overlapping change looks like this:
.sp
.nf
<<<<<<< \fIMINE\fP
lines from \fIMINE\fP
=======
lines from \fIYOURS\fP
>>>>>>> \fIYOURS\fP
.fi
.TP
.BI "\-L " LABEL ", \-\-label=" LABEL
Use the label
.I LABEL
for the brackets output by the
\fB\-A\fP, \fB\-E\fP and \fB\-X\fP options.  This option may be given up to
three times, one for each input file.  The default labels are the names of
the input files.  Thus
.B "diff3 \-L X \-L Y \-L Z \-m A B C"
acts like
.BR "diff3 \-m A B C" ,
except that the output looks like it came from
files named
.BR X ,
.B Y
and
.B Z
rather than from files
named
.BR A ,
.B B
and
.BR C .
.TP
.B \-T, \-\-initial\-tab
Output a tab rather than two spaces before the text of a line in normal format.
This causes the alignment of tabs in the line to look normal.
.TP
.B \-X
Like \fB\-E\fP, except output only the overlapping changes.  In other words,
like \fB\-x\fP, except bracket changes as in \fB\-E\fP.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Output the version number of
.BR diff3 .
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Each hunk begins with a line marked `\fB====\fP'.  Three-way hunks have
plain `\fB====\fP' lines, and two-way hunks have 
.RB ` 1 "', " 2 "', or `" 3 ' 
appended to specify which of the three input files differ in that hunk.  The
hunks contain copies of two or three sets of input lines each preceded by one
or two commands identifying where the lines came from.  The default behaviour
is to precede input lines with two spaces to distinguish them from the 
commands.  If `\fB-T\fP' is specified then \fBdiff3\fP uses a tab instead, 
lining up any other tabs correctly.
.SS Command forms
.TP
.IB FILE : L a
This hunk appears after line \fIL\fP of \fIFILE\fP, and contains no lines
in that file.  To edit this file to yield the other files, one
must append hunk lines taken from the other files.  For example,
`1:11a' means that the hunk follows line 11 in the
first file and contains no lines from that file.
.TP
.IB FILE : R c
This hunk contains the lines in the range \fIR\fP of \fIFILE\fP.  The
range \fIR\fP is a comma-separated pair of line numbers, or just one
number if the range is a singleton.  To edit this file
to yield the other files, one must change the specified lines to be the lines
taken from the other files.  For example, `2:11,13c' means that
the hunk contains lines 11 through 13 from the second file.
.sp
If the last line in a set of input lines is incomplete it is distinguished
on output from a full line by a following line that starts with `\fB\\\fP'.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.B diff3
exits with one of the following values:
.TP
.B 0
\fBdiff3\fR was successful, no overlapping changes (conflicts) found.
.TP
.B 1
Some conflict was found.
.TP
.B 2
Some error occurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
cmp(1), comm(1), diff(1), ed(1), patch(1), sdiff(1).
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
