.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.TH DU 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.SH NAME
du \- estimate file space usage
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "du [" options "] [" file... ]
.sp
POSIX options:
.B [\-askx]
.sp
GNU options (shortest form):
.B [\-abchklmsxDHLS] [\-X \fIFILE\fB]
.B [\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fB] [\-\-max\-depth=\fIDEPTH\fB]
.B [\-\-exclude=\fIPATTERN\fB]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B du
reports the amount of disk space used by the specified files,
and by each directory in the hierarchies rooted at the
specified files.
Here `disk space used' means space used for the entire
file hierarchy below the specified file.
.PP
With no arguments,
.B du
reports the disk space for the current directory.
.SH "POSIX DETAILS"
The output is in 512-byte units by default, but in
1024-byte units when the \-k option is given.
.SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-a"
Show counts for all files encountered, not just directories.
.TP
.B "\-k"
Use 1024-byte units instead of the default 512-byte units.
.TP
.B "\-s"
Only output space usage for the actual arguments given,
not for their subdirectories.
.TP
.B "\-x"
Only count space on the same device as the argument given.
.SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
Show counts for all files, not just directories.
.TP
.B "\-b, \-\-bytes"
Print sizes in bytes, overriding the default block size.
.TP
.B "\-c, \-\-total"
Print a grand total of all arguments after all arguments have been
processed.  This can be used to find out the total disk usage of a
given set of files or directories.
.TP
.B "\-h, \-\-human\-readable"
Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.
Powers of 2 are used, not 10; \fBM\fR stands for 1,048,576 bytes.
.TP
.B "\-k, \-\-kilobytes"
Print sizes in kilobytes.
.TP
.B "\-l, \-\-count\-links"
Count the size of all files, even if they have appeared already
(as a hard link).
.TP
.B "\-m, \-\-megabytes"
Print sizes in megabyte (that 1,048,576 bytes) blocks.
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-summarize"
Display only a total for each argument.
.TP
.B "\-x, \-\-one\-file\-system"
Skip directories that are on different filesystems from the one
that the argument being processed is on.
.TP
.B "\-D, \-\-dereference\-args"
Dereference symlinks that are command line arguments.  Does
not affect other symlinks.  This is helpful for finding out
the disk usage of directories, such as
.IR /usr/tmp ,
which are often symlinks.
.TP
.B \-H, \-\-si
Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.  (SI
is the International System of Units, which defines these letters
as prefixes)  Powers of 10 are used, not 2; \fBM\fR stands for
1,000,000 bytes.
.TP
.B "\-L, \-\-dereference"
Dereference symlinks (show the disk space used by the file
or directory that the link points to instead of the space used by
the link).
.TP
.B "\-S, \-\-separate\-dirs"
Report the size of each directory separately, not including the
sizes of subdirectories.
.TP
.B \-X \fIFILE\fB, \-\-exclude\-from=\fIFILE
As \fB\-\-exclude\fR, except take the patterns to exclude from \fIFILE\fR,
one per line.  If \fIFILE\fR is `\fB-\fR', read the patterns from standard
input.
.TP
.B \-\-block\-size=\fISIZE
Set the block size to \fISIZE\fR, overriding the value of the environment
variables.
.TP
.B \-\-exclude=\fIPATTERN
When recursing, skip subdirectories or files matching pattern \fIPATTERN\fR.
For example, `du \-\-exclude='*~'' excludes files whose names end in `~'
.TP
.B \-\-max\-depth=\fIDEPTH
Show the total for each directory (and file if \fB\-all\fR) that is at
most \fIDEPTH\fR depth levels down from the root of the hierarchy.  The
root is at level 0, so `du \-\-max\-depth=0' is equivalent to `du \-s'.	       
.SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-"
Terminate option list.
.SH BUGS
On BSD systems,
.B du
reports sizes that are half the correct values
for files that are NFS-mounted from HP-UX systems.  On HP-UX systems,
it reports sizes that are twice the correct values for files that are
NFS-mounted from BSD systems.  This is due to a flaw in HP-UX; it also
affects the HP-UX
.B du
program.
.SH BLOCK SIZE
The default output file block size is 1024 bytes (or 512 if \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR).
You may change this value by setting any of the following environment
variables, which are overriden if a \fB\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR is given.
.TP
In order of precedence:
.BR DU_BLOCK_SIZE ", " BLOCK_SIZE ", " POSIXLY_CORRECT .
.PP
The values for these variables can be either a number, \fBhuman\-readable\fR, or
\fBsi\fR.  Numbers may be followed by a size letter to specify a multiple of that
size, and a \fBB\fR to select normal bytes or a \fBD\fR to select
decimal "commercial" bytes.  For example `BLOCK_SIZE=1KB' is equal to
`BLOCK_SIZE=1024' and `BLOCK_SIZE=1KD' is equal to `BLOCK_SIZE=1000'

The following letters are recognized (and used when printing with
\fB\-\-human\-readable\fR or \fB\-\-si\fR)
.TP
.B k
kilo: 2^10 = 1024 for \fB\-\-human-readable\fR, or 10^3 = 1000 for \fB\-\-si\fR
.TP
.B M
Mega: 2^20 = 1,048,576 or 10^6 = 1,000,000
.TP
.B G
Giga: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 or 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
.TP
.B T
Tera: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 or 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B P
Peta: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 or 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B E
Exa: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 or 10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Z
Zetta: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 or 10^21 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Y
Yotta: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 or 10^24 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The variables DU_BLOCK_SIZE, BLOCK_SIZE and POSIXLY_CORRECT determine the
choice of the output file block size.
The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
usual meaning.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX 1003.2
.SH NOTES
Disk usage is rounded upwards, free space downwards.

This page describes
.B du
as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
