.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU echo man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH echo 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
echo \- display a line of text
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "echo [-ne] [" string... ]
.sp
.B echo [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B echo
writes each given \fIstring\fP to the standard output, with a space
between them and a newline after the last one except if option
.B \-n
is specified.
.PP
Because most shells have a built-in command by the same name, using
the unadorned command name may get you different functionality than that
described here. 
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-n
Do not output the trailing newline.
.TP
.B \-e
Enable interpretation of the following backslash-escaped characters in
each 
.IR string :
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \ea
alert (bell)
.TP
.B \eb
backspace
.TP
.B \ec
suppress trailing newline
.TP
.B \ef
form feed
.TP
.B \en
new line
.TP
.B \er
carriage return
.TP
.B \et
horizontal tab
.TP
.B \ev
vertical tab
.TP
.B \e\e
backslash
.TP
.BI \e nnn
the character whose ASCII code is \fInnn\fP (octal)
.PD
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
When GNU
.B echo
is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are recognized:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
