.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU env man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH env 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
env \- run a program in a modified environment
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "env [\-] [\-i] [\-u " name "] [\-\-ignore-environment] [\-\-unset=" name ]
.BI [ name = value ] ... "] [" command " [" args... ]]
.sp
.B env [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B env
runs a 
.I command
with an environment modified as specified by the
command line arguments.  Arguments of the form `variable=value'
set the environment variable
.I variable
to value
.IR value .
.I value
may be empty (`variable=').  Setting a variable to an empty value is
different from unsetting it.
.PP
The first remaining argument specifies a program to invoke; it is
searched for according to the specification of the \fBPATH\fP environment
variable.  Any arguments following that are passed as arguments to
that program.
.PP
If no command name is specified following the environment
specifications, the resulting environment is printed.  This is like
specifying a command name of \fBprintenv\fP(1).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-, \-i, \-\-ignore-environment"
Start with an empty environment, ignoring the inherited environment.
.TP
.BI "\-u, \-\-unset " name
Remove variable
.I name
from the environment, if it was in the environment.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
