.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU expand man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH EXPAND 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBexpand\fR \- convert tabs to spaces
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B expand
.RB [ \-i ]
.RB [ \-\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2... ]
.RB [ "\-t \fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2..." ]
.RB [ \-\-initial ]
.RB [ \-\-tabs=\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2... ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR expand " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B expand
writes each 
.I FILE
to standard output, replacing tabs with the appropiate number of spaces.  If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

By default, \fBexpand\fR converts all tabs to spaces.  It preserves
backspace characters in the output; they decrement the column count for
tab calculations.  The default action is equivalent to `-t 8' (set tabs
every 8 columns).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2...\fR]\fB, \-t \fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2...\fR]\fB, \-\-tabs=\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2...\fR]
If only one tab stop is given, set the tabs \fITAB1\fR spaces apart
(default is 8).  Otherwise, set the tabs at columns \fITAB1\fR, \fITAB2\fR,
\fI...\fR (numbered from 0), and replace any tabs beyond the last
tabstop given with single spaces.  If the tabstops are specified
with the \fB\-\-tabs\fR option, they can be separated by blanks as well as
by commas.  Short form \fB\-\fITAB...\fR is deprecated.
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-initial
Only convert initial tabs (those that precede all non-space or non-tab
characters) on each line to spaces.	       
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
