.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU fmt man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH FMT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBfmt\fR \- reformat paragraph text
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fmt
.RB [ \-ctsu "] [" -\fIWIDTH\fR "] [" "\-p \fIREFIX\fR" "] [" "\-w \fIWIDTH\fR" ]
.RB [ \-\-crown\-margin ]
.RB [ \-\-split\-only ]
.RB [ \-\-tagged\-paragraph ]
.RB [ \-\-uniform\-spacing ]
.RB [ "\-\-prefix=\fIPREFIX\fR" ] 
.RB [ "\-\-width=\fIWIDTH\fR" ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR fmt " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fmt
inserts and removes newlines to produce output lines of (at most) a
given number of characters (75 by default).  \fBfmt\fR reads from the
specified
.I FILE
arguments (or from standard input if none is given) and writes to standard
output.

By default, blank lines, spaces between words, and indentation are
preserved in the output; successive input lines with different
indentation are not joined; tabs are expanded on input and introduced on
output.

\fBfmt\fR prefers breaking lines at the end of a sentence, and tries to
avoid line breaks after the first word of a sentence or before the last
word of a sentence.  A "sentence break" is defined as either the end of
a paragraph or a word ending in any of `.?!', followed by two spaces or
end of line, ignoring any intervening parentheses or quotes.  Like
\fBTeX\fR(1), \fBfmt\fR reads entire "paragraphs" before choosing line
breaks; the algorithm is a variant of that in "Breaking Paragraphs Into
Lines" (Donald E. Knuth and Michael F. Plass, Software--Practice and
Experience', 11 (1981), 1119-1184).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-crown\-margin
"Crown margin" mode: preserve the indentation of the first two
lines within a paragraph, and align the left margin of each
subsequent line with that of the second line.
.TP
.B \-p \fIPREFIX\fB, \-\-prefix=\fIPREFIX
Only lines beginning with \fIPREFIX\fR (possibly preceded by whitespace)
are subject to formatting. The \fIPREFIX\fR and any preceding whitespace
are stripped for the formatting and then re-attached to each
formatted output line.  One use is to format certain kinds of
program comments, while leaving the code unchanged.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-split\-only
Split lines only.  Do not join short lines to form longer ones.
This prevents sample lines of code, and other such "formatted"
text from being unduly combined.
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-tagged\-margin
"Tagged paragraph" mode: like crown margin mode, except that if
indentation of the first line of a paragraph is the same as the
indentation of the second, the first line is treated as a one-line
paragraph.
.TP	  
.B \-u, \-\-uniform\-spacing
Uniform spacing.  Reduce spacing between words to one space, and
spacing between sentences to two spaces.		    
.TP
.B \-\fIWIDTH\fB, \-w \fIWIDTH\fB, \-\-width=\fIWIDTH
Fill output lines up to \fIWIDTH\fR characters (default 75).  \fBfmt\fR
initially tries to make lines about 7% shorter than this, to give
it room to balance line lengths.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
