.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU fold man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH FOLD 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBfold\fR \- wrap input lines to fit into specified width
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fold
.RB [ \-bs "] [" "\-w \fIWIDTH\fR" "]  [" \-\-bytes "] [" \-\-spaces ]
.RB [ \-\-width=\fIWIDTH ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR fold " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fold
writes each 
.I FILE
to standard output, breaking long lines.  If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

By default, \fBfold\fR breaks lines wider than 80 columns.  The output is
split into as many lines as necessary.

\fBfold\fR counts screen columns by default; thus, a tab may count more
than one column, backspace decreases the column count, and carriage
return sets the column to zero.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-bytes
Count bytes rather than columns, so that tabs, backspaces, and
carriage returns are each counted as taking up one column, just
like other characters.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-spaces
Break at word boundaries: the line is broken after the last blank
before the maximum line length.  If the line contains no such
blanks, the line is broken at the maximum line length as usual.
.TP
.B \-w \fIWIDTH\fB, \-\-width=\fIWIDTH
Use a maximum line length of \fIWIDTH\fR columns instead of 80.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
