.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU head man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH HEAD 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBhead\fR \- output the first part of files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B head
[\fB\-\fILINES\fR] [\fB\-qv\fR] [\fB\-c \fIBYTES\fR]
[\fB\-n \fILINES\fR] [\fB\-\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR] [\fB\-\-lines=\fILINES\fR]
.RB [ \-\-quiet "] [" \-\-silent "] [" \-\-verbose ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR head " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B head
writes to standard output the first part (10 lines by default) of each
.I FILE
argument.  If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

If more than one \fIFILE\fR is specified, \fBhead\fR prints a one-line header
consisting of
.sp
.nf
     ==> \fIFILENAME\fR <==
.fi
.sp
before the output for each \fIFILE\fR.

\fBhead\fR accepts two option formats: the new one, in which numbers are
arguments to the options (`\fB\-q \-n 1\fR'), and the old one, in which the
number precedes any option letters (`fB\-1q\fR').
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\fILINES
This option is only recognized if it is specified first.  \fILINES\fR is
a decimal number optionally followed by a size letter
.RB (` b "', `" k "', `" m ')
as in `\fB\-c\fR', or `\fBl\fR' to mean count by lines, or other option
letters (`\fBcqv\fR').  This option is deprecated, use \fR\-\-lines\fB instead.
.TP
.B \-c \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-bytes=\fIBYTES
Print the first \fIBYTES\fR bytes, instead of initial lines.  Appending
.RB ` b '
multiplies \fIBYTES\fB by 512,
.RB ` k '
by 1024, and
.RB ` m '
by 1048576.
.TP
.B \-n \fILINES\fB, \-\-lines=\fILINES
Output the first \fILINES\fR lines.
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent
Never print file name headers.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Always print file name headers.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
