.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU id man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH id 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
id \- print real and effective uid and gid
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B id
.B [\-gnruG] [\-\-group] [\-\-name] [\-\-real] [\-\-user] [\-\-groups]
.BI [ username ]
.sp
.B id [\-\-help] [\-\-version] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B id
prints information about the given user, or the process running it if
no user is specified.
.P
By default, it prints the real user id, real
group id, effective user id if different from the real user id,
effective group id if different from the real group ID, and
supplemental group ids. 

Each of these numeric values is preceded by an identifying string and
followed by the corresponding user or group name in parentheses.
.PP
The options cause
.B id
to print only part of the above information.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-g, \-\-group"
Print only the group id.
.TP
.B "\-G, \-\-groups"
Print only the supplementary groups.
.TP
.B "\-n, \-\-name"
Print the user or group name instead of the id number.
Requires
.BR \-u ,
.BR \-g ,
or
.BR \-G .
.TP
.B "\-r, \-\-real"
Print the real, instead of effective, user or group id.
Requires
.BR \-u ,
.BR \-g ,
or
.BR \-G .
.TP
.B "\-u, \-\-user"
Print only the user id.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
