.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, A. Wik 1998, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa 1998-2002
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.TH LS 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.SH NAME
ls, dir, vdir \- list directory contents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "ls [" options "] [" file... ]
.sp
POSIX options:
.BI "[\-CFRacdilqrtu1]"
.sp
GNU options (shortest form):
.B [\-1abcdfghiklmnopqrstuvxABCDFGHLNQRSUX]
.BI "[\-w " cols ]
.BI "[\-T " cols ]
.BI "[\-I " pattern ]
.B [\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR]
.B [\-\-classify]
.B [\-\-color[={none,always,auto}]]
.B [\-\-file\-type]
.B [\-\-full\-time]
.B [\-\-format={across,commas,long,single-column,verbose,vertical}]
.B [\-\-human\-readable]
.B [\-\-indicator\-style={none,file-type,classify}]
.B [\-\-quoting\-style={c,clocale,escape,literal,locale,shell,shell\-always}]
.B [\-\-show\-control\-chars]
.B [\-\-si]
.B [\-\-sort={none,extension,size,time,version}]
.B [\-\-time={atime,access,ctime,status,use}]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The program
.B ls
lists first its non-directory
.I file
arguments, and then for each directory argument all listable files
contained within that directory. If no non-option arguments are present,
a default argument `.' (the current directory) is assumed.
The \-d option causes directories to be treated as non-directory arguments.
A file is listable when either its name does not start with `.',
or the \-a option is given.
.PP
Each of the lists of files (that of non-directory files, and for
each directory the list of files inside) is sorted separately
according to the collating sequence in the current locale.
When the \-l option is given, each list is preceded by a summary
line giving the total size of all files in the list, measured according the
selected block size.
.PP
The output is to stdout, one entry per line, unless multicolumn
output is requested by the \-C option. However, for output to a
terminal, it is undefined whether the output will be single-column
or multi-column. The options \-1 and \-C can be used to force
single-column and multi-column output, respectively.
.SH POSIX OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-C"
List files in columns, sorted vertically.
.TP
.B "\-F"
Suffix each directory name with `/', each FIFO name with `|', and
each name of an executable with `*'.
.TP
.B "\-R"
Recursively list subdirectories encountered.
.TP
.B "\-a"
Include files with a name starting with `.' in the listing.
.TP
.B "\-c"
Use the status change time instead of the modification time
for sorting (with \-t) or listing (with \-l).
.TP
.B "\-d"
List names of directories like other files, rather than
listing their contents.
.TP
.B "\-i"
Precede the output for the file by the file serial number (i-node number).
.TP
.B "\-l"
Write (in single-column format) the file mode, the number of links
to the file, the owner name, the group name, the size of the file (in bytes),
the timestamp, and the filename.
By default, the timestamp shown is that of the last modification; the
options \-c and \u select the other two timestamps.
For device special files the size field is commonly replaced
by the major and minor device numbers.
.TP
.B "\-q"
Output nonprintable characters in a filename as question marks.
(This is permitted to be the default for output to a terminal.)
.TP
.B "\-r"
Reverse the order of the sort.
.TP
.B "\-t"
Sort by the timestamp shown.
.TP
.B "\-u"
Use the time of last access instead of the modification time
for sorting (with \-t) or listing (with \-l).
.TP
.B "\-1"
For single-column output.
.SH "GNU DETAILS"
If standard output is a terminal, the output is in columns (sorted vertically).
.PP
.B dir
(also installed as
.BR d )
is equivalent to `ls \-C'; that is, files are by default listed
in columns, sorted vertically.
.B vdir
(also installed as
.BR v )
is equivalent to `ls \-l'; that is, files are by default listed in long
format.
.SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-1, \-\-format=single-column"
List one file per line. This is the default for when standard output is
not a terminal.
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
List all files in directories, including all files that start with `.'.
.TP
.B "\-b, \-\-escape, \-\-quoting\-style=escape"
Quote nongraphic characters in file names using alphabetic and octal
backslash sequences like those used in C.
.TP
.B \-c
Sort directory contents according to the files' status change time (the
`ctime' in the inode). If the long listing format is being
.RB "used (" \-l )
print the status change time instead of the modification time.
.TP
.B "\-d, \-\-directory"
List names of directories like other files, rather than listing their contents.
.TP
.B "\-f"
Do not sort directory contents; list them in whatever order they are
stored on the disk.
Also enables
.B \-a
and disables 
.BR \-l ,
.BR \-\-color ,
and
.B \-s
if they were specified before the
.BR \-f .
.TP
.B \-g
Ignored; for Unix compatibility.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-human\-readable
Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.
Powers of 2 are used, not 10; \fBM\fR stands for 1,048,576 bytes.
Use the \fB\-H\fR or \fB\-\-si\fR option if you prefer powers of 10.
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-inode"
Print the inode number (also called the file serial number and index
number) of each file to the left of the file name. (This number uniquely
identifies each file within a particular filesystem)
.TP
.B "\-k, \-\-kilobytes"
If file sizes are being listed, print them in kilobytes.
.TP
.B "\-l, \-\-format=long, \-\-format=verbose"
In addition to the name of each file, print the file type,
permissions, number of hard links, owner name, group name, size in
bytes, and timestamp (the modification time unless other times are
selected).  For files with a time that is more than 6 months old or
more than 1 hour into the future, the timestamp contains the year
instead of the time of day.

For each directory that is listed, preface the files with a line
`total 
.IR blocks "', where " blocks " is the total disk space used by all"
files in that directory.  By default 1024-byte blocks are used, but this
value can be overriden. The \fIblocks\fR computed counts each hard link
separately; this is arguably a bug.

The permissions listed are similar to symbolic mode specifications but
.B ls
combines multiple bits into the third character of each set of permissions 
.RS
.TP
.B s
If the setuid or setgid bit and the corresponding executable bit are
both set.
.TP
.B S
If the setuid or setgid bit is set but the corresponding executable bit
is not set. 
.TP	  
.B t
If the sticky bit and the other-executable bit are both set.
.TP
.B T
If the sticky bit is set but the other-executable bit is not set.
.TP
.B x
If the executable bit is set and none of the above apply.
.TP
.B -
Otherwise.
.RE     
.TP
.B "\-m, \-\-format=commas"
List files horizontally, with as many as will fit on each line,
each separated by a comma and a space.
.TP
.B "\-n, \-\-numeric-uid-gid"
List the numeric UID and GID instead of the names.
.TP
.B \-o
Produce long format directory listings, but don't display group
information.  It is equivalent to using
.BR "\-\-format=long \-\-no-group" .
This option is provided for compatibility with other versions of 
.BR ls .		    
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-file\-type, \-\-indicator\-style=file\-type
Append a character to each file name indicating the file type. This is like
.B \-F
except that executables aren't marked.
.TP
.B "\-q, \-\-hide-control-chars"
Print question marks instead of nongraphic characters in file names. This
is the default if the output is a terminal and the program is \fBls\fR.
.TP
.B "\-r, \-\-reverse"
Sort directory contents in reverse order.
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-size"
Print the disk allocation of each file to the left of the file
name.  This is the amount of disk space used by the file, which is
usually a bit more than the file's size, but it can be less if the
file has holes.

The allocation of each file is printed in 1024-byte blocks to the left of the
file name, but this block size may be overriden.
.TP
.B "\-t, \-\-sort=time"
Sort by modification time (the `mtime' in the inode) instead of
alphabetically, with the newest files listed first.
.TP
.B \-u
Sort directory contents according to the files' last access time
instead of the modification time (the `atime' in the inode). If the long 
listing format is being used, print the last access time instead of the
modification time.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-sort=version
Sort by version name and number, lowest first.  It behaves like a
default sort, excepted that each sequence of decimal digits is
treated numericaly as an index/version number; numeric parts with
leading zeroes are considered as fractional
.sp
.nf
.B "   ls \-1           ls \-1v"
   bar\-1.gz        bar\-1.gz
   bar\-100.gz      bar\-2.gz
   bar\-12.gz       bar\-12.gz
   bar\-2.gz        bar\-100.gz
   foo\-1.007.gz    foo\-1.007.gz
   foo\-1.012b.gz   foo\-1.01a.gz
   foo\-1.01a.gz    foo\-1.012b.gz
.fi
.sp
.TP
.BI "\-w, \-\-width " cols
Assume the screen is
.I cols
columns wide.  The default is taken from the terminal driver if
possible; otherwise the environment variable
.B COLUMNS
is used if it is set; otherwise the default is 80.
.TP
.B "\-x, \-\-format=across, \-\-format=horizontal"
List the files in columns, sorted horizontally.
.TP
.B "\-A, \-\-almost\-all"
List all files in directories, except for `.' and `..'.
.TP
.B "\-B, \-\-ignore\-backups"
Do not list files that end with `~', unless they are given on the
command line.
.TP
.B "\-C, \-\-format=vertical"
List files in columns, sorted vertically. This is the default if standard
output is a terminal. It is always the default for 
.BR dir " and " d .
GNU \fBls\fR uses variable width columns to display as many files as
possible in the fewest lines.
.TP
.B "\-D, \-\-dired"
With the long listing (
.BR \-l ) 
format, print an additional line after the main output:
.sp
.nf
.B "   //DIRED//"
.I "   BEG1 END1 BEG2 END2 ..."
.fi
.sp
The
.IR BEGn " and " ENDn
are unsigned integers which record the byte position of
the beginning and end of each file name in the output. This makes it easy
for Emacs to find the names, even when they contain unusual characters
such as space or newline, without fancy searching.

If directories are being listed recursively
.RB ( \-R ),
output a similar line after each subdirectory:
.sp
.nf
.B "   //SUBDIRED//"
.I "   BEG1 END1 ..."
.fi
.sp
Finally, output a line like
.sp
.nf
.B "   //DIRED-OPTIONS// \-\-quoting-style=\fIWORD\fR"
.fi
.sp
where \fIWORD\fR is the quoting style.
.TP
.B "\-F, \-\-classify
Same as \fB\-\-indicator\-style=classify.
.TP
.B "\-G, \-\-no\-group"
Inhibit display of group information in a long format directory listing.
.TP
.B \-H, \-\-si
Append a size letter such as \fBM\fR for megabytes to each size.  (SI
is the International System of Units, which defines these letters
as prefixes)  Powers of 10 are used, not 2; \fBM\fR stands for
1,000,000 bytes.  Use the \fB\-h\fR or \fB\-\-human\-readable\fR option if
you prefer powers of 2.
.TP
.BI "\-I, \-\-ignore=" pattern
Do not list files whose names match the shell pattern
.I pattern
(not regular expression) unless they are given on the command line.  As
in the shell, an initial `.' in a filename does not match a wildcard at
the start of 
.IR pattern .
For example,
.sp
.nf
lightside:~% ls \-\-ignore='.??*' \-\-ignore='.[^.]' \e
   \-\-ignore='#*'
.fi	  
.sp
The first option ignores names of length 3 or more that start with
`.', the second ignores all two-character names that start with `.'
except `..', and the third ignores names that start with `#'.
.TP
.B "\-L, \-\-dereference"
List the file information corresponding to the referrents of symbolic
links rather for the links themselves.
.TP
.B "\-N, \-\-literal"
Do not quote file names.
.TP
.B "\-Q, \-\-quote\-name, \-\-quoting\-style=c"
Enclose file names in double quotes and quote nongraphic characters as
in C.
.TP
.B "\-R, \-\-recursive"
List the contents of all directories recursively.
.TP
.B "\-S, \-\-sort=size"
Sort directory contents by file size instead of alphabetically, with
the largest files listed first.
.TP
.BI "\-T, \-\-tabsize " cols
Assume that each tabstop is
.I cols
columns wide.  The default is 8. 
.B ls
uses tabs where possible in the output, for efficiency. If 
.I cols 
is zero, do not use tabs at all.
.TP
.B "\-U, \-\-sort=none"
Do not sort directory contents; list them in whatever order they are
stored on the disk. (The difference between 
.BR \-U " and " \-f 
is that the later doesn't disable or enable options). This is especially
useful when listing very large directories, since not doing any sorting
can be noticeably faster.
.TP
.B "\-X, \-\-sort=extension"
Sort directory contents alphabetically by file extension (characters
after the last `.'); files with no extension are sorted first.     
.TP
.B \-\-block\-size=\fISIZE
Set the block size to \fISIZE\fR, overriding the value of the environment
variables.
.TP
.BI "\-\-color[=" when ]
Specify whether to use color for distinguishing file types.
Colors are specified using the LS_COLORS environment variable.
For information on how to set this variable, see 
.BR dircolors (1). 
.I when
may be omitted, or one of:
.RS
.TP
.B none
Do not use color at all. This is the default.
.TP
.B auto
Only use color if standard output is a terminal.
.TP
.B always
Always use color.  Specifying 
.B \-\-color
and no 
.I when
is equivalent to
.BR "\-\-color=always" .
.RE
.TP
.B "\-\-full-time"
List times in full, rather than using the standard abbreviation
heuristics. The format is the same as 
.BR date (1)'s
default; it's not possible to change this, but you can extract out the
date string with 
.BR cut (1)
and then pass the result to `date \-d'.

This is most useful because the time output includes the seconds.
(Unix filesystems store file timestamps only to the nearest
second, so this option shows all the information there is.)  For
example, this can help when you have a Makefile that is not
regenerating files properly.		    
.TP
.B \-\-indicator\-style=\fIWORD
Append a character to each file name indicating the file type, and depending
on \fIWORD\fR:
.RS
.TP
.B none
Do not append any character indicator; this is the default behaviour
.TP
.B file\-type
Append `/' for directories, `@' for symbolic links, `|' for FIFOs, `=' for
sockets, and nothing for regular files.  This is the same as \fB\-p\fR or
\fB\-\-file\-type\fR.
.TP
.B classify
As \fBfile\-type\fR, but also append a `*' for execultables.  This is the
same as \fB\-F\fR or \fB\-\-classify\fR.
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-quoting\-style\=\fIWORD
Use style \fIWORD\fR to quote output names. The \fIWORD\fR should be one of
the following:
.RS
.TP
.B literal
Output names as\-is.  This is the default behaviour, although it may change
to shell in future versions.
.TP
.B shell
Quote names for the shell if they contain shell metacharacters or would
cause ambiguous output.
.TP
.B shell\-always
Quote names for the shell, even if they would normally not require quoting.
.TP
.B c
Quote names as for a C language string; this is the same as \fB\-Q\fR or
\fB\-\-quote\-name\fR.
.TP
.B escape
Quote as with \fBc\fR except omit the surrounding double-quote characters;
this is the same as \fB\-b\fR or \fB\-\-escape\fR.
.TP
.B locale
Like \fBc\fR sytle but with appropiate locale specific quoting symbols \"like
this\".
.TP
.B clocale
Like \fBc\fR sytle but with appropiate locale specific quoting symbols `like
this'.
.PP
You can specify the default value of the \fB\-\-quoting-style\fR option
with the environment variable \fBQUOTING_STYLE\fR.
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-show\-control\-chars
Print nongraphic characters as-is in file names.  This is the
default unless the output is a terminal and the program is \fBls\fR.
.TP
.B "\-\-time=atime, \-\-time=access"
When used along with \fB\-\-sort=time\fR or \fB\-t\fR, this is equivalent to
\fB\-u\fR (sort by atime).  When used with options that normally print
times, print each file's last access time, instead of it's last modification
time.
.TP
.B \-\-time=ctime, \-\-time=status, \-\-time=use
When used along with \fB\-\-sort=time\fR or \fB\-t\fR, this is equivalent to
\fB\-c\fR (sort by ctime).  When used with options that normally print
times, print each file's inode last change time, instead of it's last
modification time.
.SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-"
Terminate option list.
.SH BLOCK SIZE
The default output file block size is 1024 bytes (or 512 if \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR).
You may change this value  by setting any of the following environment
variables, which are overriden if a \fB\-\-block\-size=\fISIZE\fR is given.
.TP
In order of precedence:
.BR LS_BLOCK_SIZE ", " BLOCK_SIZE ", " POSIXLY_CORRECT .
.PP
The values for these variables can be either a number, \fBhuman\-readable\fR, or
\fBsi\fR.  Numbers may be followed by a size letter to specify a multiple of that
size, and a \fBB\fR to select normal bytes or a \fBD\fR to select
decimal "commercial" bytes.  For example `BLOCK_SIZE=1KB' is equal to
`BLOCK_SIZE=1024' and `BLOCK_SIZE=1KD' is equal to `BLOCK_SIZE=1000'

The following letters are recognized (and used when printing with
\fB\-\-human\-readable\fR or \fB\-\-si\fR)
.TP
.B k
kilo: 2^10 = 1024 for \fB\-\-human-readable\fR, or 10^3 = 1000 for \fB\-\-si\fR
.TP
.B M
Mega: 2^20 = 1,048,576 or 10^6 = 1,000,000
.TP
.B G
Giga: 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 or 10^9 = 1,000,000,000
.TP
.B T
Tera: 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 or 10^12 = 1,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B P
Peta: 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 or 10^15 = 1,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B E
Exa: 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 or 10^18 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Z
Zetta: 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 or 10^21 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.TP
.B Y
Yotta: 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 or 10^24 =
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The variables LS_BLOCK_SIZE, BLOCK_SIZE and POSIXLY_CORRECT determine the
choice of the output file block size.
The variable COLUMNS (when it contains the representation of a decimal
integer) determines the output column width (for use with the \-C option).
Filenames must not be truncated to make them fit a multi-column output.
The variable QUOTING_STYLE determines the quoting style for output.
The variable LS_COLORS is used to specify the colors used.
The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_CTYPE, LC_MESSAGES and LC_TIME
have the usual meaning.
The variable TZ gives the time zone for time strings written by
.BR ls .
.SH BUGS
On BSD systems, the
.B "\-s"
option reports sizes that are half the correct values for files that are
NFS-mounted from HP-UX systems. On HP-UX systems,
.B ls
reports sizes that
are twice the correct values for files that are NFS-mounted from BSD
systems. This is due to a flaw in HP-UX; it also affects the HP-UX
.B ls
program.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX 1003.2
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dircolors (1)
.SH NOTES
This page describes
.B ls
as found in the fileutils-4.1 package;
other versions may differ slightly. Mail corrections and additions to
aeb@cwi.nl and aw@mail1.bet1.puv.fi and ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com
Report bugs in the program to bug-fileutils@gnu.org.
