.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU md5sum man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH MD5SUM 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBmd5sum\fR \- calculate and check MD5 hash checksums
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B md5sum
.RB [ \-bctw ]
.RB [ \-\-binary ]
.RB [ \-\-check ]
.RB [ \-\-status ]
.RB [ \-\-text ]
.RB [ \-\-warn ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR md5sum " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B md5sum
computes and prints a 128-bit checksum (or "fingerprint" or
"message-digest") for each given
.IR FILE .
If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

Output format when calculating checksums consists for each input \fIFILE\fR,
in a MD5 sum, a space, a file type character (`*' for binary, ` ' for text)
and a filename.  This is the format \fB\-\-check\fR expects.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-binary
Reads the input \fIFILE\fRs in binary mode. This option has no effect on Unix
systems, since they don't distinguish between binary and text files.  This is
the default on DOS platforms. 
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-check
Reads filenames and checksums from the given \fIFILE\fRs, and report wether
each file and the corresponding checksum are correct.  \fb\-\-check\fR
expects the same format \fBmd5sum\fR outputs.
.sp
.nf
For example:
md5sum *.txt > checksums.md5
md5sum \-\-check checksums.md5
.fi
.TP
.B \-\-text
Treat all input files as text files.
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-warn
When verifying checksums, warn about improperly formatted MD5
checksum lines.  This option is useful only if all but a few lines
in the checked input are valid.	       
.TP
.B \-\-status
Silently exit with a status return code.  Warnings or checksum failures are
omitted, and errors from operations such as opening are reading are printed.
A successful exit code of 0 is only returned is everything is passed and no
errors have ocurred.  Otherwise a non-zero value is returned.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
