.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU nice man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH nice 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
nice \- run a program with modified scheduling priority
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nice
.BI "[\-n " adjustment "] [\-" adjustment "] [\-\-adjustment=" adjustment ]
.BI [ command " [" arg... ]]
.sp
.B nice [\-\-help] [\-\-version] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nice
prints the current scheduling priority, which it inherited if no
arguments are given.
Otherwise,
.B nice
runs the given
.I command
with its scheduling priority adjusted.
.P
If no
.I adjustment
is given, the priority of the
.I command 
is incremented by 10.  The priority can be
adjusted by
.B nice
over the range of -20 (the highest priority) to 19 (the lowest). You must
have appropiate privileges to specify a negative adjustment (usually be
the super-user).
.P
Because most shells have a built-in command by the same name, using
the unadorned command name may get you different functionality than that
described here. 
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-n " adjustment ", \-" adjustment ", \-\-adjustment=" adjustment
Add
.I adjustment
instead of 10 to the 
.IR command 's
priority.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
