.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU nl man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH NL 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBnl\fR \- number lines and write files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nl
.RB [ \-p "] [" "\-b \fISTYLE\fR" "] [" "\-d \fICD\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-f \fISTYLE\fR" "] [" "\-h \fISTYLE\fR" "] [" "\-i \fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-l \fINUMBER\fR" "] [" "\-n \fIFORMAT\fR" "] [" "\-s \fISTRING\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-v \fINUMBER\fR" "] [" "\-w \fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-body\-numbering=\fISTYLE\fR" ] 
.RB [ "\-\-footer\-numbering=\fISTYLE\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-header\-numbering=\fISTYLE\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-join\-blank\-lines=\fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-page\-increment=\fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-renumber ]
.RB [ "\-\-number\-format=\fIFORMAT\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-number\-separator=\fIFORMAT\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-number\-width=\fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-section\-delimiter=\fICD\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-starting\-line\-number=\fINUMBER\fR" ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR nl " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nl
writes each 
.I FILE
to standard output, with line numbers added to some or all of the lines.  If
.I FILE
is omitted or if is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used.   

.B nl
decomposes its input into (logical) pages; by default, the line
number is reset to 1 at the top of each logical page.  
.B nl
treats all of the input files as a single document; it does not reset line
numbers or logical pages between files.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b \fISTYLE\fB, \-\-body\-numbering=\fISTYLE
Select the numbering style for lines in the body section of each
logical page.  When a line is not numbered, the current line number
is not incremented, but the line number separator character is
still prepended to the line.  The styles are:
.RS
.TP
.B a
number all lines
.TP
.B t
number only nonempty lines (default for body)
.TP
.B n
do not number lines (default for header and footer)
.TP
.BI p REGEXP
number only lines that contain a match for
.IR REGEXP .
.RE
.TP
.B \-d \fICD\fB, \-\-section\-delimiter=\fICD
Set the section delimiter characters to \fICD\fR; default is `\e:'. If
only \fIC\fR is given, the second remains `:'.  (Remember to protect `\e'
or other metacharacters from shell expansion with quotes or extra
backslashes)
.TP
.B \-f \fISTYLE\fB, \-\-footer\-numbering=\fISTYLE
Analogous to
.BR \-\-body\-numbering .
.TP
.B \-h \fISTYLE\fB, \-\-header\-numbering=\fISTYLE
Analogous to
.BR \-\-body\-numbering .
.TP
.B \-i \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-page\-increment=\fINUMBER
Increment line numbers by 
.I NUMBER
(default 1).
.TP
.B \-l \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-join\-blank\-lines=\fINUMBER
Consider 
.I NUMBER
(default 1) consecutive empty lines to be one logical line for numbering,
and only number the last one.  Where fewer than
.I NUMBER
consecutive empty lines occur, do not number them.  An empty line is one
that contains no characters, not even spaces or tabs.
.TP
.B \-n \fIFORMAT\fB, \-\-number\-format=\fIFORMAT
Select the line numbering format (default is `\fBrn\fR'):
.RS
.TP
.B ln
left justified, no leading zeros
.TP
.B rn
right justified, no leading zeros
.TP
.B rz
right justified, leading zeros
.RE
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-no\-renumber
Do not reset the line number at the start of a logical page.
.TP
.B \-s \fISTRING\fB, \-\-number\-separator=\fIFORMAT
Separate the line number from the text line in the output with
.I STRING
(default is <TAB>).	  
.TP
.B \-v \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-starting\-line\-number=\fINUMBER
Set the initial line number on each logical page to
.I NUMBER
(default 1).	  
.TP
.B \-w \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-number\-width=\fINUMBER
Use
.I NUMBER
characters for line numbers (default 6).     
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH LOGICAL PAGES
A logical page consists of three sections: header, body, and footer.
Any of the sections can be empty.  Each can be numbered in a different
style from the others.

The beginnings of the sections of logical pages are indicated in the
input file by a line containing exactly one of these delimiter strings:
.TP
.B \e:\e:\e:
start of header
.TP
.B \e:\e:
start of body;
.TP
.B \e:
start of footer.
.PP			
The two characters from which these strings are made can be changed
from 
.RB ` \e "' and `" : '
via options, but the pattern and length of each string cannot be
changed.  A section delimiter is replaced by an empty line on output.  Any
text that comes before the first section delimiter string in the input file
is considered to be part of a body section, so 
.B nl
treats a file that contains no section delimiters as a single body section.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
