.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU nohup man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH nohup 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
nohup \- run a command immune to hangups
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI nohup " command " [ arg... ]
.sp
.B nohup [\-\-help] [-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nohup
runs the given
.I command
with hangup signals ignored so that the command can continue running in
the background after you log out.
.PP
The scheduling priority increased by 5, so it has a slightly smaller
chance to run. If the standard output is a terminal, it and the standard error
are redirected so that they are appended to the file `nohup.out'; if that
cannot be written to, they are appended to the file `$HOME/nohup.out'.
If that cannot be written to, the command is not run.
.PP
If
.B nohup
creates the file `nohup.out' or `$HOME/nohup.out', it creates it with
`go-rwx' permissions.  It does not change the permissions of those files
if they already existed.
.PP
.B nohup
does not automatically put the command it runs in the background; you
must do that explicitly, by ending the command line with an `&'.
.SH OPTIONS
When GNU
.B nohup
is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are recognized:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
