.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU od man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH OD 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBod\fR \- write files in octal or other formats
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B od
.RB [ \-v "] [" "\-j \fIBYTES\fR" "] [" "\-s \fR[\fILENGTH\fR]]"
.RB [ "\-t \fITYPE\fR" "] [" "\-w \fIWIDTH\fR" "] [" "\-A \fIRADIX\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-N \fIBYTES\fR" "]
.RB [ "\-\-address\-radix=\fIRADIX\fR" ] 
.RB [ "\-\-format=\fITYPE\fR" ]
.RB [ \-\-output\-duplicates ]
.RB [ "\-\-read\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-skip\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-strings\fR[\fB=\fILENGTH\fR" ]
.RB [ "\-\-width\fR[\fB=\fIWIDTH\fR" ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR od " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]

Non POSIX:
.br
.B od
.RB [ \-abcdfhilox ]
.RI [ FILE... ]
.br
.IR "\fBod \-C\fR \fR[\fB\-\-traditional" "] [" FILE "] [[\fB+\fR]" OFFSET " [[\fB+\fR]" LABEL ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B od
writes an unambiguous representation of each
.I FILE
to standard output.  If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used.

Each line of output consists of the offset in the input, followed by
groups of data from the file. By default, 
.B od
prints the offset in octal, and each group of file data is two bytes of
input printed as a single octal number.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-j \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-skip\-bytes=\fIBYTES
Skip \fIBYTES\fR input bytes before formatting and writing.  If \fIBYTES\fR
begins with 
.RB ` 0x '
or 
.RB ` 0X '
, it is interpreted in hexadecimal;
otherwise, if it begins with 
.RB ` 0 ',
in octal; otherwise, in decimal.  Appending 
.RB ` b '
multiplies \fIBYTES\fR by 512, 
.RB ` k '
by 1024, and 
.RB ` m '
by 1048576.
.TP
.B \-s \fR[\fILENGTH\fR]\fB, \-\-strings\fR[\fB=\fILENGTH\fR]
Instead of the normal output, output only "string constants": at
least \fILENGTH\fR (3 by default) consecutive ASCII graphic characters,
followed by a null (zero) byte.  Short form \fB\-s\fR is deprecated.
.TP
.B \-t \fITYPE\fB, \-\-format=\fITYPE
Select the format in which to output the file data.  \fITYPE\fR is a
string of one or more of the below type indicator characters.  If
you include more than one type indicator character in a single \fITYPE\fR
string, or use this option more than once, \fBod\fR writes one copy of
each output line using each of the data types that you specified,
in the order that you specified.

Adding a trailing
.RB ` z '
to any type specification appends a display
of the ASCII character representation of the printable characters
to the output line generated by the type specification.
.RS
.TP
.B a
named character
.TP
.B c
ASCII character or backslash escape	  
.TP
.B d
signed decimal
.TP
.B f
floating point
.TP
.B o
octal
.TP
.B u
unsigned decimal
.TP
.B x
hexadecimal
.PP
.sp
The type 
.RB ` a '
outputs things like `sp' for space, `nl' for newline, and `nul' for a null
(zero) byte.  Type `c' outputs  ` ', \n', and  \0', respectively.

Except for types 
.RB ` a "' and `" c ',
you can specify the number of bytes to use in interpreting each number in
the given data type by following the type indicator character with a decimal
integer.  Alternately, you can specify the size of one of the C compiler's
built-in data types by following the type indicator character with
one of the following characters.  

For integers (
.RB ` d "', `" o "', `" u "', `" x '):
.RS
.TP
.B C
char
.TP
.B S
short
.TP
.B I
int
.TP
.B L
long
.RE
.sp
For floating point (
.RB ` f '):
.RS
.TP
.B F
float
.TP
.B D
double
.TP
.B L
long double
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-output\-duplicates
Output consecutive lines that are identical.  By default, when two
or more consecutive output lines would be identical, \fBod\fR outputs
only the first line, and puts just an asterisk on the following
line to indicate the elision.
.TP
.B \-w\fR[\fIWIDTH\fR]\fB, \-\-width\fR[\fB=\fIWIDTH\fR]
Dump \fIWIDTH\fR input bytes per output line.  This must be a multiple of
the least common multiple of the sizes associated with the
specified output types.  If \fIWIDTH\fR is omitted, the default is 32.  If
this option is not given at all, the default is 16.  Short form \fB\-w\fR is
deprecated.
.TP
.B \-A \fIRADIX\fB, \-\-address\-radix=\fIRADIX
Selects the base in which file offsets are printed.  \fIRADIX\fR can be
one of the following:
.RS
.TP
.B d
decimal
.TP
.B o
octal (default)
.TP
.B x
hexadecimal
.TP
.B n
none (do not print offsets)
.RE
.TP
.B \-N \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-read\-bytes=\fIBYTES
Output at most \fIBYTES\fR bytes of the input.  Prefixes and suffixes on
\fIBYTES\fR are interpreted as for the \fB\-j\fR option.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NON-POSIX OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a
Output as named characters.  Equivalent to \fB\-ta\fR.
.TP     
.B \-b
Output as octal bytes.  Equivalent to \fB\-toC\fR.
.TP
.B \-c
Output as ASCII characters or backslash escapes.  Equivalent to
\fB\-tc\fR.
.TP
.B \-d
Output as unsigned decimal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-tu2\fR.
.TP
.B \-f
Output as floats.  Equivalent to \fB\-tfF\fR.
.TP
.B \-h
Output as hexadecimal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-tx2\fR.
.TP
.B \-i
Output as decimal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-td2\fR.
.TP
.B \-l
Output as decimal longs.  Equivalent to \fB\-td4\fR.
.TP
.B \-o
Output as octal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-to2\fR.
.TP
.B \-x
Output as hexadecimal shorts.  Equivalent to \fB\-tx2\fR.
.TP
.B \-C, \-\-traditional
Recognize the pre-POSIX non-option arguments that traditional \fBod\fR
accepted.
.PP
The following syntax:
.sp	  
.B od \-\-traditional
.RI [ FILE "] [[" \fB+\fR]\fIOFFSET\fR[\fB.\fR][\fBb\fR] 
.RI [[ \fB+\fR ] LABEL [\fB.\fR][\fBb\fR]]]
.sp		    
can be used to specify at most one file and optional arguments
specifying an offset and a pseudo-start address, \fILABEL\fR.  By default,
\fIOFFSET\fR is interpreted as an octal number specifying how
many input bytes to skip before formatting and writing.  The
optional trailing decimal point forces the interpretation of
\fIOFFSET\fR as a decimal number.  If no decimal is specified
and the offset begins with `\fB0x\fR' or `\fB0X\fR' it is interpreted as a
hexadecimal number.  If there is a trailing `\fBb\fR', the number of bytes
skipped will be \fIOFFSET\fR multiplied by 512.  The \fILABEL\fR argument is
interpreted just like \fIOFFSET\fR, but it specifies an initial
pseudo-address.  The pseudo-addresses are displayed in parentheses
following any normal address.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
