.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU paste man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH PASTE 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBpaste\fR \- merge lines of files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B paste
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ "\-d \fIDELIM\-LIST" ]
.RB [ \-\-delimiters=\fIDELIM\-LIST ]
.RB [ \-\-serial ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR paste " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B paste
writes to standard output lines consisting of sequentially corresponding lines 
for each given
.IR FILE ,
separated by <TAB>.  If no
.I FILE
is given or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d \fIDELIM\-LIST\fB, delimiters=\fIDELIM\-LIST
Consecutively use the characters in \fIDELIM\-LIST\fR instead of <TAB> to
separate merged lines.  When \fIDELIM\-LIST\fR is exhausted, start again
at its beginning.	   
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-serial
Paste the lines of one file at a time rather than one line from each file.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
