.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU pathchk man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH pathchk 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
pathchk \- check file name portability
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pathchk [-p] [\-\-portability]
.I filename...
.sp
.B patchk [\-\-help] [\-\-version] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
For each
.IR filename ,
.B pathchk
prints a message if any of these conditions are true:

\(bu one of the existing directories in
.I filename
do not have search (execute) permission
.br
\(bu the length of
.I filename
is larger than its filesystem's maximum file name length
.br
\(bu the length of each component of
.I filename
corresponding to an existing directory name
is larger than its filesystem's maximum length for a file name component
.PP
The exit status is:
.nf
0 if all file names passed all of the tests,
1 otherwise.
.fi
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-p, \-\-portability"
Instead of performing length checks on the underlying filesystem, test
the length of each file name and its components against the POSIX.1
minimum limits for portability.  Also check that the file name contains
no characters not in the portable filename character set.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
