.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU pinky man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH pinky 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
pinky \- local user information lookup program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "pinky " [ \-bfhilpqsw "] [" \fIUSER...\fR ]
.sp
.BR "pinky " [ \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pinky
prints information of given local \fIUSER\fRs.  If none are
specified, it uses currently logged in users (read from /var/run/utmp)

In short format (this is the default) it prints user's login name, real
name, tty, idle time, login time and hostname, one user per line.  In long
format, it prints in multiple lines the user's login name, real name, home
directory, shell, project file and plan file.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Short Format Options
.TP
.B \-f
Omit first line, with the column headers.
.TP
.B \-i
Omit user's full name and remote host.
.TP
.B \-q
Omit user's full name, remote host and idle time.
.TP
.B \-w
Omit user's full name
.SS Long Format Options
.TP
.B \-b
Omit user's home directory and shell.
.TP
.B \-h
Omit user's project file.
.TP
.B \-p
Omit user's plan file.
.SS Regular Options
.TP
.B \-l
Use long format.
.TP
.B \-s
Use short format (this is the default)
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
