.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU pr man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH PR 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBpr\fR \- paginate or columnate files for printing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pr
[\fB+\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR[\fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR]]
[\fB\-\fICOLUMN\fR] [\fB\-acdfmrtvFJT\fR]
[\fB\-e\fR[\fIIN-TABCHAR\fR[\fIIN\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
[\fB\-h \fIHEADER\fR]
[\fB\-i\fR[\fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR[\fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
[\fB\-l \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR]
[\fB\-n\fR[\fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR[\fIDIGITS\fR]]
[\fB\-o \fIMARGIN\fR]
[\fB\-s\fR[\fISEP\-CHAR\fR]]
[\fB\-w \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR]
[\fB\-D \fIDATEFORMAT\fR]
[\fB\-N \fILINE_NUMBER\fR]
[\fB\-S\fR[\fISEP\-STRING\fR]]
[\fB\-W \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR]
[\fB\-\-across\fR]
[\fB\-\-columns=\fICOLUMN\fR]
[\fB\-\-date=\fIDATEFORMAT\fR]
[\fB\-\-double\-\-space\fR]
[\fB\-\-expand\-tabs\fR[\fB=\fIIN-TABCHAR\fR[\fIIN\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
[\fB\-\-form\-feed\fR]
[\fB\-\-header \fIHEADER\fR]
[\fB\-\-indent=\fIMARGIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-length \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR]
[\fB\-\-merge\fR]
[\fB\-\-number\-lines\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR[\fIDIGITS\fR]]
[\fB\-\-no\-file\-warnings\fR]
[\fB\-\-output\-tabs\fR[\fB=\fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR[\fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
[\fB\-\-omit\-header\fR]
[\fB\-\-pages=\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR[\fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR]]
[\fB\-\-page_width=\fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR]
[\fB\-\-separator\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-CHAR\fR]]
[\fB\-\-sep\-string\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-STRING\fR]]
[\fB\-\-show\-control\-chars\fR]
[\fB\-\-show\-nonprinting\fR]
[\fB\-\-width=\fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR pr " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pr
writes each 
.I FILE
to standard output paginating and optionally outputting in multicolumn format.
If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used.

By default, a 5\-line header is printed at each page: two blank lines; a
line with the date, the file name, and the page count; and two more blank
lines.  A footer of five blank lines is also printed at each page.

The default \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR is 66 lines, and the text line of a header
takes up the full \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR (default is 72) in the form `yy-mm-dd
HH:MM String Page nnnn', where String is a centered string.

Form feeds in the input cause page breaks in the output.  Multiple
form feeds produce empty pages.

Columns have equal width, separated by a space by default.  Lines will
always be truncated to \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR, unless you use the \fB\-J\fR
option.  For single column output no line truncation occurs by default.
(use \fB\-W\fR for truncation).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B +\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR[\fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR]\fB
.TP
.B \-\-pages=\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR[\fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR] 
Begin printing with page \fIFIRST_PAGE\fR and stop with \fILAST_PAGE\fR.
Missing \fB:\fILAST_PAGE\fR implies end of file.  While estimating the
number of skipped pages each form feed in the input file results
in a new page.  Page and line numbering with and without \fB+\fIFIRST_PAGE\fR
is identical as it starts counting at the first page of input file (not
first page printed); page numbering, however, may be altered by \fB\-N\fR. 
.TP
.B \-\fICOLUMN\fB
.TP
.B \-\-columns=\fICOLUMN
With each single \fIFILE\fR produce \fICOLUMN\fR\ columns of output (default
is 1) and print columns down.  The column width is automatically calculated
from \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR, and the number of lines in the columns on each page
is balanced.  Lines that don't fit in a column are truncated.
\fB-\-columns\fR may not be used with \fB\-m\fR.
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-across
With each single \fIFILE\fR, print columns across rather than down.
\fICOLUMN\fR must be greater than one.  Lines that don't fit in a column are
truncated.
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-show\-control\-chars
Print control characters using hat notation (e.g., `^G'); print
other unprintable characters in octal backslash notation.  By
default, unprintable characters are not changed.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-double\-space
Double space the output.
.TP
.B \-e\fR[\fIIN-TABCHAR\fR[\fIIN\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
.TP
.B \-\-expand\-tabs\fR[\fB=\fIIN-TABCHAR\fR[\fIIN\-TABWIDTH\fR]],
Expand tabs to spaces on input.  Optional argument \fIIN-TABCHAR\fR is
the input tab character (default is <TAB>).  Second optional argument
\fIIN-TABWIDTH\fR is the input tab character's width (default is 8).
.TP
.B \-f, \-F, \-\-form\-feed
Use a form feed instead of newlines to separate output pages, and print only
a 3\-line header (the two leading blank lines and footer are omitted).
Default page length of 66 lines is not altered, but the default number of
lines of text per page changes from 56 to 63 lines. 
.TP
.B \-h \fIHEADER\fB, \-\-header=\fIHEADER
Replace the name of \fIFILE\fR in the header with the centered string
\fIHEADER\fR.  Left-hand-side truncation (marked by a `*') may occur if
the total header line `yy-mm-dd HH:MM \fIHEADER\fR Page nnnn' becomes
larger than \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR. `\fB\-h ""\fR' prints a blank line
header.
.TP
.B \-i\fR[\fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR[\fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
.TP
.B \-\-output\-tabs\fR[\fB=\fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR[\fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR]]
Collapse spaces with tabs on output.  Optional argument \fIOUT\-TABCHAR\fR
is the output tab character (default is <TAB>).  Second optional
argument \fIOUT\-TABWIDTH\fR is the output tab character's width (default is
8).
.TP
.B \-J, \-\-join\-lines
Merge lines of full length. Used together with the column options
\fB\-\fICOLUMN\fR, `\fB\-a \-\fICOLUMN\fR' or \fB\-m\fR, it turns off
\fB\-W\fR and \fB\-w\fR line truncation;  no column alignment is used.  It
changes the column separator to <TAB>, unless overriden by \fB\-S\fR.
.TP
.B \-l \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fB, \-\-length=\fIPAGE_LENGTH
Set the page length (including header and footer) to \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR
(default is 66) lines.  If \fIPAGE_LENGTH\fR is <= 10 (and <= 3 with
\fB\-F\fR), the headers and footers are omitted and all form feeds set in
input files are eliminated as if the \fB\-T\fR option had been given.
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-merge
Merge and print all \fIFILE\fRs in parallel, one in each
column resulting.  If a line is too long to fit in a column, it is truncated.
Empty pages in \fIFILE\fRs (form feeds set) produce empty columns, still
marked by \fISEPARATOR\fR (but completely empty common pages show no
separators or line numbers)  The default header becomes `yy-mm-dd HH:MM
<blanks> Page nnnn'; may be used with \fB\-h \fIHEADER\fR to fill up the
middle part, and with \fB\-S\fR[\fISEP\-CHAR\fR].
.TP
.B \-n\fR[\fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR[\fIDIGITS\fR]]
.TP
.B \-\-number\-lines\fR[\fB=\fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR[\fIDIGITS\fR]]
Precede each column with a line number; with parallel \fIFILE\fRs
(\fB\-m\fR), precede only each line with a line number.  Default line
number counting starts with first line of the input file (not with the first
line printed, see \fB\-N\fR and \fB\-\fIPAGES\fR).

Optional argument \fINUMBER\-SEPARATOR\fR is the character to print after
each number;  the default is a space, which are automagically collapsed to a
<TAB> if it won't change the width .  Optional argument \fIDIGITS\fR is the
number of digits per line number (default is 5).
.TP
.B \-o \fIMARGIN\fB, \-\-indent=\fIMARGIN
Indent each line with \fIMARGIN\fR spaces wide (default is 0), i.e., set
the left margin.  The total page width is \fIMARGIN\fR plus
\fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR.  Overflow may happen with numbered column output.
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-no\-file\-warnings
Do not print a warning message when an argument \fIFILE\fR cannot be
opened.  (The exit status will still be nonzero, however.)
.TP
.B \-s\fR[\fISEP\-CHAR\fR]\fB, \-\-separator\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-CHAR\fR]
Separate columns with a \fISEP\-CHAR\fR character.  The default for
\fISEP\-CHAR\fR is an empty string if \fB\-s\fR is combined with \fB\-w\fR,
and <TAB> if it is not.  A second effect of the \fB\-w\fR combination is
that column truncation is turned off.
.TP
.B \-S\fR[\fISEP\-STRING\fR]\fB, \-\-sep\-string\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-STRING\fR]
Separate columns with a \fISEP\-STRING\fR string (default is an empty string).
Short option form \fB\-S\fR is deprecated.
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-omit\-header
Do not print the header (and footer) on each page, and do
not fill out the bottom of pages (with blank lines or a form
feed).  No page structure is produced, but retain form feeds set in
the input files (therefore the predefined pagination is not changed)
\fB\-t\fR  or \fB\-T\fR may be useful together with other options; e.g.:
`\fB\-t \-e4\fR', expand <TAB> in the input file to 4 spaces but do not do
any other changes.  Use of \fB\-t\fR overrides \fB\-h\fR.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-show\-nonprinting
Print unprintable characters in octal backslash notation.
.TP
.B \-w \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fB, \-\-width=\fIPAGE_WIDTH
For multiple column output only, set the page width to \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR (default
is 72) characters and truncate lines..
.TP
.B \-D \fIDATEFORMAT\fB, \-\-date=\fIDATEFORMAT
Use \fIDATEFORMAT\fR as the date format for headers, or to specify a date.
See \fBdate\fR(1) for details.
.TP
.B \-N \fILINE_NUMBER\fB, \-\-first\-line\-number=\fILINE_NUMBER
Start counting line counting with \fILINE_NUMBER\fR at the first line of the
first page printed.
.TP
.B \-S \fR[\fISEP\-STRING\fR]\fB, \-\-sep\-string\fR[\fB=\fISEP\-STRING\fR]
Separate output columns with the string \fISEP\-STRING\fR.
.TP
.B \-T
Do not print header (and footer).  In addition eliminate all form
feeds set in the input files.
.TP
.B \-W \fIPAGE_WIDTH\fB, \-\-page_width=\fIPAGE_WIDTH
For both single and multiple column output, set the page width to
\fIPAGE_WIDTH\fR (default is 72) characters and truncate lines.  If neither
\fB\-W\fR or any of the column options is used no truncation is done (except
on the header line, which is always truncated).
.TP	  
.B \-\-help
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH POSIX NOTES
Uppercase single letter options dominate over lowercase ones, being the
latter redefined to be more \fBPOSIX\fR compilant.  Also, arguments to some single
letter options can't be separated from the preceding option as specified in
the \fBPOSIX\fR specification (for example `\fB\-s\fR a' should be `\fB\-sa\fR' instead)
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
