.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU ptx man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH PTX 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBptx\fR \- produce permuted indexes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ptx
.RI [ OPTION... "] [" FILE... ]

.B ptx
.RB [ \-G ]
.RB [ \-\-traditional ]
.RI [ OPTION... "] [" IN\-FILE " [" OUT\-FILE ]]
.SS Options:
.RB [ \-frAORT ]
.RB [ "\-b \fIFILE" ]
.RB [ "\-g \fINUMBER" ]
.RB [ "\-i \fIFILE" ]
.RB [ "\-o \fIFILE" ]
.RB [ "\-w \fINUMBER" ]
.RB [ "\-F \fISTRING" ]
.RB [ "\-M \fISTRING" ]
.RB [ "\-S \fIREGEXP" ]
.RB [ "\-W \fIREGEXP" ]
.RB [ \-\-auto\-reference ]
.RB [ \-\-break\-file=\fIFILE ]
.RB [ \-\-flac\-truncation=\fISTRING ]
.RB [ \-\-format=\fR{\fBnroff,tex }]
.RB [ \-\-gap\-size=\fINUMBER ]
.RB [ \-\-ignore\-case ]
.RB [ \-\-ignore\-file=\fIFILE ]
.RB [ \-\-macro\-name=\fISTRING ]
.RB [ \-\-only\-file=\fIFILE ]
.RB [ \-\-references ]
.RB [ \-\-right\-side\-refs ]
.RB [ \-\-sentence\-regexp=\fIREGEXP ]
.RB [ \-\-word\-regexp=\fIREGEXP ]
.RI [ FILE... ]
 
.BR ptx " [" \-C "] [" \-\-copyright "]  [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ptx
with GNU extensions (by default) writes to standard output a
permutated index for each
.I FILE
given.  
If
.I FILE
is omitted or if is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used.  Even if the result is concatenated together, each
.I FILE
has it's own context and is referrenced separately when using automatic
references.

If \fB\-\-traditional\fR mode is used, \fBptx\fR reads \fIIN\-FILE\fR for
input and writes to \fIOUT\-FILE\fR, or standard output if omitted.

The default output format is the keyword in the center of the line and the
context of the keyword to the left and right if any, or
\fB\-\-format\-nroff\fR in \fB\-\-traditional\fR mode.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
.B \-b \fIFILE\fB, \-\-break\-file=\fIFILE
Obtain characters that can't be part of a word from \fIFILE\fR, also known
as the \fBbreak file\fR.  In default
mode any character in \fIFILE\fR is considered, including newlines.  In
traditional mode spaces, tabs and newlines  are always discarded from
\fIFILE\fR.
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-ignore\-case
Ignores case when sorting strings.
.TP
.B \-g \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-gap\-size=\fINUMBER
Set the minimum spacing between the fields to \fINUMBER\fR (default is 3).
.TP
.B \-i \fIFILE\fB, \-\-ignore\-file=\fIFILE
Obtain a list of keywords that are to be ignored from \fIFILE\fR, also known
as the \fBignore file\fR  (default is /usr/local/lib/eign)  Each line should
only contain one word.  Words in the \fBignore file\fR override the ones in the
\fBonly file\fR.
.TP
.B \-o \fIFILE\fB, \-\-only\-file=\fIFILE
Obtain a list of keywords from\fIFILE\fR, also known as the \fBonly file\fR,
and when generating the index ignore any keyword which isn't present in the
list.  Each line should only contain one word.
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-references
Precede each line with a string that will identify the context. \fBptx\fR
will attempt to remove the references from context, and will always
succeed when the context ends at the newline.  If it is used with \fB\-S\fR
(and it's default), or when using \fB\-\-traditional\fR mode, references are
always removed from context.
.TP
.B \-w \fINUMBER\fB, \-\-width=\fINUMBER
Truncate output lines which exceed \fINUMBER\fR width.  Note that the length
of \fB\-\-right\-side\-refs\fR isn't taken into account, and width may be
exceeded if they are used.
.TP
.B \-A, \-\-auto\-reference
Precede each line with the filename (or empty when reading from standard
input), the line number, and a colon.  Overrides \fB\-\-references\fR.
.TP
.B \-F \fISTRING\fB, \-\-flac\-truncation=\fISTRING
Output \fISTRING\fR (default is `\fB\e\fR') when truncating a line by
effect of \fR\-\-width\fR or because it extends towards the beginning of the
line.

Many usual backslashed escape sequences, as found in C programs, are
recognized and converted to the corresponding characters by \fBptx\fR when
specifying the \fISTRING\fR.
.TP
.B \-M \fISTRING\fB, \-\-macro\-name=\fISTRING
Use \fISTRING\fR as the macro name when outputing in nroff or TeX format
(default is `\fB.xx\fR')
.TP
.B \-O, \-\-format=nroff
Output in nroff format, in the format.  Non printable characters are
converted to spaces, and quote characters are doubled so they can ben
correctly processed.  The format of each line is:
.sp
.nf
 .xx "TAIL" "BEFORE" "KEYWORD_AND_AFTER" "HEAD" "REF"
.fi
.TP
.B \-R, \-\-right\-side\-refs
Like \fB\-\-references\fR, but print output references to the right. 
.TP
.B \-S \fIREGEXP\fB, \-\-sentence\-regexp=\fIREGEXP
Use \fIREGEXP\fR to describe the end of a line or sentence.  In GNU mode
when \fB\-\-references\fR are not used, the default is
.sp
.RS
.RS
.nf
[.?!][]\e"')}]*\e\e($\e\e|\et\e\e|  \e\e)[ \et\en]*	 
.fi
.RE
.sp
In \fB\-\-traditional\fR mode, or in GNU mode when \fB\-\-references\fR are
used the default is
.sp
.RS
.nf
\en
.fi
.RE
.sp
As with \fB\-\-F\fR, backslashed sequences are recognized and converted.
.RE
.TP
.B \-T, \-\-format=tex
Output in TeX format.  Non printable characters are converted to spaces,
some special characters (such as `$', `%', `&', `#' and `_') are protected
with a backslash,  backslashes are convert to `\ebackslash{}', circumflex
to `^\e{ }', tildes to `~\e{ }', and other diacritics to the most possible
appropiate TeX sequence.  The format of each line is:
.sp
.RS
.RS
.nf
\exx {TAIL}{BEFORE}{KEYWORD}{AFTER}{HEAD}{REF}
.fi
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B \-W \fIREGEXP\fB, \-\-word\-regexp=\fIREGEXP
Use \fIREGEXP\fR to describe a keyword, overriding \fB\-\-break\-file\fR if
it has been also specified.  In GNU mode the default is
.sp
.RS
.RS
.nf
.B \ew+
.fi
.RE
.sp
and in \fB\-\-traditional\fR mode it is
.sp
.nf
.RS
.B [^ \et\en]+
.fi
.RE
.sp
An empty \fIREGEXP\fR is the equivalent of using the default.  As with
\fB\-\-F\fR, backslashed sequences are recognized and converted.
.RE
.TP
.B "\-C, \-\-copyright"
Print a brief copyright message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH EXAMPLES
No complete examples are given here because output tends to be rather
bulky.
.SS Plain text

Francois Pinard, author of \fBptx\fR, run through it an email I had sent him
and this is what he says (*** denotes manual truncation to fit into the man
page)
.sp
.nf
>>    /I've had a look at the source,   and I still   ***
>>    /or what is a permutated index,   and what it   ***

> ptx merely produces a sorted list of the vocabulary you
> used, with some context for each, so I can study your
> writing style, for example.  Whenever you use the word 
> "and", it is preceded by a comma :-). 
.fi
.SS Bang Paths
We have a collection of news posts or email messages, and grep the bang
paths from them.  For example with
.sp
.RS
.nf
lightside~% grep posts "^Path: " |cut -b 7- > paths.txt
.fi
.RE
.sp
and ending up with paths.txt containing:
.sp
.RS
.nf
lightside!host2!host3!host4!host5!news
lightside!host2!host3!host4!host6!news
lightside!host7!host8!host9|host10|host4|host5!news
lightside!host4!host5!news
lightside!host11!news
.fi
.RE
.sp
Now we run \fBptx\fR on it, properly escaping the regexps
.sp
.RS
.nf
lightside~% ptx \-\-sentence\-regexp="\en" \e
                \-\-word\-regexp"[^\e!]+."
.fi
.RE
.sp
This will produce output suitable for analyzing the the routes of the posts
which is specially useful when having more than just the 5 lines we had here.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
System V \fBptx\fR compatibility is available by specifying
\fB\-\-traditional\fR.  GNU \fBptx\fR also tries to imitate System V output,
with occassional glitches due the better usage of line width by GNU
\fBptx\fR. Other changes in \fB\-\-traditional\fR mode are:
.RS
.sp
\fB\(bu\fR\ Argument behaviour changes as in \fBDESCRIPTION\fR.
.sp
\fB\(bu\fR\ The only available options are
.BR \-b ", " \-f ", " \-g ", " \-i ", " \-o ", "\-r ", " \-t ", and " \-w .
.sp
\fB\(bu\fR\ Default format is \fB\-\-format=nroff\fR.
.sp
\fB\(bu\fR\ Width of references isn't taken into account when truncating to
\fB\-\-width\fR.
.sp
\fB\(bu\fR\ 8-bit and tilde (`\fB~\fR') characters are rejected, as well as
some control characters.
.sp
\fB\(bu\fR\ Input lines are silently truncated to 200 characters.
.sp
\fB\(bu\fR\ It's not possible to specify both an \fBignore file\fR and an
\fBonly file\fR.
.sp
\fB\(bu\fR\ The defaults of some options change as described in \fBOPTIONS\fR.
.RE
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.  Enhancement suggestions on
\fB\-\-format=tex\fR is encouraged.
.sp
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
