.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU sdiff man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH SDIFF 1 "October 2002" "GNU diff Utilities 2.8.1"
.SH NAME
\fBsdiff\fR \- find differences between two files and merge interactively
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sdiff
[\fB\-abdilstBEHW\fR] [\fB\-o \fIOUTFILE\fR] [\fB\-w \fICOLUMNS\fR]
[\fB\-I \fIREGEXP\fR] [\fB\-\-diff\-program=\fIPROGRAM\fR]
[\fB\-\-expand-tabs\fR] [\fB\-ignore\-all\-space\fR]
[\fB\-ignore\-blank\-lines\fR] [\fB\-\-ignore\-case\fR]
[\fB\-\-ignore\-matching\-lines=\fIREGEXP\fR]
[\fB\-\-ignore\-space\-change\fR]
[\fB\-\-ignore\-tab\-expansion\fR]
[\fB\-\-left\-column\fR] [\fB\-\-minimal\fR]
[\fB\-\-output=\fIOUTFILE\fR] 
[\fB\-\-speed\-large\-files\fR]
[\fB\-\-strip\-trailing\-cr\fR]
[\fB\-\-supress\-common\-lines\fR] 
[\fB\-\-text\fR] [\fB\-\-width=\fICOLUMNS\fR]
.I FROMFILE TOFILE

.B sdiff
[\fB-v\fR] [\fB\-\-help\fR] [\fB\-\-version\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sdiff
merges two files and interactively outputs the
results, to
.I OUTFILE
if \fB\-o\fR is specified, or producing a side-by-side difference if it's
not.

If
.I FROMFILE
is a directory and
.I TOFILE
is not,
.B sdiff
compares the file in
.I FROMFILE
whose file name is that of
.IR TOFILE ,
and vice versa.
.I FROMFILE
and
.I TOFILE
may not both be
directories.
You may not use
.RB ` \- '
as an input file.

Normally \fBsdiff\fP invokes \fBdiff\fP(1) to do its work, but you can
change the program by setting the \fBDIFF\fP environment variable to the
name of other program. You may also change the editor, setting the
\fBEDITOR\fR environment variable.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-text
Treat all files as text and compare them line-by-line, even if they
do not appear to be text.
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-ignore\-space\-change
Ignore changes in amount of white space.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-minimal
Change the algorithm to perhaps find a smaller set of changes.  This
makes
.B sdiff
slower (sometimes much slower).
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-ignore\-case
Ignore changes in case; consider upper- and lower-case to be the same.
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-left\-column
Print only the left column of two common lines.
.TP
.BI "\-o " OUTFILE ", \-\-output=" OUTFILE
Put merged output into
.IR  OUTFILE .
This option is required for merging.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-suppress\-common\-lines
Do not print common lines.
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-expand\-tabs
Expand tabs to spaces in the output, to preserve the alignment of tabs
in the input files.
.TP
.BI "\-w " COLUMNS ", \-\-width=" COLUMNS
Use an output width of
.IR COLUMNS .
Note that for historical reasons, this option is
.B \-W
in
.BR diff (1).
.TP
.B \-B, \-\-ignore\-blank\-lines
Ignore changes that just insert or delete blank lines.
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-ignore\-tab\-expansion
Ignores changes in whitespace due to tab expansion.
.TP
.B \-H, \-\-speed\-large\-files
Use heuristics to speed handling of large files that have numerous
scattered small changes.
.TP
.BI "\-I " REGEXP ", \-\-ignore\-matching\-lines=" REGEXP
Ignore changes that just insert or delete lines that match
.IR REGEXP .
.TP
.B \-W
Ignore horizontal white space when comparing lines.
Note that for historical reasons, this option is
.B \-w
in
.BR diff (1).
.TP
.B \-\-diff\-program= \fIPROGRAM
Use an external \fIPROGRAM\fR, compatible with \fBdiff\fR, to compare files.
.TP
.B \-\-strip\-trailing\-cr
Strips trailing CRs.  Useful when processing output from systems that use
CRLF as end of line markers. 
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Output the version number of
.BR diff3 .
.SH MERGING
Groups of common lines, with a blank gutter, are copied from the
first file to the output.  After each group of differing lines, \fBsdiff\fP
prompts with 
.RB ` % '
and pauses, waiting for one of the following commands.
.TP
.B e
Discard both versions.  Invoke a text editor on an empty temporary
file, then copy the resulting file to the output.
.TP 
.B eb
Concatenate the two versions, edit the result in a temporary file,
then copy the edited result to the output.
.TP
.B ed
Like 
.RB ` eb ',
except precede each version with a header
that shows what file and lines the version came from.
.TP     
.B el
Edit a copy of the left version, then copy the result to the output.
.TP
.B er
Edit a copy of the right version, then copy the result to the output.
.TP
.B l
Copy the left version to the output.
.TP
.B q
Quit.
.TP
.B p
Copy the right version to the output.
.TP
.B s
Silently copy common lines.
.TP
.B v
Verbosely copy common lines.  This is the default.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.B diff3
exits with one of the following values:
.TP
.B 0
\fBsdiff\fR was successful, no differences found.
.TP
.B 1
Some differences were found.
.TP
.B 2
Some error occurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
cmp(1), comm(1), diff(1), diff3(1).
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
