.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU seq man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH seq 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
seq \- print a monotonical sequence of numbers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B seq [\-w] [\-f \fIFORMAT\fB] [\-s \fISEP\fB] [\-\-equal\-width] [\-\-format=\fIFORMAT\fB] [\-\-separator=\fISEP\fB]
.BI < LAST " | " "FIRST LAST" " | " "FIRST LAST INCR" >

.B seq [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B seq
prints numbers from \fIFIRST\fR to \fILAST\fR in \fIINCR\fR increments.  If
.I LAST
or
.I INC
are omitted, they default to 1.  All the numbers are interpreted as floats.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-f \fIFORMAT\fB, \-\-format=\fIFORMAT"
Use \fBprintf(3)\fR \fIFORMAT\fR formatting. (Default: %g)
.TP
.B "\-s \fISEP\fB, \-\-separator=\fISEP"
Separate numbers with \fISEP\fR. (Default: `\n')
.TP
.B "\w, \-\-equal\-width"
Pad numbers with zeros to make them the same length.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
