.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU split man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH SPLIT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBsplit\fR \- split a file into fixed-size pieces
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B split
[\fB\-\fILINES\fR] [\fB-a \fILENGTH\fR] [\fB\-b \fIBYTES\fR] [\fB\-l \fILINES\fR]
[\fB\-C \fIBYTES\fR] [\fB\-\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR] [\fB\-\-lines=\fILINES\fR]
[\fB\-\-line\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR] [\fB\-\-verbose\fR] [\fIFILE\fR]

.BR split " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B split
creates output files containing consecutive sections of \fIFILE\fR. If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

By default, \fBsplit\fR puts 1000 lines of \fIFILE\fR (or whatever is left
over for the last section), into each output file.

The output files' names consist of \fIPREFIX\fR (`\fBx\fR' by default) followed
by a group of letters `aa', `ab', and so on, such that concatenating
the output files in sorted order by file name produces the original
input file.  (If more than 676 output files are required, \fBsplit\fR uses
`zaa', `zab', etc.)  The length of this group can be changed by
\fB\-\-suffix\-length\fR).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\fILINES\fB, \-l \fILINES\fB, \-\-lines=\fILINES
Put \fILINES\fR lines of \fIFILE\fR into each output file, instead of the
default 1000 lines.  Short option form \fB\-\fILINES\fR is deprecated.
.TP
.B \-a \fILENGTH\fB, \-\-suffix\-length=\fILENGTH
Use suffixes of \fILENGTH\fR characters.  (Default: 2)
.TP
.B \-b \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-bytes=\fIBYTES
Put the first \fIBYTES\fR bytes of \fIFILE\fR into each output file.
Appending 
.RB ` b '
multiplies \fIBYTES\fR by 512,
.RB ` k '
by 1024, and
.RB ` m '
by 1048576.
.TP
.B \-C \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-line\-bytes=\fIBYTES
Put into each output file as many complete lines of \fIFILE\fR as
possible without exceeding \fIBYTES\fR bytes.  For lines longer than
\fIBYTES\fR bytes, put \fIBYTES\fR bytes into each output file until less than
\fIBYTES\fR bytes of the line are left, then continue normally.  \fIBYTES\fR
has the same format as for the \fB\-\-bytes\fR option.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Always print file name headers.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
