.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU su man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH su 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
su \- run a command with substitute user and group id
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B su
.BI "[\-] [\-flmp] [\-c " command "] [\-s " shell "] [\-\-fast] [\-\-login]"
.B [\-\-preserve-environment]
.BI "[\-\-command=" command "] [\-\-shell=" shell "]"
.BI [ user " [" arg... ]]
.sp
.B su [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B su
allows one user to temporarily become another user.  It runs a command
(ofter an interactive shell) with the real and effective user id, group
id, and supplemental groups of 
.IR user . 
.PP
If no
.I user
is given, the default is root, the super-user.
The shell run is taken from 
.IR user 's 
password entry, or /bin/sh if none is specified there.  If 
.I user 
has a password,
.B su
prompts for the password unless run by a user with real user id 0 (the
super-user).
.PP
By default,
.B su
does not change the current directory.  It sets the environment
variables 
.BR "HOME " and 
.B SHELL
from the password entry for 
.IR user ", and if " user " is not the super-user, sets "
.BR USER " and " LOGNAME " to " 
.IR user .
By default, the shell is not a login shell.
.PP
Any additional arguments are passed as additional arguments to the shell.
.PP
.B su
does not handle /bin/sh or other shells specially
(setting argv[0] to 
.BR \-su ", passing " \-c " only to certain shells, etc.)."
.PP
On systems that have 
.RB syslog (3) ,
.B su
can be compiled to report failed, and optionally successful,
.B su
attempts using syslog.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-c " command ", \-\-command=" command
Pass 
.IR command,
a single command line to run, to the shell with a
.B \-c
option instead of starting an interactive shell.
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-fast"
Pass the
.B \-f
option to the shell.  This probably only makes sense with
.BR csh (1)
and
.BR tcsh (1),
for which the
.B \-f
option prevents reading the startup file (.cshrc).  With Bourne-like
shells, the
.B \-f
option disables filename pattern expansion (globbing), which is not a
generally desirable thing to do.
.TP
.B "\-, \-l, \-\-login"
Make the shell a login shell.  This means the following.  Unset all
environment variables except 
.BR TERM ", " HOME ", and " SHELL
(which are set as described above), and 
.BR USER " and " LOGNAME
(which are set, even for the super-user, as described above), and set
.B PATH
to a compiled-in default value.  Change to 
.IR user 's 
home directory.  Prepend
.B \- 
to the shell's name, to make it read its login startup file(s).
.TP
.B "\-m, \-p, \-\-preserve\-environment"
Do not change the environment variables 
.BR HOME ", " USER ", " LOGNAME ", or " SHELL .
Run the shell given in the environment variable 
.B SHELL
instead of 
.IR user 's 
shell from /etc/passwd, unless the user running
.B su
is not the superuser and 
.IR user 's 
shell is restricted.  A restricted shell is one that is not listed in the
file /etc/shells, or in a compiled-in list if that file does not exist.
Parts of what this option does can be overridden by
.B \-\-login
and
.BR \-\-shell .
.TP
.BI "\-s, \-\-shell " shell
.RI "Run " shell " instead of " user 's
shell from /etc/passwd, unless the user running
.B su
is not the superuser and 
.IR user 's
shell is restricted.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH Why GNU su does not support the wheel group (by Richard Stallman)
Sometimes a few of the users try to hold total power over all the
rest.  For example, in 1984, a few users at the MIT AI lab decided to
seize power by changing the operator password on the Twenex system and
keeping it secret from everyone else.  (I was able to thwart this coup
and give power back to the users by patching the kernel, but I
wouldn't know how to do that in Unix.)
.PP
However, occasionally the rulers do tell someone.  Under the usual su
mechanism, once someone learns the root password who sympathizes with
the ordinary users, he can tell the rest.  The "wheel group" feature
would make this impossible, and thus cement the power of the rulers.
.PP
I'm on the side of the masses, not that of the rulers.  If you are
used to supporting the bosses and sysadmins in whatever they do, you
might find this idea strange at first.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
