.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU sum man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH SUM 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBsum\fR \- print checksum and block counts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sum
.RB [ \-rs ]
.RB [ \-\-sysv ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR sum " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sum
computes and prints a 16 bit checksum for each given
.IR FILE .
If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

.B sum
prints the checksum for each \fIFILE\fR followed by the number of
blocks in the file (rounded up).  By default if more than one \fIFILE\fR is
given, file names are also printed.

By default, GNU \fBsum\fR computes checksums using an algorithm
compatible with BSD \fBsum\fR and prints file sizes in units of 1024-byte
blocks.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-r
Use the default (BSD compatible) algorithm.  This option is
included for compatibility with the System V sum.  Unless \fB-s\fR
is also given, it has no effect.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-sysv
Compute checksums using an algorithm compatible with System V
sum's default, and print file sizes in units of 512-byte blocks.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
