.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1998-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	sync man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH SYNC 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU fileutils 4.1"
.SH NAME
\fBsync\fR \- synchronize filesystem memory buffers with disk
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR sync " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sync
requests the kernel to flush any filesystem data buffers in memory out to
disk.  This flushing can include (but is not limited to) modified superblocks,
modified inodes, and delayed writes.

The kernel keeps data in memory to avoid doing (relatively slow) disk
reads and writes.  This improves performance, but if the computer
crashes, data may be lost or the filesystem corrupted as a result.
\fBsync\fR ensures everything in memory is written to disk, and should be
called whenever you expect your system to go down in an unusual way in which
shutdown commands such as \fBshutdown\fR(8) and \fBhalt\fR(8) won't be run
(these take care of syncing before halting)

Note that this is \fBmerely\fR a request: \fBsync\fR(1) calls the
\fBsync\fR(2)\fR kernel system call, and the kernel schedules the flushing.
Therefore, the \fBsync\fR command may return before the buffers are
actually flushed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBhalt\fR(8), \fBshutdown\fR(8), \fBsync\fR(2)
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to <bug-fileutils@gnu.org>.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
