.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU tac man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH TAC 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBtac\fR \- concatenate and write files in reverse
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tac
.RB [ \-br "] [" "\-s \fISEPARATOR\fR" "] [" \-\-before "] [" \-\-regex ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR tac " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tac
writes each 
.I FILE
to standard output, reversing the records (lines by default).  If
.I FILE
is omitted or if is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used.

Records are separated by instances of a string (newline by default).  By
default, this separator string is attached to the end of the record that
it follows in the file.

Under DOS platforms \fBtac\fR reads files in binary mode.  See \fBcat\fR(1)
for more details.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-before
The separator is attached to the beginning of the record that it
precedes in the file.
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-regex
Treat the separator string as a regular expression.
.TP
.BI "\-s " SEPARATOR ", \-\-separator=" SEPARATOR
Use
.I SEPARATOR
as the record separator, instead of a newline.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
