.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU tail man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH TAIL 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBtail\fR \- output the last part of files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tail
[<\fB\-\fR|\fB+\fR>\fICOUNTOPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-fqvF\fR] [\fB\-c \fIBYTES\fR]
[\fB\-n \fILINES\fR] [\fB\-\-follow\fR] [\fB\-\-bytes=\fIBYTES\fR]
[\fB\-\-lines=\fILINES\fR]
[\fB\-\-follow\fR[\fB=\fIHOW\fR]]
[\fB\-\-max\-consecutive\-size\-changes=\fINUMBER\fR]
[\fB\-\-max\-unchanged\-stats=\fINUMBER\fR]
[\fB\-\-pid=\fIPID\fR]
[\fB\-\-retry\fR]
[\fB\-\-sleep\-interval=\fISECS\fR]
.RB [ \-\-quiet "] [" \-\-silent "] [" \-\-verbose ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR tail " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tail
writes to standard output the last part (10 lines by default) of each
.I FILE
argument.  If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

If more than one \fIFILE\fR is specified, \fBtail\fR prints a one-line header
consisting of
.sp
.nf
     ==> \fIFILENAME\fR <==
.fi
.sp
before the output for each \fIFILE\fR.

\fBtail\fR accepts two option formats: the new one, in which numbers are
arguments to the options (`\fB\-n 1\fR'), and the old one, in which the
number precedes any option letters (`fB\-1\fR' or `\fB+1\fR').

If any option-argument is a number \fIN\fR starting with a `\fB+\fR',
\fBtail\fR begins printing with the \fIN\fRth item from the start of each file,
instead of from the end.  This syntax is deprecated.

If the \fIFILE\fR is truncated, \fBtail\fR will detect that it has shrinked,
move to the new end of file and start reading from the new end of file.

.B tail
can output any amount of data (some other non-GNU versions of
\fBtail\fR cannot).  It also has no \fB\-r\fR option (print in reverse), since
reversing a file is really a different job from printing the end of a
file; BSD \fBtail\fR (which is the one with \fB\-r\fR) can only reverse files
that are at most as large as its buffer, which is typically 32k.  A
more reliable and versatile way to reverse files is the GNU \fBtac\fR(1)
command.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \fR<\fB-\fR|\fB+\fR>\fICOUNTOPTIONS
This option is only recognized if it is specified first.  \fICOUNT\fR is
a decimal number optionally followed by a size letter
.RB (` b "', `" k "', `" m ')
as in `\fB\-c\fR', or `\fBl\fR' to mean count by lines, or other option
letters (`\fBcfqv\fR').  The \fB\-\fR and \fB+\fR short option forms are
deprecated. 
.TP
.B \-c \fIBYTES\fB, \-\-bytes=\fIBYTES
Print the last \fIBYTES\fR bytes, instead of final last lines.  Appending
.RB ` b '
multiplies \fIBYTES\fB by 512,
.RB ` k '
by 1024, and
.RB ` m '
by 1048576.
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-follow\fR[\fB=\fIHOW\fR]
Loop forever trying to read more characters at the end of the file,
presumably because the file is growing.  Ignored if reading from a
pipe.  If more than one file is given, \fBtail\fR prints a header
whenever it gets output from a different file, to indicate which
file that output is from.  You may specify how to track a file:
.RS
.TP
.B descriptor
Track the end of the file after it has been unlinked or renamed;  that is,
forever.
.TP
.B name
Track the end of the file after it has been removed.  Once \fBtail\fR finds
out that the \fRFILE\fR no longer exists (because it has been unlinked or
renamed), it will trying to open it again.
.RE
.TP
.B \-n \fILINES\fB, \-\-lines=\fILINES
Output the last \fILINES\fR lines.
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent
Never print file name headers.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Always print file name headers.
.TP
.B \-F
Equivalent to \fB\-\-follow=name \-\-retry.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-consecutive\-size\-changes=\fINUMBER
When following by name, follow a file until NUMBER of consecutive size
changes have been detected (even if it has been renamed or removed);  then
check if the filename is still associated with the same device/inode pair as
before by opening and fstating the file.  Default is 200.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-unchanged\-stats=\fINUMBER
When following by name, after NUMBER of consecutive iterations on which size
has remained consant, check if the filename is still associated with the
same device/inode pair as before by opening and fstating the file.  Default is 5.
.TP
.B \-\-pid=\fIPID
When following a file \fBtail\fR will terminate when process with pid
\fIPID\fR does too.  If such process doesn't exist, it will terminate after
one iteration.
.TP
.B \-\-retry
When \fBtail\fR is following a file by name and detects that it is gone,
retry until it succeeds opening it again.  Otherwise it will just report the
file no longer exists and never check again.
.TP
.B \-\-sleep\-interval=\fISECS\fR
Check tracked files every \fISECS\fR seconds (default is 1)
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
