.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU tee man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH tee 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
tee \- read from standard input and write to standard output and files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tee [\-ai] [\-\-append] [\-\-ignore-interrupts]
.BI [ file... ]
.sp
.B tee [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tee
copies the standard input to the standard output and any
files given as arguments. It is useful when you want not only to send
some data down a pipe, but also to save a copy.
.P
If a file being written to does not already exist, it is created.  If
a file being written to already exists, the data it previously
contained is overwritten unless the
.B \-a
option is used.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-append"
Append the standard input to the given files rather than overwriting them.
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-ignore-interrupts"
Ignore interrupt signals.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
