.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU test man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH test 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
test \- check file types and compare values
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "test [" expr ]
.sp
.B test [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B test
returns a status of 0 (true) or 1 (false) depending on
the evaluation of
the conditional expression
.IR "expr" .
.PP
Each part of the expression must be a separate argument. Expressions may
be unary or binary. 
.B test
has file status checks, string operators, and numeric comparison
operators.
.PP
Because most shells have a built-in command by the same name, using
the unadorned command name may get you different functionality than that
described here. 
.SS File type tests
.BR
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-b \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a block special device.
.TP
.B \-c \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a character special device.
.TP
.B \-d \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a directory.
.TP
.B \-f \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a regular file.
.TP
.B \-h \fIfile\fP
.TP
.B \-L \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a symbolic link.
.TP
.B \-p \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a named pipe.
.TP
.B \-S \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a socket.
.TP
.B \-t [\fIfd\fP]
True if
.I fd
is opened on a terminal.  If
.I fd
is omitted, it defaults to 1 (standard output).

.SS File permission tests
.BR
.TP
.B \-g \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and has its set-group-id bit set.
.TP
.B \-k \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP has its ``sticky'' bit set.
.TP
.B \-r \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is readable.
.TP
.B \-u \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and has its set-user-id bit set.
.TP
.B \-w \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is writable.
.TP
.B \-x \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is executable.
.TP
.B \-O \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is owned by the current effective user id.
.TP
.B \-G \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is owned by the current effective group id.

.SS File characteristics tests
.BR
.TP
.B \-e \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists
.TP
.B \-s \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and has a size greater than zero.
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \-\fBnt\fP \fIfile2\fP
True if \fIfile1\fP is newer (according to
modification date) than \fIfile2\fP.
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \-\fBot\fP \fIfile2\fP
True if \fIfile1\fP is older than file2.
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \fB\-ef\fP \fIfile2\fP
True if \fIfile1\fP and \fIfile2\fP have the same device and
inode numbers.

.SS String tests
.BR
.TP
.B \fIstring\fP
.TP
.B \-n \fIstring\fP
True if the length of
.I string
is non-zero.
.TP
.B \-z \fIstring\fP
True if the length of \fIstring\fP is zero.
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB=\fP \fIstring2\fP
True if the strings are equal.
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB!=\fP \fIstring2\fP
True if the strings are not equal.

.SS Numeric tests
.BR
.TP
.I arg1 \fBOP\fP arg2
.SM
.B OP
is one of
.BR \-eq ,
.BR \-ne ,
.BR \-lt ,
.BR \-le ,
.BR \-gt ,
or
.BR \-ge .
These arithmetic binary operators return true if \fIarg1\fP
is equal, not-equal, less-than, less-than-or-equal,
greater-than, or greater-than-or-equal than \fIarg2\fP,
respectively.
.I arg1
and
.I arg2
may be positive integers, negative integers, or the special
expression \fB\-l\fP \fIstring\fP, which evaluates to the
length of 
.IR string .

.SS Connectives for test
.BR
.TP
.B ! \fIexpr\fP
True if
.I expr
is false.
.TP
\fIexpr1\fP \-\fBa\fP \fIexpr2\fP
True if both
.I expr1
and
.I expr2
are true.
.TP
\fIexpr1\fP \-\fBo\fP \fIexpr2\fP
True if either
.I expr1
or
.I expr2
is true.
.PD 1
.SH OPTIONS
When GNU
.B test
is invoked with exactly one argument, the following options are
recognized:
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
