.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU tsort man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH TSORT 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBtsort\fR \- print byte, word, and line counts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tsort
.RI [ FILE ]

.BR tsort " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtsort\fR topologically sorts a given 
.IR FILE ".  If " FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

String pairs, each element separated by blanks, are read from \fIFILE\fR.
The total order in relation with the partial order indicated by
the elements of the string pairs is then printed to standard output.  If any
cycle is detected, it'll write the first one found to standard error.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH EXAMPLES
We will give \fBtsort\fR a list of "X happened before Y" pairs,
and see if it can sort it.  Note that for a given partial order there may be
no unique total order.
.sp
.RS
.nf
tsort << EOF
neolitic bronze
greeks linux
pyramids greeks
bronze pyramids
bronze greeks
EOF
.fi
.RE
.sp
outputs
.sp
.RS
.nf
neolitic
bronze
pyramids
greeks
linux
.fi
.RE
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>


