.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU uname man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH uname 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
uname \- print system information
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B uname
.B [\-snrvma] [\-\-sysname] [\-\-nodename] [\-\-release]
.B [\-\-machine] [\-\-all]
.sp
.B uname [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B uname
prints information about the machine and operating system it is run on.
If no options are given,
.B uname
acts as if the
.B \-s
option
were given.  If multiple options are given or the
.B \-a
option is given, the selected information is printed in the `snrvm'
with a space between items.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-m, \-\-machine"
Print the machine (hardware) type.
.TP
.B "\-n, \-\-nodename"
Print the machine's network node hostname.
.TP
.B "\-r, \-\-release"
Print the operating system release.
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-sysname"
Print the operating system name.
.TP
.B "\-v"
Print the operating system version.
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
Print all of the above information.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
