.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU unexpand man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH UNEXPAND 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBunexpand\fR \- convert spaces to tabs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B unexpand
.RB [ \-a ]
.RB [ \-\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2... ]
.RB [ "\-t \fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2..." ]
.RB [ \-\-all ]
.RB [ \-\-first\-only ]
.RB [ \-\-tabs=\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2... ]
.RI [ FILE... ]

.BR unexpand " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B unexpand
writes each 
.I FILE
to standard output, replacing strings of two or more spaces or tab
characters with as many tabs as possible followed by as many spaces as are
needed.  If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2...\fR]\fB, \-t \fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2...\fR]\fB, \-\-tabs=\fITAB1\fR[\fB,\fITAB2...\fR]
If only one tab stop is given, set the tabs \fITAB1\fR spaces apart
(default is 8).  Otherwise, set the tabs at columns \fITAB1\fR, \fITAB2\fR,
\fI...\fR (numbered from 0), and replace any tabs beyond the last
tabstop given with single spaces.  If the tabstops are specified
with the \fB\-\-tabs\fR option, they can be separated by blanks as well as
by commas.  Short option form \fB\-\fR is deprecated.
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-all
Convert all strings of two or more spaces or tabs, not just initial
ones, to tabs.
.TP
.B \-\-first\-only
Perform only one replacement and exit.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
