.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU uniq man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH UNIQ 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBuniq\fR \- uniquify files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B uniq
[<\fB+\fR|\fB-\fR>\fIN\fR] [\fB\-ciduD\fR] [\fB\-f \fIN\fR] [\fB\-s \fIN\fR] [\fB\-w \fIN\fR]
.RB [ -\-all\-repeated\fR[\fB={prepend,separate,none} ]]
.RB [ \-\-check\-chars=\fIN ]
.RB [ \-\-count ]
.RB [ \-\-ignore\-case ]
.RB [ \-\-repeated ]
.RB [ \-\-skip\-chars=\fIN ]
.RB [ \-\-skip\-fields=\fIN ]
.RB [ \-\-unique ]
.RI [ "INFILE " [ OUTFILE ]]

.BR uniq " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B uniq
writes the unique lines in the given
.I INFILE
to standard output, or
.I OUTFILE
if specified.  If
.I INFILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

By default, \fBuniq\fR prints the unique lines in a sorted file, i.e.,
discards all but one of identical successive lines.  Optionally, it can
instead show only lines that appear exactly once, or lines that appear
more than once.

The input must be sorted.  If your input is not sorted, perhaps you
want to use `sort \-u'.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\fIN\fB, \-f \fIN\fB, \-\-skip\-fields\fB=\fIN
Skip \fIN\fR fields on each line before checking for uniqueness.  Fields
are sequences of non-space non-tab characters that are separated
from each other by at least one spaces or tabs.  Short option form \fB\-\fR
is deprecated.
.TP
.B \+\fIN\fB, \-s \fIN\fB, \-\-skip\-chars\fB=\fIN
Skip \fIN\fR characters before checking for uniqueness.  If you use both
the field and character skipping options, fields are skipped over first.
Short option form \fB+\fR is deprecated.
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-count
Print the number of times each line occurred along with the line.
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-ignore\-case
Ignore differences in case when comparing lines.
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-repeated
Print one of each duplicate lines, and only duplicate lines.
.TP	       
.B \-u, \-\-unique
Print only unique lines.
.TP
.B \-w \fIN\fB, \-\-check\-chars=\fIN
Compare \fIN\fR characters on each line (after skipping any specified fields
and characters).  By default the entire rest of the lines are compared.
.TP
.B \-D, \-\-all\-repeated\fR[\fB={prepend,separate,none}\fR]
Print all duplicate lines, and only duplicate lines.  If \fBprepend\fR is
specified, precede each group of duplicated lines with a newline.
\fBseparate\fR does the same except that the first group that is outputted
is not prepended.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
