.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU users man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH users 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
users \- print the user names of users currently logged in to the current host
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "users [" file "]"
.sp
.B users [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B users
prints on a single line a blank-separated list of user names
of users currently logged in to the current host.
Each output user name corresponds to a login session, so if a user has more
than one login session, that user's name will appear the same
number of times in the output.
With no 
.I file 
argument,
.B users
extracts its information from the file
.BR /var/run/utmp .
If a 
.I file 
argument is given,
.B users
uses that file instead.
A common choice is
.BR /var/run/wtmp .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
