.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"	GNU wc man page
.\"	man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"	<ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH WC 1 "7 October 2002" "GNU textutils 2.1"
.SH NAME
\fBwc\fR \- print byte, word, and line counts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wc
.RB [ \-clmwL ]
.RB [ \-\-bytes ]
.RB [ \-\-chars ]
.RB [ \-\-lines ]
.RB [ \-\-max\-line\-length ]
.RB [ \-\-words ]

.BR wc " [" \-\-help "] [" \-\-version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wc
counts the number of bytes, whitespace-separated words, and newlines in each
given 
.IR FILE .
If
.I FILE
is omitted or if it is a
.RB ` \- ',
standard input is used for reading.

By default, it prints all three counts.  Options can specify that
only certain counts be printed.  Options do not undo others previously
given, so `wc \-\-bytes \-\-words' prints both the byte counts and the word
counts.

.B wc
also prints a final line containing the cumulative counts, with the
\fIFILE\fR total.  The counts are printed in this order: newlines, words,
bytes.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-bytes
Print only the byte counts, which may differ from \fB-\-chars\fR depending
on the locale.
.TP	  
.B \-l, \-\-lines
Print only the newline counts.
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-chars
Print only character counts, which may differ from \fB-\-bytes\fR depending
on the locale.
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-words
Print only the word counts.
.TP	       
.B \-L, \-\-max\-line\-length
Print only the maximum line length per file, and if there is more than one
file also print the  maximum (not the sum) of those lengths.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH POSIX NOTES
\fBwc\fR prints counts right justifying them in a 7 characters long field,
but \fBPOSIX\fR mandates to be exactly one space between the counts and the
filenames; you can get this last format by setting the \fBPOSIXLY_CORRECT\fR
environment variable.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-textutils@gnu.org.
.br
Man page by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
