.\" You may copy, distribute and modify under the terms of the LDP General
.\" Public License as specified in the LICENSE file that comes with the
.\" gnumaniak distribution
.\"
.\" The author kindly requests that no comments regarding the "better"
.\" suitability or up-to-date notices of any info documentation alternative
.\" is added without contacting him first.
.\"
.\" (C) 1999-2002 Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.\"
.\"     GNU who man page
.\"     man pages are NOT obsolete!
.\"     <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
.TH who 1 "18 June 2002" "GNU Shell Utilities 2.1"
.SH NAME
who \- show who is logged on
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B who
.B [\-abdilmpqrstuwHT] [\-\-all] [\-\-boot] [\-\-count] [\-\-dead]
.B [\-\-heading] [\-\-idle] [\-\-login] [\-\-lookup]
.B [\-\-message] [\-\-mesg] [\-\-process] [\-\-runlevel] [\-\-short]
.B [\-\-time] [\-\-users] [\-\-writable] [am i]
.BI [ file ]
.sp
.B who [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH DESCRIPTION
If given no non-option arguments,
.B who
prints the following information for each user currently logged on:
.RS
.nf

login name
terminal line
login time
remote hostname or X display
.fi
.RE
.PP
If given one non-option argument,
.B who
uses that instead of 
.BR "/var/run/utmp" " as the name of the file containing the"
.RB "record of users logged on.  "  /var/run/wtmp
is commonly given as an argument to
.B who
to look at who has previously logged on.
.PP
If given two non-option arguments,
.B who
prints only the entry for the user running it (determined from its
standard input), preceded by the hostname.
Traditionally, the two arguments given are `am i'.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
Same as `who -b -d --login -p -r -t -u'.
.TP
.B "\-b, \-\-boot"
Print only the time of the last system boot.
.TP
.B "\-d, \-\-dead"
Print dead processes, showing an extra EXIT field with the exit code of
processes.
.TP
.B "\-i, \-u, \-\-idle"
After the login time, print the number of
hours and minutes that the user has been idle.
`.' means the user was active in last minute.
`old' means the user was idle for more than 24 hours.
.TP
.B \-\-login
Print only login processes.
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-lookup
Use DNS to resolve the hostname of each user.
.TP
.B \-m
Same as `who am i'.
.TP
.B "\-p, \-\process"
Print processes spawned by init.
.TP
.B "\-q, \-\-count"
Print only the login names and the number of users logged on.
Overrides all other options.
.TP
.B "\-r, \-\-runlevel"
Print only the current runlevel.
.TP
.B "\-s, \-\-short"
Print only the NAME, LINE and TIME columns (This is the default.)
.TP
.B "\-t, \-\-time"
Print the time of the last change to the system clock.
.TP
.B "\-u, \-\-users"
Prints the users currently logged in, and an IDLE field.
.TP
.B "\-w, \-T, \-\-mesg, \-\-message, \-\-writable"
After each login name print a character indicating the user's
message status:
.RS
.IP +
allowing \fBwrite\fP(1) messages
.IP \-
disallowing \fBwrite\fP(1) messages
.IP ?
cannot find terminal device
.RE
.TP
.B "\-H, \-\-heading"
Print a line of column headings.
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
.SH NOTES
Report bugs to bug-sh-utils@gnu.org.
Page updated by Ragnar Hojland Espinosa <ragnar@ragnar-hojland.com>
