.\" $Id: pppoe-wrapper.1,v 1.2 2002/04/09 17:28:38 dfs Exp $ 
.\" LIC: GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Mon Oct  8 21:53:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH PPPOE-WRAPPER 1 "26 February 2001"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pppoe-wrapper \- SUID wrapper for starting and stopping PPPoE connections.
pppoe-wrapper \- PPPoE 接続を開始・終了するための SUID ラッパー
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pppoe-wrapper start linkname
.P
.B pppoe-wrapper stop linkname
.P
.B pppoe-wrapper status linkname

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBpppoe-wrapper\fR is a small SUID program which allows non-root users
.\"O to start and stop PPPoE links.  It operates as follows:
\fBpppoe-wrapper\fR は、root 以外のユーザーが
PPPoE 接続を開始・終了できるようにするための小さな SUID プログラムである。

.TP
.B o
.\"O First, \fIlinkname\fR is sanity-checked.  Too-long names and names containing
.\"O illegal characters are rejected.
初めに \fIlinkname\fR が正しいかをチェックする。
長すぎる名前や不正な文字を含む名前は拒否される。

.TP
.B o
.\"O Second, \fBpppoe-wrapper\fR opens the file \fB/etc/ppp/rp-pppoe-gui/\fR\fIlinkname\fR for reading.  If that file does not contain the line:
次に \fBpppoe-wrapper\fR は
ファイル \fB/etc/ppp/rp-pppoe-gui/\fR\fIlinkname\fR を
オープンして読み込む。
ファイルに
.nf

		NONROOT=OK

.fi
という行がない場合、\fBpppoe-wrapper\fR は起動に失敗する。

.TP
.B o
.\"O Otherwise, \fBpppoe-wrapper\fR runs \fBadsl-start\fR, \fBadsl-stop\fR or
.\"O \fBadsl-status\fR with the above filename as its single argument.
上の行があれば、\fBpppoe-wrapper\fR は \fIlinkname\fR  を引き数として
\fBadsl-start\fR, \fBadsl-stop\fR, \fBadsl-status\fR を実行する。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O \fBpppoe-wrapper\fR was written by David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com>.
\fBpppoe-wrapper\fR は David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com> によって
作成された。

.\"O The \fBpppoe\fR home page is \fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR.
\fBpppoe\fR のホームページは
\fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR である。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
adsl-start(8), adsl-stop(8), adsl-status(8), tkpppoe(1)
