.\" $Id: tkpppoe.1,v 1.2 2002/04/09 17:28:38 dfs Exp $ 
.\" LIC: GPL
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Mon Oct  8 21:53:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH TKPPPOE 1 "26 February 2001"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O tkpppoe \- Graphical interface for controlling rp-pppoe
tkpppoe \- rp-pppoe を制御するグラフィカルインターフェース
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B tkpppoe

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBtkpppoe\fR is a graphical program for controlling PPPoE links.
.\"O It works with the RP-PPPoE package and has its own HTML manual.
\fBtkpppoe\fR は PPPoE 接続を制御するグラフィカルプログラムである。
このプログラムは RP-PPPoE パッケージとともに動作し、HTML マニュアルがある。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル

.TP
.B /etc/ppp/rp-pppoe-gui/connection-info
.\"O Contains connection information.  This file is not human-editable.
接続情報が書かれる。
このファイルは人間が編集できない。

.TP
.B /etc/ppp/rp-pppoe-gui/passwd
.\"O Contains passwords for each connection.  This file is not human-editable.
各接続のパスワードが書かれる。
このファイルは人間が編集できない。

.TP
.B /etc/ppp/rp-pppoe-gui/conf.*
.\"O These configuration files are used by \fBadsl-start\fR.  They are
.\"O generated anew by \fBtkpppoe\fR each time a change is made to a
.\"O connection's properties.
これらの設定ファイルは \fBadsl-start\fR によって使われる。
またこれらは接続の設定が変更される度に、
\fBtkpppoe\fR によって新しく作成される。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O \fBtkpppoe\fR was written by David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com>.
\fBtkpppoe\fR は David F. Skoll <dfs@roaringpenguin.com> によって作成された。

.\"O The \fBpppoe\fR home page is \fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR.
\fBpppoe\fR のホームページは
\fIhttp://www.roaringpenguin.com/pppoe/\fR である。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
adsl-start(8), adsl-stop(8), pppoe-wrapper(8).
