.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 16:15:24 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Sep  8 17:49:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	look up		照合
.\"
.TH ATALKD 8 "17 Nov 1995" "netatalk 1.3"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O atalkd \- AppleTalk RTMP, NBP, ZIP, and AEP manager
atalkd \- AppleTalk RTMP, NBP, ZIP, AEP の管理をする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /usr/sbin/atalkd
[
.B -f
.I configfile
] [
.B -1
|
.B -2
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B atalkd
.\"O is responsible for all user level AppleTalk network management. This
.\"O includes routing, name registration and lookup, zone lookup, and the
.\"O AppleTalk Echo Protocol (similar to
.\"O .BR ping (8)).
.B atalkd
は全てのユーザーレベル AppleTalk ネットワーク管理の責任を負う。
これには、ルーティング・名前の登録と照合・ゾーンの照合・
AppleTalk エコープロトコル
.RB ( ping (8)
に似たもの) が含まれる。
.\"O .B atalkd
.\"O is typically started at boot time, out of
.\"O .B /etc/rc.
.B atalkd
は、通常、ブート時に
.B /etc/rc
から起動される。
.\"O It first reads from its configuration file,
.\"O .BR /etc/netatalk/atalkd.conf .
最初に設定ファイル
.B /etc/netatalk/atalkd.conf
を読み込む。
.\"O If there is no configuration file,
.\"O .B atalkd
.\"O will attempt to configure all available interfaces and will create a
.\"O configuration file.  The file consists of a series of interfaces, one
.\"O per line.  Lines with
.\"O .RB ` # '
.\"O in the first column are ignored, as are blank lines.  The syntax is
設定ファイルがない場合、
.B atalkd
は使用可能な全てのインターフェースを設定しようと試み、
設定ファイルを作成する。
このファイルには 1 行に 1 つのインターフェースが並べて書かれている。
.RB ` # '
が最初にある行は、空行と同様に、無視される。
書式は以下の通り。
.RS
.sp
.I interface
[
.B -seed
] [
.B -phase
.I number
] [
.B -net
.I net-range
] [
.B -addr
.I address
] [
.B -zone
.I zonename
] ...
.sp
.RE
.\"O Note that all field except the
.\"O .I interface
.\"O are optional.  
.I interface
以外のフィールドは省略可能である点に注意すること。
.\"O The loopback interface is configured automatically.  
ループバックインターフェースは自動的に設定される。
.\"O If
.\"O .B -seed
.\"O is specified, all other fields must be present.  
.B -seed
を指定した場合、他の全てのフィールドが存在しなければならない。
.\"O Also,
.\"O .B atalkd
.\"O will exit during bootstrapping, if a router disagrees with its seed
.\"O information.  
ルータがこのシード情報を認めない場合、
.B atalkd
はブートせずに終了する。
.\"O If
.\"O .B -seed
.\"O is not given, all other information may be overriden during
.\"O auto-configuration.  
.B -seed
が指定されない場合、他の全ての情報は自動設定で上書きされる。
.\"O If no
.\"O .B -phase
.\"O option is given, the default phase as given on the command line is used
.\"O (the default is 2).  
.B -phase
オプションが指定されない場合、
コマンドラインで与えられるデフォルトのフェーズが使われる
(デフォルトは 2 である)。
.\"O If
.\"O .B -addr
.\"O is given and
.\"O .B -net
.\"O is not, a
.\"O .I net-range
.\"O of one is assumed.
.B -addr
は指定されているが、
.B -net
が指定されていない場合、
.I net-range
は 1 であると仮定する。
.LP
.\"O The first
.\"O .B -zone
.\"O directive for each interface is the ``default'' zone.  
各インターフェースの最初の
.B -zone
ディレクティブは「デフォルト」ゾーンである。
.\"O Under Phase 1, there
.\"O is only one zone.  
フェーズ 1 では、1 つのゾーンしかない。
.\"O Under Phase 2, all routers on the network are
.\"O configured with the default zone and must agree.
フェーズ 2 では、ネットワーク上の全てのルータは
デフォルトゾーンに設定され、これを認めなければならない。
.\"O .B atalkd
.\"O maps ``*'' to the default zone of the first interface.  
.B atalkd
は、``*'' を第 1 インターフェースのデフォルトゾーンに対応づける。
.\"O Note:  The
.\"O default zone for a machine is determined by the configuration of the
.\"O local routers; to appear in a non-default zone, each service, e.g.
.\"O .BR afpd ,
.\"O must individually specify the desired zone.  See also
.\"O .BR nbp_name (3).
注意:
マシンのデフォルトゾーンはローカルルータの設定によって決められる;
デフォルトゾーンがない場合、
.BR afpd
のような各サービスは、個別に希望するゾーンを指定しなければならない。
.BR nbp_name (3)
を参照すること。
.\"O .SH ROUTING
.SH ルーティング
.\"O If you are connecting a netatalk router to an existing AppleTalk
.\"O internet, you should first contact your local network administrators to
.\"O obtain appropriate network addresses.
既存の AppleTalk インターネットに netatalk ルータで接続している場合は、
適切なネットワークアドレスを取得するために、
まずはローカルのネットワーク管理者に相談すべきである。
.LP
.\"O .B atalkd
.\"O can provide routing between interfaces by configuring multiple
.\"O interfaces.  
.B atalkd
は、複数のインターフェースを設定することにより、
インターフェース間のルーティング機能を提供する。
.\"O Each interface must be assigned a unique
.\"O .I net-range
.\"O between 1 and 65279 (0 and 65535 are illegal, and addresses between
.\"O 65280 and 65534 are reserved for startup).  
各インターフェースは 1 〜 65279 の間で他と重ならない
.I net-range
を割り当てなければならない
(0 と 65535 は不正であり、
65280 〜 65534 のアドレスはスタートアップのために予約されている)。
.\"O It is best to choose the
.\"O smallest useful
.\"O .IR net-range ,
最も小さく有効な
.IR net-range
を選ぶのが最も良い。
.\"O i.e. if you have three machines on an Ethernet, don't chose a
.\"O .I net-range
.\"O of 1000-2000.  
つまり、イーサーネット上に 3 台のマシンがある場合、
1000-2000 という
.I net-range
を選んではならない。
.\"O Each
.\"O .I net-range
.\"O may have an arbitrary list of zones associated with it.
各
.I net-range
には、それに割り当てられたゾーンの任意のリストが存在できる。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O Below is an example configuration file for a sun4/40.  The machine has
.\"O two interfaces, ``le0'' and ``le1''.  The ``le0'' interface is
.\"O configured automatically from other routers on the network.  The
.\"O machine is the only router for the ``le1'' interface.
以下は sun4/40 の設定ファイルの例である。
マシンには 2 つのインターフェース
``le0'' と ``le1'' がある。
``le0'' インターフェースは、
ネットワーク上の他のルータによって自動的に設定される。
このマシンは ``le1'' インターフェースについてのみルーティングを行う。
.sp
.RS
.nf
le0
le1 -seed -net 9461-9471 -zone netatalk -zone Argus
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O .B atalkd
.\"O automatically acts as a router if there is more than one interface.
2 つ以上のインターフェースがある場合、
.B atalkd
は自動的にルータとして動作する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP 30
.B /etc/netatalk/atalkd.conf
.\"O configuration file
設定ファイル
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O On some systems, atalkd can not be restarted.
いくつかのシステムでは、atalkd が再起動できない。
