'\" t
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Mar 13 01:35:34 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Sep  8 17:49:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Oct  8 21:37:26 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	clear text	平文	
.\"WORD:	manufacturer	製造メーカ
.\"
.TH PAPD 8 "06 Mar 2001" "netatalk 1.5"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O papd \- AppleTalk print server daemon
papd \- AppleTalk プリントサーバデーモン
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /usr/sbin/papd
[
.B -d
] [
.B -f
.I configfile
] [
.B -p
.I printcap
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B papd
.\"O is the AppleTalk printer daemon.  This daemon accepts print jobs from
.\"O AppleTalk clients (typically Macintosh computers) using the Printer
.\"O Access Protocol (PAP).
.B papd
は AppleTalk プリンタデーモンである。
このデーモンは、
AppleTalk クライアント (通常は Macintosh コンピュータ) から
プリンタアクセスプロトコル (Printer Access Protocol, PAP) を使って
印刷ジョブを受け付ける。
.\"O .B papd
.\"O spools jobs directly into an
.\"O .BR lpd (8)
.\"O spool directory and wakes up
.\"O .B lpd
.\"O after accepting a job from the network to have it re-examine the
.\"O appropriate spool directory.  The actual printing and spooling is
.\"O handled entirely by
.\"O .B lpd.
.B papd
はネットワークからジョブを受け取ると、
そのジョブを直接
.BR lpd (8)
のスプールディレクトリにスプールし、
.B lpd
を起動する。
すると
.B lpd
は、対応する適切なスプールディレクトリがあるかどうかを再検査する。
実際の印刷とスプールは、
.B lpd
が全て処理する。
.\"O .B papd
.\"O can also pipe the print job to an external program for processing, and
.\"O this is the preferred method to avoid compatibility problems with all
.\"O the flavors of lpd in use.
.B papd
は印刷ジョブを外部プログラムにパイプで渡して処理させることができる。
使っている lpd のくせによる互換性の問題を避けるには、
この方法を用いると良い。
.LP
.\"O .B papd
.\"O is typically started at boot time, out of system init scripts.
通常
.B papd
は、システムの init スクリプトからブート時に起動される。
.\"O It first reads from its configuration file,
.\"O .BR /etc/netatalk/papd.conf .
初めに設定ファイル
.B /etc/netatalk/papd.conf
を読み込む。
.\"O The file is in the same format as
.\"O .BR /etc/printcap .
このファイルは
.B /etc/printcap
と同じフォーマットである。
.\"O See
.\"O .BR printcap (5)
.\"O for details.  
詳細は
.BR printcap (5)
を参照すること。
.\"O The name of the entry is registered with
.\"O .BR NBP .
エントリの名前は
.B NBP
で登録されている。
.\"O The following options are supported:
以下のオプションがサポートされている:
.LP
.TS
c c l l
cfB l l l .
.\"O Name	Type	Default	Descripton
.\"O .sp .5
.\"O pd	str	`.ppd'	Pathname to PPD file
.\"O pr	str	`lp'	LPD printer name (or print command)
.\"O op	str	`operator'	Operator name for LPD spooling
.\"O ca	str	NULL	Pathname used for CAP-style authentication
.\"O sp	bool	false	PSSP-style authentication
.\"O am	str	NULL	UAMS to use for authentication
.\"O pa	str	NULL	Printer's AppleTalk address?
名前	タイプ	デフォルト	説明
.sp .5
pd	str	`.ppd'	PPD ファイルのパス名
pr	str	`lp'	LPD プリンタ名 (または、印刷コマンドへのパイプ)
op	str	`operator'	LPD スプーリングのオペレータ名
ca	str	NULL	CAP 形式認証に使うファイルのパス名
sp	bool	false	PSSP 形式認証
am	str	NULL	認証に使う UAM (ユーザー認証モジュール)
pa	str	NULL	プリンタの AppleTalk アドレス?
.TE
.LP
.\"O If no configuration file is given, the hostname of the machine is used
.\"O as the NBP name and all options take their default value.
設定ファイルが指定されない場合、
ホスト名が NBP 名として使われ、全てのオプションがデフォルトの値になる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -d
.\"O Do not fork or disassociate from the terminal.  Write some
.\"O debugging information to stderr.
fork しない。または端末から切り離さない。
デバッグ情報を標準エラーに書き出す。
.HP
.B -f
.I configfile
.br
.\"O Consult
.\"O .I configfile
.\"O instead of
.\"O .B /etc/netatalk/papd.conf
.\"O for the configuration information.
設定情報として
.B /etc/netatalk/papd.conf
ではなく
.I configfile
を読み込む。
.HP
.B -p
.I printcap
.br
.\"O Consult
.\"O .I printcap
.\"O instead of
.\"O .B /etc/printcap
.\"O for LPD configuration information.
LPD 設定情報として
.B /etc/printcap
ではなく
.I printcap
を読み込む。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O The following papd configuration file sets up three print spoolers.
以下の papd 設定ファイルは 3 つのプリントスプーラを設定する。
.\"O The first spooler is known by the NBP name
.\"O .B Mac Printer Spooler,
.\"O and uses a PPD file located in /usr/share/lib/ppd.
1 番目のスプーラは NBP 名が
.B Mac Printer Spooler
で、/usr/share/lib/ppd にある PPD ファイルを使う。
.\"O In addition, the user mcs
.\"O will be the owner of all jobs that are spooled.
さらに、ユーザー mcs がスプールされる全てのジョブの所有者になる。
.\"O The second spooler is known as
.\"O .B HP Printer
.\"O and all options are the default. 
2 番目のスプーラは
.B HP Printer
という名前で、全てのオプションがデフォルトである。
.\"O The third spooler is known as
.\"O .B HP 8100 .
.\"O It pipes the print job to lpr for printing.  PSSP authenticated printing
.\"O is enabled, as is CAP-style authenticated printing.  Both methods support
.\"O guest and cleartext authentication as specified by the 'am' option.  The
.\"O PPD used is /etc/atalk/ppds/hp8100.ppd.
3 番目のスプーラは
.B HP 8100
という名前である。
このスプーラは印刷ジョブを行うために lpr を使う。
PSSP 認証印刷が CAP 形式認証印刷と同様に有効にされている。
\&'am' オプションが指定されているので、
どちらの認証法でも guest と平文の認証が使える。
使用される PPD は /etc/atalk/ppds/hp8100.ppd である。
.sp
.RS
.nf
Mac Printer Spooler:\\ 
	:pr=ps:\\
	:pd=/usr/share/lib/ppd/HPLJ_4M.PPD:\\
	:op=mcs:

HP Printer:\\ 
	:

HP 8100:\\
	:pr=|/usr/bin/lpr -Plp:\\
	:sp:\\
	:ca=/tmp/print:\\
	:am=uams_guest.so,uams_pam.so:\\
	:pd=/etc/atalk/ppds/hp8100.ppd:
.fi
.RE
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O PSSP (Print Server Security Protocol) is an authentication protocol
.\"O carried out through postscript printer queries to the print server.  Using
.\"O PSSP requires LaserWriter 8.6.1 or greater on the client mac.  The user
.\"O will be prompted to enter their username and password before they print.
PSSP (Print Server Security Protocol) はプリントサーバーに
PostScript プリンタの問い合わせをさせる認証プロトコルである。
PSSP を使うにはクライアント Mac 上に LaserWriter 8.6.1 以降が必要である。
印刷を行う前に、ユーザー名とパスワードを入力するプロンプトが出る。
.\"O It may be necessary to re-setup the printer on each client the first time
.\"O PSSP is enabled, so that the client can figure out that authentication is
.\"O required to print.  You can enable PSSP on a per-printer basis.  PSSP is
.\"O the recommended method of authenticating printers as it is more robust
.\"O that CAP-style authentication, described below.
PSSP を初めて有効にしたときは、
各クライアント上のプリンタを再設定する必要があるかもしれない。
これによりクライアントは印刷に認証が必要とされることを理解することができる。
プリンタ毎に PSSP を有効にすることができる。
PSSP は以下で説明する CAP 形式認証より堅牢なので、
プリンタの認証にはこちらを使うと良い。
.LP
.\"O CAP-style authentication gets its name from the method the CAP (Columbia
.\"O APpletalk) package used to authenticate its mac clients' printing.  This
.\"O method requires that a user login to a file share before they print.
CAP 形式認証は、Mac クライアントでの印刷の認証で使われる
CAP (Columbia APpletalk) パッケージの方法を用いて、
ユーザー名を取得する。
この方法では、印刷をする前に
ユーザーがファイル共有にログインしている必要がある。
.\"O .B afpd
.\"O records the username in a temporary file named after the clients
.\"O Appletalk address, and it deletes the temporary file when the user
.\"O disconnects.
.B afpd
はユーザー名をクライアントの Appletalke アドレスにちなんだ
テンポラリファイルに記録し、
ユーザーが接続を切ると、このファイルを削除する。
.\"O .B papd
.\"O gets the username from the file with the same Appletalk address as the
.\"O machine connecting to it.  CAP-style authentication will work with any
.\"O mac client.  If both CAP and PSSP are enabled for a particular printer, CAP
.\"O will be tried first, then it will fall back to PSSP.
.B papd
は接続してきているマシンの Appletalk アドレスと
同じ名前のファイルからユーザー名を取得する。
CAP 形式認証はどの Mac クライアントに対しても動作するだろう。
あるプリンタに対して CAP と PSSP がともに有効になっている場合、
最初に CAP が試みられ、(失敗した場合は) 次に PSSP を試みる。
.LP

.\"O The list of UAMS to use for authentication (specified with the 'am'
.\"O option) applies to all printers.  It is not possible to define different
.\"O authentication methods on each printer. You can specify the list of UAMS
.\"O multiple times, but only the last setting will be used.  Currently only
.\"O uams_guest.so, uams_passwd.so, and uams_pam.so are supported as printer
.\"O authentication methods.  The guest method requires a valid username, but
.\"O not a password. The passwd and pam methods require both a valid username
.\"O and the correct password.
('am' オプションで指定されて) 認証に使われる
UAM (ユーザー認証モジュール) の一覧は全てのプリンタに適用される。
各プリンタ毎に別の認証法を定義することはできない。
UAM のリストを複数回指定することもできるが、
最後の設定のみが使われる。
現在のところ、プリンタの認証法としては
uams_guest.so, uams_passwd.so, uams_pam.so のみがサポートされている。
guest による方法では、有効なユーザー名が必要であるが、パスワードは必要ない。
passwd と pam による方法では、
有効なユーザー名と正しいパスワードの両方が必要である。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP 16
.B /etc/netatalk/papd.conf
.\"O Default configuration file.
デフォルトの設定ファイル。
.TP 16
.B /etc/printcap
.\"O Printer capabilities database.
プリンタ機能のデータベース。
.TP 16
.B .ppd
.\"O PostScript Printer Description file.
PostScript プリンタ記述ファイル。
.\"O .B papd
.\"O answers configuration and font queries from printing clients by
.\"O consulting the configured PPD file.  
.B papd
は、設定情報や印刷を行っているクライアントからのフォント要求を、
設定された PPD ファイルに基づいて答える。
.\"O Such files are available from
.\"O Adobe, Inc, via anonymous ftp from ftp.adobe.com in /pub/adobe/printerdrivers/mac/all/ppdfiles/
.\"O (ftp://ftp.adobe.com//pub/adobe/printerdrivers/mac/all/ppdfiles/), or from the printer's
.\"O manufacturer.  
このようなファイルは、Adobe, Inc のサイト
ftp.adobe.com の /pub/adobe/printerdrivers/mac/all/ppdfiles/ から
匿名 ftp (ftp://ftp.adobe.com//pub/adobe/printerdrivers/mac/all/ppdfiles/) によって、
あるいはプリンタの製造メーカからも入手できる。
.\"O If no PPD file is configured,
.\"O .B papd
.\"O will return the default answer, possibly causing the client to send
.\"O excessively large jobs.
PPD ファイルが設定されていない場合、
.B papd
はデフォルトの返答をする。
これは、クライアントに非常に大きなジョブを送信させる可能性がある。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR lpr (1),
.BR lprm (1),
.\"O \." .BR pap (4),
.\" .BR pap (4),
.\"O .BR printcap (5).
.BR printcap (5),
.BR lpc (8),
.BR lpd (8).
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O .I papd
.\"O accepts characters with the high bit set (a full 8-bits) from the clients,
.\"O but some PostScript printers (including Apple Computer's LaserWriter family)
.\"O only accept 7-bit characters on their serial interface by default.  You will
.\"O need to configure your printer to accept a full 8 bits.
.I papd
は、クライアントから送られる
ハイビットセット (フル 8 ビット) の文字を受け付ける。
しかし、(Apple Computer の LaserWriter ファミリーを含む)
PostScript プリンタの中には、
デフォルトではシリアルインターフェース上から
7 ビット文字しか受け付けないものがある。
この場合は、プリンタがフル 8 ビットを受け付けるように
プリンタを設定する必要がある。
