.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 18:41:53 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:
.\"
.TH PAPSTATUS 8 "17 Dec 1991"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O papstatus \- get the status of an AppleTalk-connected printer
papstatus \- AppleTalk で接続されたプリンタの状態を取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /usr/sbin/papstatus
[
.BI -d
] [
.B -p
.I printer
] [
.I retrytime
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B papstatus
.\"O is used to obtain the current status message from an AppleTalk connected
.\"O printer.  It uses the Printer Access Protocol (PAP) to obtain the
.\"O status information.
.B papstatus
は AppleTalk で接続されたプリンタから
現在の状態メッセージを取得するのに使われる。
状態情報の取得には
プリンタアクセスプロトコル (Printer Access Protocol, PAP) が使われる。
.LP
.\"O If no printer is specified on the command line,
.\"O .B papstatus
.\"O looks for a file called
.\"O .B .paprc
.\"O in the current directory and reads it to obtain the name of a printer.  
コマンドラインでプリンタが指定されてない場合、
.B papstatus
はカレントディレクトリの中の
.B .paprc
という名前のファイルを探し、
このファイルを読んでプリンタ名を取得する。
.\"O The
.\"O .B .paprc
.\"O file should contain a single line of the form
.\"O .IB object : \c
.\"O .IB type @ \c
.\"O .I zone
.\"O where each of
.\"O .IR object ,
.\"O .BI : type ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BI @ zone
.\"O are optional.
.B .paprc
には
.IB object : \c
.IB type @ \c
.I zone
という形式の単一の行がなければいけない。
ここで、
.IR object ,
.BI : type ,
.BI @ zone
はオプションである。
.\"O .I type
.\"O and
.\"O .I zone
.\"O must be proceeded by
.\"O .RB ` : '
.\"O and
.\"O .RB ` @ '
.\"O respectively.  
.I type
と
.I zone
の前には、それぞれ
.RB ` : '
と
.RB ` @ '
がなければいけない。
.\"O Blank lines and lines the begin with a
.\"O .RB ` # '
.\"O are ignored.
空行と
.RB ` # '
で始まる行は無視される。
.\"O .I type
.\"O and
.\"O .I zone
.\"O default to
.\"O .B LaserWriter
.\"O and the zone of the local host, respectively.
.I type
と
.I zone
のデフォルトは、それぞれ
.B LaserWriter
とローカルホストのゾーンである。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -d
.\"O Turns on a debugging mode that prints some extra information to standard error.
デバッグモードを有効にする。追加情報が標準エラーに表示される。
.HP
.B -p
.I printer
.br
.\"O Get status from
.\"O .I printer
.\"O (do not consult any
.\"O .B .paprc
.\"O files to find a printer name).  The syntax for
.\"O .I printer
.\"O is the same as discussed above for the
.\"O .B .paprc
.\"O file.
.I printer
から状態を取得する
(プリンタ名を見付けるために
.B .paprc
ファイルを参照しない)。
.I printer
の書式は、上の
.B .paprc
ファイルで述べたものと同じである。
.TP
.I retrytime
.\"O Normally,
.\"O .B papstatus
.\"O only gets the status from the printer once.  If
.\"O .I retrytime
.\"O is specified, the status is obtained repeatedly, with a sleep of
.\"O .I retrytime
.\"O seconds between inquiring the printer.
通常、
.B papstatus
はプリンタから 1 度しか状態を取得しない。
.I retrytime
が指定されると、プリンタへの問い合わせの間に
.I retrytime
秒間スリープして、繰り返し状態を取得する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP 20
.B .paprc
.\"O file that contains printer name
プリンタ名が書かれたファイル
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR nbp (1),
.BR pap (8)
