.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 18:41:53 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:
.\"
.TH PSF 8 "17 Dec 1991" "netatalk 1.2"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O psf \- PostScript filter
psf \- PostScript フィルタ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B psf
[
.B -n
.I name
] [
.B -h
.I host
] [
.B -w
.I width
] [
.B -l
.I length
] [
.B -i
.I indent
] [
.B -c
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B psf
.\"O is an
.\"O .B lpd
.\"O filter for PostScript printing.
.B psf
は PostScript 印刷をするための
.B lpd
フィルタである。
.\"O .B psf
.\"O interprets the name it was called with to determine what filters to
.\"O invoke. 
.B psf
は、どのフィルタを起動するかを決めるために、
自分がどういう名前で呼び出されたかを調べる。
.\"O First, if the string ``pap'' appears anywhere in the name,
.\"O .B psf
.\"O invokes
.\"O .B pap
.\"O to talk to a printer via AppleTalk. 
まず、名前のどこかに文字列 ``pap'' がある場合は、
.B psf
は AppleTalk を経由してプリンタと通信するために
.B pap
を起動する。
.\"O Next, if the string ``rev'' appears,
.\"O .B psf
.\"O invokes
.\"O .B psorder
.\"O to reverse the pages of the job. 
次に、文字列 ``rev'' がある場合は、
.B psf
はジョブのページを逆順にするために
.B psorder
を起動する。
.\"O Finally, if
.\"O .B psf
.\"O was called with a filter's name as the leading string, it invokes that
.\"O filter. 
最後に、
.B psf
が名前の先頭部にフィルター名を付けて呼ばれた場合は、
そのフィルタを起動する。
.\"O If there is no filter to run,
.\"O .B psf
.\"O examines the magic number of the input, and if the input is not
.\"O PostScript, converts it to PostScript.
実行するフィルタがない場合、
.B psf
は入力のマジックナンバーを調べ、
入力が PostScript でない場合は PostScript に変換する。
."O .SH KLUDGE
."Osato: kludge 恰好の悪い解決法？
.SH クラッジ (KLUDGE)
.\"O In the default configuration,
.\"O .B psf
.\"O supports two kludges.  
デフォルトの設定では、
.B psf
は 2 つのクラッジをサポートしている。
.\"O The first causes
.\"O .B psf
.\"O to check its name for the letter `m'.  
1 番目のクラッジは、自分の名前に文字 `m' があるかどうかを
.B psf
にチェックさせる。
.\"O If this letter is found and accounting
.\"O is turned on,
.\"O .B psf
.\"O calls
.\"O .B pap
.\"O twice, once to get an initial page count and to print the job, and
.\"O another time to get a final page count.  
この文字があり、アカウンティングが有効になっている場合、
.B psf
は
.B pap
を 2 度呼び出す。
1 度目は初期ページカウントを取得し、印刷ジョブを行うためである。
2 度目は最終ページカウントを取得するためである。
.\"O This is a work-around for bugs
.\"O in a variety of PAP implementions that cause printers to never properly
.\"O close the PAP output file.  
これは、プリンタが PAP 出力ファイルを閉じなくなるといった、
いろいろな PAP 実装に含まれるバグに対処するためのものである。
.\"O A notable example is any printer by
.\"O Hewlett-Packard.
その顕著な例は Hewlett-Packard のプリンタである。
.LP
.\"O The second kludge causes
.\"O .B psf
.\"O to examine its name for the letter `w'.  
2 番目のクラッジは、自分の名前に文字 `w' があるかどうかを
.B psf
にチェックさせる。
.\"O If this letter is found and
.\"O accounting is turned on,
.\"O .B psf
.\"O calls
.\"O .B pap
.\"O with the
.\"O .B \-w
.\"O flag.  
この文字があり、アカウンティングが有効になっている場合、
.B psf
は
.B pap
を
.B \-w
フラグ付きで呼び出す。
.\"O This flag causes
.\"O .B pap
.\"O to wait until the printer's status contains the string `idle'.  
このフラグがつくと、
.B pap
はプリンタ状態に文字列 `idle' が現われるまで待つ。
.\"O Once
.\"O this string is found, the job is printed as normal.  
見つかったら、通常と同じく印刷ジョブが行われる。
.\"O This kludge is a
.\"O work-around for printers, notably Hewlett-Packard's LaserJet IV, which
.\"O will report a page count while a previous jobs is still printing.
このクラッジは、特に Hewlett-Packard の LaserJet IV に
対処するためのものである。
このプリンタは、前のページがまだ印刷されている際中に
ページカウントを報告する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O The sample
.\"O .B printcap
.\"O entry below invokes
.\"O .B psf
.\"O to print text files, PostScript files,
.\"O .BR troff 's
.\"O C/A/T output, and
.\"O .BR TeX 's
.\"O DVI output, to an AppleTalk connected LaserWriter Plus. 
以下の
.B printcap
エントリの例では、
テキストファイル・PostScript ファイル・
.B troff
の C/A/T 出力・
.B TeX
の DVI 出力を
AppleTalk に接続された LaserWriter Plus で印刷するために
.B psf
を起動する。
.\"O Since the
.\"O LaserWriter Plus stacks pages in descending order, we reverse the pages
.\"O and print the burst page last.
LaserWriter Plus はページを降順に積み重ねるので、
ページを逆順にして、バーストページを最後に印刷する。
.sp
.RS
.nf
laser|lp|LaserWriter Plus on AppleTalk:\\
    :sd=/usr/spool/lpd/laser:\\
    :lp=/usr/spool/lpd/laser/null:\\
    :lf=/var/adm/lpd-errs:pw#80:hl:\\
    :of=/usr/lib/filters/ofpap:\\
    :if=/usr/lib/filters/ifpaprev:\\
    :tf=/usr/lib/filters/tfpaprev:\\
    :df=/usr/lib/filters/dfpaprev:
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O Note that if the host in question spools to more than one AppleTalk
.\"O printer,
.\"O .B /dev/null
.\"O should not be used for the
.\"O .B lp
.\"O capability. 
該当するホストが複数の AppleTalk プリンタにスプールする場合、
.B lp
機能として
.B /dev/null
を使用すべきではない点に注意すること。
.\"O Instead, a null device should be created with
.\"O .B mknod
.\"O for each printer, as has been done above.
そうではなく、上の例でやっているように、
各プリンタに対して
.B mknod
を使って null デバイスを作成すべきである。
.LP
.\"O Finally, there is a file in the spool directory,
.\"O .BR /var/spool/lpd/laser ,
.\"O called
.\"O .BR .paprc ,
.\"O which
.\"O .B pap
.\"O reads for the AppleTalk name of the printer.
最後に、スプールディレクトリ
.B /var/spool/lpd/laser
には
.BR .paprc
という名前のファイルがある。
.B pap
はプリンタの AppleTalk 名を調べるためにこのファイルを読む。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR psorder (1),
.BR printcap (5),
.BR lpd (8),
.BR mknod (8),
.BR pap (8).
