.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" $Id: makedbm.8,v 1.3 2001/12/01 15:25:31 nakano Exp $
.\" 
.\" This manual page is a part of ypserv archive. 
.\" README states the following
.\"
.\" See the file COPYING for copying restrictions. It is available under
.\" the GNU General Public License.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998, 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 23 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 22 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH MAKEDBM 8 "August 2001" "YP Server"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O makedbm - create or dump a ypserv database file
.SH 名前
makedbm \- ypserv のデーターベースファイルを生成・ダンプする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B
/usr/lib/yp/makedbm
[
.B \-a
|
.B \-r
]
[
.B \-b
] [
.B \-c
] [
.B \-s
] [
.B \-l
] [
.BI \-i " YP_INPUT_NAME"
] [
.BI \-o " YP_OUTPUT_NAME"
] [
.BI \-m " YP_MASTER_NAME"
]
.I inputfile
.I dbname
.br
.B
/usr/lib/yp/makedbm
.BI \-u " dbname"
.br
.B
/usr/lib/yp/makedbm
.B \-c
.br
.B
/usr/lib/yp/makedbm
.B \--version
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B makedbm
.\"O takes the inputfile and converts it to a ypserv database file. In the
.\"O moment, GDBM is used as database. Each line of the input file is converted
.\"O to a single record. All characters up to the first TAB or SPACE are the key,
.\"O and the rest of the line is the data.
.\"O .B makedbm
.\"O does not treat `#' as a special character.
.B makedbm
は入力ファイルを ypserv のデーターベースファイルに変換する。
現在は GDBM のデーターベースを用いている。入力ファイルの
それぞれの行は一つのレコードに変換される。最初に現われるタブまたはスペース
までの文字がキーとなり、行の残りの部分がデータとなる。
.B makedbm
は `#' に特殊な取り扱いはしない。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Special support for mail aliases. We couldn't use sendmail for it, since
.\"O sendmail uses db, but ypserv gdbm as database format.
メイルエイリアス用の特殊なサポートを提供する。これを指定しないと
sendmail 用に
.B makedbm
を用いることはできない。 sendmail が db を用いるのに対し、
ypserv では gdbm データーベースフォーマットを用いているからである。
.TP
.B \-b
.\"O Insert the
.\"O .B YP_INTERDOMAIN
.\"O into the output.  This key causes
.\"O .BR ypserv (8)
.\"O to use
.\"O .B DNS
.\"O for host name and address lookups for hosts not found in the maps.
出力に
.B YP_INTERDOMAIN
を挿入する。このキーを入れると、
.BR ypserv (8)
はマップに見つからなかったホスト名のアドレス検索に
.B DNS
を用いる。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O send a
.\"O .B YPPROC_CLEAR
.\"O to the local
.\"O .BR ypserv (8).
.\"O This causes ypserv to invalidate all cached entries.
ローカルの
.BR ypserv (8)
に
.B YPROC_CLEAR
を送る。 ypserv はすべてのキャッシュエントリを無効にする。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Convert the keys of the given map to lower case.
与えられたマップのキーを小文字に変換する。
.TP
.BI \-i " YP_INPUT_NAME"
.\"O Create a special entry with the key
.\"O .BR YP_INPUT_NAME .
.B YP_INPUT_NAME
というキーを持った特殊なエントリを生成する。
.TP
.BI \-m " YP_MASTER_NAME"
.\"O Create a special entry with the key
.\"O .BR YP_MASTER_NAME .
.\"O If no master host name is specified,
.\"O .B YP_MASTER_NAME
.\"O will be set to the local host name.
.B YP_MASTER_NAME
というキーを持った特殊なエントリを生成する。
マスターとなるホスト名が指定されない場合は、
.B YP_MASTER_NAME
はローカルのホスト名にセットされる。
.TP
.BI \-o " YP_OUTPUT_NAME"
.\"O Create a special entry with the key
.\"O .BR YP_OUTPUT_NAME .
.B YP_OUTPUT_NAME
というキーを持った特殊なエントリを生成する。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Handle `#' as comment sign and remove the comment.
`#' をコメントのサインとみなし、コメント行を削除する。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Secure map. Accept connections from secure
.\"O .B NIS
.\"O networks only (reserved ports).
安全なマップを生成する。安全な
NIS
ネットワーク (特権ポート) からの接続のみを許可する
.TP
.BI \-u " dbname"
.\"O Dump a ypserv database file. Prints out the file in text format, one entry
.\"O per line, with a single space separating keys from values.
ypserv のデーターベースファイルをダンプする。
ファイルはテキストフォーマットで出力され、一つのエントリが一行になる。
キーと値はスペース一つで区切られる。
.TP
.BI \-\-no-limit-check
.\"O Don't check for NIS key and data limit.
NIS キーとデータリミットをチェックしない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ypserv (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\O .B makedbm
.\O was written by Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>.
.B makedbm
は Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de> によって書かれた。
