.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" $Id: mknetid.8,v 1.3 2001/12/01 15:25:31 nakano Exp $
.\" 
.\" This manual page is a part of ypserv archive. 
.\" README states the following
.\"
.\" See the file COPYING for copying restrictions. It is available under
.\" the GNU General Public License.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998, 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 23 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 22 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH MKNETID 8 "August 1996" "NYS YP Server" "Linux Reference Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O mknetid \- generate data for netid map
.SH 名前
mknetid \- netid マップのデータを生成する。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /usr/lib/yp/mknetid
[
.B \-q
]
[
.B \-h hosts
]
[
.B \-p passwd
]
[
.B \-g group
]
[
.B \-d domain
]
[
.B \-n netid
]
.LP
.B /usr/lib/yp/mknetid
.B \-\-version
.LP
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.LP
.\"O .B mknetid
.\"O generates the \fInetid.byname\fP NIS map from the contents of the
.\"O group(5), passwd(5), hosts(5) and netid files. It checks for multiple
.\"O entrys of netids and warn for them or filters them out. It is only
.\"O called by
.\"O .B /var/yp/Makefile
.\"O when rebuilding the NIS map.
.B mknetid
は、 group (5), passwd(5), hosts(5), netid の各ファイルの内容から
NIS マップ \fInetid.byname\fP を生成する。
.B mknetid
は netid に複数のエントリがあるかをチェックし、警告を発するか
重複を削除する。
.B mknetid
は NIS マップを再生成する場合に
.B /var/yp/Makefile
から呼ばれる。これがほぼ唯一の起動のされ方である。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O This flag turns on 'quiet' mode, don't print a warning message when
.\"O finding an duplicate netid entry.
`quiet' モードにする。netid エントリに重複があっても
警告メッセージを表示しない。
.TP
.BI \-h " hosts"
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-h
.\"O flag can be used to specify the use of another hosts file
.\"O than the default \fI/etc/hosts\fP.
デフォルトの \fI/etc/hosts\fP 以外の hosts ファイルを用いる場合に指定する。
.TP
.BI \-p " passwd"
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O flag can be used to specify the use of another passwd file
.\"O than the default \fI/etc/passwd\fP.
デフォルトの \fI/etc/passwd\fP 以外の passwd ファイルを用いる場合に指定する。
.TP
.BI \-g " group"
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-g
.\"O flag can be used to specify the use of another group file
.\"O than the default \fI/etc/group\fP.
デフォルトの \fI/etc/group\fP 以外の group ファイルを用いる場合に指定する。
.TP
.BI \-n " netid"
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O flag can be used to specify the use of another netid file
.\"O then the default \fI/etc/netid\fP.
デフォルトの \fI/etc/netid\fP 以外の netid ファイルを用いる場合に指定する。
.TP
.BI \-d " domain"
.\"O The
.\"O .B mknetid
.\"O command uses the system domainname by default. If it is not set
.\"O or you whish to override it, you must use the
.\"O .B \-d
.\"O parameter.
.B mknetid
は、デフォルトではシステムのドメイン名を用いる。
システムのドメイン名が設定されていなかったり、この設定を
上書きしたい場合にはこのオプションを用いる。
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Prints the version number
バージョン番号を表示する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B /etc/group
.\"O groups file
グループファイル
.TP
.B /etc/hosts
.\"O hosts database
ホストのデーターベース
.TP
.B /etc/netid
.\"O netname database
ネット名のデーターベース
.TP
.B /etc/passwd
.\"O password file
パスワードファイル
.\"O .PD
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR passwd (8),
.BR group (5),
.BR hosts (5),
.BR passwd (5)
.LP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B mknetid
.\"O was written by Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>.
.B mknetid
は Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de> によって書かれた。
