.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998, 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1998-11-23, <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 1999-10-22, NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated 2012-05-12, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@gmail.com>
.\"
.TH REVNETGROUP 8 "August 2001" "YP Server" "Reference Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O revnetgroup \- generate reverse netgroup data
.SH 名前
revnetgroup \- netgroup の逆変換データを生成する。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fB/usr/lib/yp/revnetgroup\fR [\fB-u\fR|\fB-h\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Revnetgroup
.\"O processes the standard input in
.\"O .BR netgroup (5)
.\"O format into what is called
.\"O .I reverse netgroup
.\"O form. That is, where the original file shows netgroup memberships in
.\"O terms of which members reside in a particular
.\"O group, the reverse netgroup format specifies what groups are associated
.\"O with a particular member. This information is used to generate the
.\"O .B netgroup.byuser
.\"O and
.\"O .B netgroup.byhosts
.\"O NIS maps. These reverse netgroup maps are used to help speed up
.\"O netgroup lookups, particularly for the
.\"O .B innetgr
.\"O library function.
.B Revnetgroup
は、
.BR netgroup (5)
形式の標準入力を処理して、
.I netgroup の逆変換
形式を作成する。
つまり、元のファイルがどのメンバーがどのグループに所属するかを
示す netgroup 所属情報を出力する場合に、
netgroup の逆変換形式は特定のユーザにどのグループが
関連付けられているかを示す。
この情報は、
NIS マップ
.B netgroup.byuser
と
.B netgroup.byhosts
を生成するのに使用される。
これらの netgroup の逆変換マップは netgroup の参照、特に
.B innetgr
ライブラリ関数における参照、を高速化するのに使用される。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B revnetgroup
.\"O command prints its results on the standard output. It is usually called
.\"O only by
.\"O .B /var/yp/Makefile
.\"O when rebuilding the NIS netgroup maps.
.B revnetgroup
コマンドは標準出力に処理結果を表示する。
通常、このコマンドを呼び出すのは
.B /var/yp/Makefile
だけで、NIS netgroup マップを作り直す際に使用される。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O The
.\"O .B revnetgroup
.\"O command supports the following options:
.B revnetgroup
コマンドは、以下のオプションをサポートしている。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Generate
.\"O .B netgroup.byuser
.\"O output; only username information in the
.\"O original netgroup file is processed.
.B netgroup.byuser
の出力を生成する。
元の netgroup ファイルのうちユーザ名の情報だけが処理される。
.TP
.B \-h
.\"O Generate
.\"O .B netgroup.byhost
.\"O output; only hostname information in the
.\"O original netgroup file is processed. 
.B netgroup.byhost
の出力を生成する。
元の netgroup ファイルのうちホスト名の情報だけが処理される。
.TP
.\"O Note at least one of the both flags must be specified.
上記のフラグのうち少なくとも一方は指定しなければならない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B /var/yp/Makefile
.\"O The Makefile to build the NIS databases
NIS データベースを作成するための Makefile
.TP
.B /etc/netgroup
.\"O the default netgroup database file. This file is most often found
.\"O only on the NIS master server
デフォルトの netgroup データベースファイル。
このファイルは通常は NIS マスターサーバのみ存在する。
.PD
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR getnetgrent (3),
.BR netgroup (5),
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B revnetgroup
.\"O was written by Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>.
.B revnetgroup
は Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de> が書いた。
