.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" 
.\" This manual page is a part of ypserv archive. 
.\" README states the following
.\"
.\" See the file COPYING for copying restrictions. It is available under
.\" the GNU General Public License.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998, 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 23 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 22 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH ypinit 8 "August 1996"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ypinit - NIS database install and build program
.SH 名前
ypinit \- NIS データーベースの作成とインストールを行うプログラム
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B
/usr/lib/yp/ypinit
[
.B \-m
] [
.B \-s 
.I master_name
] 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ypinit
.\"O builds the domain subdirectory of /var/yp for the current default
.\"O domain. After building the domain subdirectory,
.\"O .B ypinit
.\"O builds a complete set of administrative maps for your system and places
.\"O them in this directory. The first map created by
.\"O .B ypinit -m
.\"O is the ypservers map. You should run it as root on the hosts, which
.\"O should be the master ypserver.
.\"O You should have only one master server per NIS domain.
.B ypinit
は /var/yp に現在のデフォルトドメインに対応した
サブディレクトリを作る。その後、システムに必要な管理マップの
一連のセットを生成し、その内容をこのサブディレクトリに置く。
.B "ypinit \-m"
によって最初に生成されるマップは ypservers マップである。
このコマンドはマスターサーバーとなるホストの root 権限で実行する必要がある。
なお、ひとつの NIS ドメインに置くマスターサーバーは一台だけにすべきである。
.LP
.\"O All databases are built from scratch,
.\"O either from information available to the program at runtime,
.\"O or from the
.\"O .SM ASCII
.\"O data base files in
.\"O .BR /etc .
.\"O These files are listed below under
.\"O .SM FILES\s0.
すべてのデーターベースがゼロから構築される。これらの情報は
プログラムが実行時に取得できたものや、
.B /etc
にある
.SM ASCII
データーベースの内容が用いられる。
このようなファイルのリストは以下の
「ファイル」を見よ。
.LP
.\"O An
.\"O .SM NIS
.\"O database on a slave server is set up by copying
.\"O an existing database from a running server.  The
.\"O .I master_name
.\"O argument should be the hostname of an
.\"O .SM NIS
.\"O server (either the master server for all the maps,
.\"O or a server on which the data base is up-to-date and stable).
スレーブサーバーでの
.SM NIS
データーベースの設定は、
すでに起動しているサーバーのデーターベースを
コピーしてくることによって行われる。
.I master_name
引数は
.SM NIS
サーバーのホスト名である (すべてのマップのマスターサーバーか、
あるいは最新で安定したデーターベースを保持しているサーバー)。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-m
.\"O If the local host is the
.\"O .SM NIS
.\"O master.
ローカルホストを
.SM NIS
マスターにする場合に指定する。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Set up a slave server with the database from
.\"O .I master_name
スレーブサーバーを設定する。
データーベースを
.I master_name
から取得する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
/etc/passwd
.TP
/etc/group
.TP
/etc/hosts
.TP
/etc/networks
.TP
/etc/services
.TP
/etc/protocols
.TP
/etc/netgroup
.TP
/etc/rpc
.PD
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR makedbm (8),
.BR revnetgroup (8),
.BR yppush (8),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR ypxfr (8)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O There isn't a good error handling at the moment.
現段階ではエラーの取り扱いがあまり良くない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
