.\" Copyright (c) 1991 Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Nov 19 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 27 Oct 2000 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.\"WORD:	archive		書庫
.\"WORD:	modifier	修正子
.\"WORD:	keyletter	動作指定子 
.\"
.TH ar 1 "5 November 1991" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.SH 名前
.\"ar \- create, modify, and extract from archives.
ar \- 書庫の作成、変更、および書庫からのファイルの取出しを行う

.SH 書式
.hy 0
.na
.BR ar " [\|" "-" "\|]"\c
.I {dmpqrtx}[abcilosSuvV] \c
[\|\c
.I membername\c
\&\|] \c
.I archive\c
\& \c
.I files\c
\&.\|.\|.

.ad b
.hy 1
.SH 説明
GNU \c
.B ar\c
.\"O \& program creates, modifies, and extracts from
.\"O .I archive\c
.\"O & is a single file holding a collection of
.\"O other files in a structure that makes it possible to retrieve
.\"O the original individual files (called \c
.\"O .I members\c
.\"O \& of the archive).
プログラムは書庫 (
.I archive
) ファイルの作成、変更、および書庫からのファイルの取出しを行う。書庫は
いくつかのファイルを集めて一つのファイルにしたもので、内部からオリジ
ナルのファイルそれぞれを復元することができるようになっている。内部に含
まれるファイルを書庫の
.I メンバー
と呼ぶ。

.\"O The original files' contents, mode (permissions), timestamp, owner, and
.\"O group are preserved in the archive, and may be reconstituted on
.\"O extraction.  
オリジナルのファイルの内容、モード (許可属性)、タイムスタンプ、オーナー
およびグループも書庫に保存され、取出しの際に再設定することができる。

.\"O GNU \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& can maintain archives whose members have names of any
.\"O length; however, depending on how \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& is configured on your
.\"O system, a limit on member-name length may be imposed (for compatibility
.\"O with archive formats maintained with other tools).  If it exists, the
.\"O limit is often 15 characters (typical of formats related to a.out) or 16
.\"O characters (typical of formats related to coff).
GNU \c
.B ar
では、書庫に含まれるメンバーの名前の長さに制限はない。ただし
.B ar
のインストール時の設定によっては、制限が付いている場合があるかもしれな
い (他のツールで扱える書庫フォーマットとの互換性のためであることが多い)。
制限がある場合には、 15 文字 (a.out 関連フォーマット) または 16 文字
(coff 関連フォーマット) であることが多い。

.\"O \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& is considered a binary utility because archives of this sort
.\"O are most often used as \c
.\"O .I libraries\c
.\"O \& holding commonly needed
.\"O subroutines.
.\"O 
.B ar
はバイナリーユーティリティ (binary utility) とされている。
なぜならこの種の書庫は汎用のサブルーチンをまとめた
.I ライブラリ
として用いられることが多いからである。

.\"O \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& will create an index to the symbols defined in relocatable
.\"O object modules in the archive when you specify the modifier `\|\c
.\"O .B s\c
.\"O \|'.
.\"O Once created, this index is updated in the archive whenever \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \&
.\"O makes a change to its contents (save for the `\|\c
.\"O .B q\c
.\"O \|' update operation).
.\"O An archive with such an index speeds up linking to the library, and
.\"O allows routines in the library to call each other without regard to
.\"O their placement in the archive.
.\"O 
.B ar
は、書庫に入っているリロケータブルなオブジェクトモジュールに含まれるシ
ンボルの索引 (index) を作成することができる。これは修正子 (modifier)
`\fBs\fP' が指定されたときの動作である。一度作成されると、この索引は
.B ar
によって書庫の内容が変更されるたびに更新される (ただし `\fBq\fP' によっ
て書庫が更新された場合を除く)。このような索引を持った書庫では、ライブ
ラリとしてリンクされる場合の速度が向上する。またライブラリの内部に含まれる
ルーチンが、書庫内部での位置によらずお互いを呼び出すことができるように
なる。

.\"O You may use `\|\c
.\"O .B nm \-s\c
.\"O \|' or `\|\c
.\"O .B nm \-\-print\-armap\c
.\"O \|' to list this index
.\"O table.  If an archive lacks the table, another form of \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& called
.\"O \c
.\"O .B ranlib\c
.\"O \& can be used to add just the table.
`\fBnm \-s\fP' または `\fBnm \-\-print\-armap\fP' とすればこの索引をリ
ストすることができる。書庫に索引がない場合は、
.B ar
の別名である
.B ranlib
を用いて索引を追加することもできる。

.\"O \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& insists on at least two arguments to execute: one
.\"O keyletter specifying the \c
.\"O .I operation\c
.\"O \& (optionally accompanied by other
.\"O keyletters specifying \c
.\"O .I modifiers\c
.\"O \&), and the archive name to act on.
.B ar
の実行には最低 2 つの引数が必要である。一つは
.B ar
の動作 (operation) を指定する一文字の英字 (動作指定子 :keyletter) であ
り (他の英字が修正子として付随することもある)、もう一つは実際に操作の
対象となる書庫の名前である。

.\"O Most operations can also accept further \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \& arguments,
.\"O specifying particular files to operate on.
ほとんどの動作では動作対象とするファイルを
.I files
引数として与えることもできる。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
GNU \c
.B ar\c
.\"O \& allows you to mix the operation code \c
.\"O .I p\c
.\"O \& and modifier
.\"O flags \c
.\"O .I mod\c
.\"O \& in any order, within the first command-line argument.
では動作指定子
.I p
と修正子
.I mod
の順番は任意であるが、これらはまとめて最初のコマンドライン引数に与える
必要がある。

.\"O If you wish, you may begin the first command-line argument with a
.\"O dash.
最初のコマンドライン引数の先頭にダッシュ (-) を加えてもかまわない。

.\"O The \c
.\"O .I p\c
.\"O \& keyletter specifies what operation to execute; it may be
.\"O any of the following, but you must specify only one of them:
動作指定子
.I p
では実行する動作を指定する。これには以下のどれかを指定する。複数指定す
ることはできない。

.TP
.B d
\c
.\"O \c
.\"O .I Delete\c
.\"O \& modules from the archive.  Specify the names of modules to
.\"O be deleted as \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \&; the archive is untouched if you
.\"O specify no files to delete.
.\"O 
書庫からモジュールを削除 (
.I Delete
) する。削除するモジュールの名前は
.I files
に指定する。もし一つもファイルが指定されなかった場合は、書庫に何の操作
も行わない。

.\"O If you specify the `\|\c
.\"O .B v\c
.\"O \|' modifier, \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& will list each module
.\"O as it is deleted.
修正子として
.B v
を指定すると、
.B ar
は削除したモジュールをそれぞれ表示する。

.TP
.B m
.\"O Use this operation to \c
.\"O .I move\c
.\"O \& members in an archive.
.\"O 
書庫中のメンバーを移動 (
.I Move
)する。

.\"O The ordering of members in an archive can make a difference in how
.\"O programs are linked using the library, if a symbol is defined in more
.\"O than one member.  
.\"O 
一つのシンボルが書庫内部の複数のメンバーによって定義されている場合、メ
ンバーの配置の順番が異なると、このライブラリへのリンクのされ方が予想と
は異なる可能性がある。

.\"O If no modifiers are used with \c
.\"O .B m\c
.\"O \&, any members you name in the
.\"O \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \& arguments are moved to the \c
.\"O .I end\c
.\"O \& of the archive;
.\"O you can use the `\|\c
.\"O .B a\c
.\"O \|', `\|\c
.\"O .B b\c
.\"O \|', or `\|\c
.\"O .B i\c
.\"O \|' modifiers to move them to a
.\"O specified place instead.
.\"O 
修正子による指定がなければ、
.B m
による操作では
.I files
引数によって指定されたメンバーを書庫の\fI最後尾\fPに移動する。移動先を
修正子 `\fBa\fP'、 `\fBb\fP'、 \fBi\fP によって指定することもできる。

.TP
.B p
.\"O \c
.\"O .I Print\c
.\"O \& the specified members of the archive, to the standard
.\"O output file.  If the `\|\c
.\"O .B v\c
.\"O \|' modifier is specified, show the member
.\"O name before copying its contents to standard output.
.\"O 
指定された書庫内部のメンバー (複数可) を標準出力に表示 (
.I Print
) する。 `\fBv\fP' 修正子が指定された場合には、メンバーの内容を標準出
力に表示する前にそのメンバーの名前を表示する。

.\"O If you specify no \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \&, all the files in the archive are printed.
.\"O 
.I files
を指定しないと、書庫の内部のすべてのファイルが表示される。

.TP
.B q
.\"O \c
.\"O .I Quick append\c
.\"O \&; add \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \& to the end of \c
.\"O .I archive\c
.\"O \&,
.\"O without checking for replacement.  
.\"O 
.I files
を書庫の最後に追加する。このとき置き換えのチェックを行わない
.RI ( Quick append )。

.\"O The modifiers `\|\c
.\"O .B a\c
.\"O \|', `\|\c
.\"O .B b\c
.\"O \|', and `\|\c
.\"O .B i\c
.\"O \|' do \c
.\"O .I not\c
.\"O \& affect this
.\"O operation; new members are always placed at the end of the archive.
.\"O 
修正子
.BR a 、 b 、 i
はこの操作には影響しない。新しいメンバーは常に書庫の最後に配置される。

.\"O The modifier `\|\c
.\"O .B v\c
.\"O \|' makes \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& list each file as it is appended.
.\"O 
修正子
.BR v をつけると ar
は追加する際にそれぞれのファイルを表示する。

.\"O Since the point of this operation is speed, the archive's symbol table
.\"O index is not updated, even if it already existed; you can use `\|\c
.\"O .B ar s\c
.\"O \|' or
.\"O \c
.\"O .B ranlib\c
.\"O \& explicitly to update the symbol table index.
.\"O 
この操作のミソは速度なので、書庫のシンボルテーブルは更新されない (存在
していても更新されない)。シンボルテーブルを明示的に更新させるには
.B ar s
または
.B ranlib
を用いればよい。

.\"O However, too many different systems assume quick append rebuilds the
.\"O index, so GNU
.\"O .B ar
.\"O implements `\|\c
.\"O .B q\c
.\"O \|' as a synonym for `\|\c
.\"O .B r\c
.\"O \|'.
しかし、
quick append の際に index が再構築されるとみなしている
システムがあまりにも多いので、 GNU
.B ar
の実装では
.B q
を
.B r
と同義としている。

.TP
.B r
.\"O Insert \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \& into \c
.\"O .I archive\c
.\"O \& (with \c
.\"O .I replacement\c
.\"O \&). This
.\"O operation differs from `\|\c
.\"O .B q\c
.\"O \|' in that any previously existing members
.\"O are deleted if their names match those being added.
書庫に
.I files
を挿入し、同名のファイルがあったら置換 (
.I Replacement
) する。この操作は
.B q
とは異なり、もとから書庫にあったメンバーのうち追加したメンバーと同名の
ものはすべて削除される。

.\"O If one of the files named in \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \& doesn't exist, \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \&
.\"O displays an error message, and leaves undisturbed any existing members
.\"O of the archive matching that name.
.I files
のリストの中に存在しないファイルがあった場合
.B ar
はエラーを表示する。そしてそのメンバーに関しては古いものを書庫にそのま
ま残し、変更を行なわない。

.\"O By default, new members are added at the end of the file; but you may
.\"O use one of the modifiers `\|\c
.\"O .B a\c
.\"O \|', `\|\c
.\"O .B b\c
.\"O \|', or `\|\c
.\"O .B i\c
.\"O \|' to request
.\"O placement relative to some existing member.
デフォルトでは新たなメンバーはファイルの最後に追加される。
修正子 \fBa\fP、 \fBb\fP、 \fBi\fP を使えば、現在存在しているメンバー
からの相対位置として、新たなファイルを追加する位置を指定することができ
る。

.\"O The modifier `\|\c
.\"O .B v\c
.\"O \|' used with this operation elicits a line of
.\"O output for each file inserted, along with one of the letters `\|\c
.\"O .B a\c
.\"O \|' or
.\"O `\|\c
.\"O .B r\c
.\"O \|' to indicate whether the file was appended (no old member
.\"O deleted) or replaced.
この操作で修正子
.B v
を用いると、挿入されるファイルを一行ずつ表示する。またこのとき \fBa\fP 
または \fBr\fP の文字を表示する。これはそれぞれファイルが追加 (append) 
された (つまり書庫には削除すべき古いメンバーが存在しなかった) か、置換 
(replace) されたかに対応する。

.TP
.B t
.\"O Display a \c
.\"O .I table\c
.\"O \& listing the contents of \c
.\"O .I archive\c
.\"O \&, or those
.\"O of the files listed in \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \& that are present in the
.\"O archive.  Normally only the member name is shown; if you also want to
.\"O see the modes (permissions), timestamp, owner, group, and size, you can
.\"O request that by also specifying the `\|\c
.\"O .B v\c
.\"O \|' modifier.
書庫の内容の表 (
.I table
) を表示する。
.I files
が指定された場合は、\fIfiles\fP のうち書庫に存在するものを表示する。
通常はメンバーの名前のみが表示される。モード (パーミッション)、タイム
スタンプ、オーナー、グループ、サイズなども表示させたい場合には、リクエ
ストの際に同時に修正子
.B v
をつければ良い。

.\"O If you do not specify any \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \&, all files in the archive
.\"O are listed.
.I files
を指定しなければ、書庫にあるすべてのファイルがリストされる。

.\"O If there is more than one file with the same name (say, `\|\c
.\"O .B fie\c
.\"O \|') in
.\"O an archive (say `\|\c
.\"O .B b.a\c
.\"O \|'), `\|\c
.\"O .B ar t b.a fie\c
.\"O \|' will list only the
.\"O first instance; to see them all, you must ask for a complete
.\"O listing\(em\&in our example, `\|\c
.\"O .B ar t b.a\c
.\"O \|'.
.\"O 
同じ名前のファイル (仮に \fBfie\fP とする) が書庫 (\fBb.a\fP とする) 
に二つ以上存在する場合には、 `\fBar t b.a fie\fP' では最初のものしか表
示しない。すべての
.B fie
を表示させたい場合には、書庫のファイル全てを表示させるように実行しなけ
ればならない (この例ならば `\fBar t b.a\fP' となる)。


.TP
.B x
.\"O \c
.\"O .I Extract\c
.\"O \& members (named \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \&) from the archive.  You can
.\"O use the `\|\c
.\"O .B v\c
.\"O \|' modifier with this operation, to request that
.\"O \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& list each name as it extracts it.
メンバーを書庫から取り出す (
.I eXtract
)。この操作に修正子
.B v
を用いると、
.B ar
は取出したファイルをそれぞれ表示する。

.\"O If you do not specify any \c
.\"O .I files\c
.\"O \&, all files in the archive
.\"O are extracted.
.I files
を何も指定しないと、書庫のすべてのファイルが取り出される。

.PP

.\"O A number of modifiers (\c
.\"O .I mod\c
.\"O \&) may immediately follow the \c
.\"O .I p\c
.\"O \&
.\"O keyletter, to specify variations on an operation's behavior:
いくつかの修正子 (
.I mod
) を動作指定子
.I p
に続けて指定することができる。
これによって動作を調整することができる。

.TP
.B a
.\"O Add new files \c
.\"O .I after\c
.\"O \& an existing member of the
.\"O archive.  If you use the modifier \c
.\"O .B a\c
.\"O \&, the name of an existing archive
.\"O member must be present as the \c
.\"O .I membername\c
.\"O \& argument, before the
.\"O \c
.\"O .I archive\c
.\"O \& specification.
新たなファイルを、すでに書庫に存在するメンバーの後 (
.I after
) に追加する。修正子
.B a
を用いる場合は、書庫にすでに存在するメンバーの名前を引数
.I membername
として書庫名の指定の前に置かなければならない。

.TP
.B b
.\"O Add new files \c
.\"O .I before\c
.\"O \& an existing member of the
.\"O archive.  If you use the modifier \c
.\"O .B b\c
.\"O \&, the name of an existing archive
.\"O member must be present as the \c
.\"O .I membername\c
.\"O \& argument, before the
.\"O \c
.\"O .I archive\c
.\"O \& specification.  (same as `\|\c
.\"O .B i\c
.\"O \|').
新たなファイルを、すでに書庫に存在するメンバーの前 (
.I before
) に追加する。修正子
.B b
を用いる場合は、書庫にすでに存在するメンバーの名前を引数
.I membername
として、書庫名の指定の前に置かなければならない。 (
.B i
と同じ動作をする)

.TP
.B c
.\"O \c
.\"O .I Create\c
.\"O \& the archive.  The specified \c
.\"O .I archive\c
.\"O \& is always
.\"O created if it didn't exist, when you request an update.  But a warning is
.\"O issued unless you specify in advance that you expect to create it, by
.\"O using this modifier.
書庫を作成 (
.I create
) する。書庫を更新する操作の場合には、指定した書庫が存在しなければ、そ
れは常に作成される。しかしこのとき警告メッセージが出る。この修正子をあ
らかじめ同時に指定しておけば、この警告を抑止することができる。

.TP
.B f
.\"O Truncate names in the archive.  
.\"O .B ar
.\"O will normally permit file names of any length.  This will cause it to
.\"O create archives which are not compatible with the native 
.\"O .B ar
.\"O program on some systems.  If this is a concern, the 
.\"O .B f
.\"O modifier may be used to truncate file names when putting them in the
.\"O archive.
.\"O 
書庫の中の名前を切りつめる。通常
.B ar
では、ファイル名には任意の長さを指定できる。しかしこのことは、他のシス
テムのネイティブな
.B ar
プログラムと互換性のない書庫を作ってしまう原因にもなりかねない。もしこ
れが問題となるときは、修正子
.B f
を用いれば書庫の中に入れるファイルの名前を切りつめることができる。

.TP
.B i
.\"O Insert new files \c
.\"O .I before\c
.\"O \& an existing member of the
.\"O archive.  If you use the modifier \c
.\"O .B i\c
.\"O \&, the name of an existing archive
.\"O member must be present as the \c
.\"O .I membername\c
.\"O \& argument, before the
.\"O \c
.\"O .I archive\c
.\"O \& specification.  (same as `\|\c
.\"O .B b\c
.\"O \|').
新しいファイルを書庫に存在するメンバーの前に挿入 (insert) する。この修
正子
.B i
を用いる際には、書庫に存在しているメンバーの名前を
.I membername
引数として書庫の指定の前に置く必要がある。 (
.B b
と同じ動作をする)

.TP
.B l
.\"O This modifier is accepted but not used.
.\"O 
この修正子はエラーにはならないが何の効力もない。

.TP
.B o
.\"O Preserve the \c
.\"O .I original\c
.\"O \& dates of members when extracting them.  If
.\"O you do not specify this modifier, files extracted from the archive
.\"O will be stamped with the time of extraction.
.\"O 
書庫からメンバーを取り出すときに、元の日付を保存する
.RI ( original )。
この修正子を指定しなければ、
書庫から取り出されたファイルのタイムスタンプは取り出し時のものになる。

.TP
.B s
.\"O Write an object-file index into the archive, or update an existing one,
.\"O even if no other change is made to the archive.  You may use this modifier
.\"O flag either with any operation, or alone.  Running `\|\c
.\"O .B ar s\c
.\"O \|' on an
.\"O archive is equivalent to running `\|\c
.\"O .B ranlib\c
.\"O \|' on it.
オブジェクトファイルの索引を書庫に書き込むか、または存在する索引を更新
する。書庫に何の変化がなくても更新は行われる。この修正子はどんな操作と
も同時に用いることができるし、単独でも用いることができる。 `\fBar s\fP' 
を書庫に対して実行するのは、 `\fBranlib\fP' と等価である。

.TP
.B S
.\"O Do not generate an archive symbol table.  This can speed up building a
.\"O large library in several steps.  The resulting archive can not be used
.\"O with the linker.  In order to build a symbol table, you must omit the
.\"O `\|\c
.\"O .B S\c
.\"O \|' modifier on the last execution of `\|\c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \|', or you must run `\|\c
.\"O .B ranlib\c
.\"O \|' on the archive.
書庫のシンボルテーブルを作成しない。
これは大きな書庫を構築する場合は結構な速度向上になる。
結果としてできた書庫は、リンカからは使うことができない。
シンボルテーブルをつくるには、
最後の段階で実行される
.B ar
に
.B S
修正子をつけないか、あるいはそのアーカイブに
.B ranlib
を実行しなければならない。

.TP
.B u
.\"O Normally, \c
.\"O .B ar r\c
.\"O \&.\|.\|. inserts all files
.\"O listed into the archive.  If you would like to insert \c
.\"O .I only\c
.\"O \& those
.\"O of the files you list that are newer than existing members of the same
.\"O names, use this modifier.  The `\|\c
.\"O .B u\c
.\"O \|' modifier is allowed only for the
.\"O operation `\|\c
.\"O .B r\c
.\"O \|' (replace).  In particular, the combination `\|\c
.\"O .B qu\c
.\"O \|' is
.\"O not allowed, since checking the timestamps would lose any speed
.\"O advantage from the operation `\|\c
.\"O .B q\c
.\"O \|'.
.\"O 
通常
.B ar r\c
\&.\|.\|. はリストされたすべてのファイルを書庫に挿入する。指定したファ
イルと同名のメンバーが書庫中にすでにあった時に、元のメンバーの方が古い
場合に限って挿入を行いたい場合には、この修正子を使うと良い (update)。
`\fBu\fP' 修正子を用いることができるのは
.B r
操作 (replace) の場合に限られる。
.B qu
の組み合わせは許されない。なぜならタイムスタンプをチェックすると 
`\fBq\fP' 操作の速度面での利点が損なわれてしまうからである。

.TP
.B v
.\"O This modifier requests the \c
.\"O .I verbose\c
.\"O \& version of an operation.  Many
.\"O operations display additional information, such as filenames processed,
.\"O when the modifier `\|\c
.\"O .B v\c
.\"O \|' is appended.
.\"O 
この修正子は饒舌 (
.I verbose
) モードの動作を指定するために用いられる。 `\fBv\fP' 修正子が追加
されると、多くの操作において、より詳細な情報が表示される (例えば処理し
ているファイル名など)。

.TP
.B V
.\"O This modifier shows the version number of
.\"O .BR ar .
.\"O 
この修正子は
.B ar
のバージョン番号を表示する。

.PP

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .RB "`\|" binutils "\|'"
.\"O entry in 
.\"O .B
.\"O info\c
.\"O \&; 
.\"O .I
.\"O The GNU Binary Utilities\c
.\"O , Roland H. Pesch (October 1991).
.\"O .BR nm ( 1 )\c
.\"O \&,
.\"O .BR ranlib ( 1 )\c
.\"O \&.
.B info
の `\fB binutils \fP' エントリ、
.IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
Roland H. Pesch (October 1991)、
.BR nm "(" 1 ")、"
.BR ranlib "(" 1 ")"

.SH 著作権
Copyright (c) 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
