.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1996, 1997, 1998 Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jan 6 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 27 Oct 2000 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH as 1 "29 March 1996" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"

.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O GNU as \- the portable GNU assembler.
.SH 名前
GNU as \- GNU ポータブルアセンブラ

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.na
.B as
.RB "[\|" \-a "[\|" dhlns "\|]" \c
\&[\|\=\c
.I file\c
\&\|]\|]
.RB "[\|" \-D "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-defsym\ SYM=VAL "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-f "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-gstabs "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-I
.I path\c
\&\|]
.RB "[\|" \-K "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-L "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-M\ |\ \-\-mri "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-o 
.I objfile\c
\&\|]
.RB "[\|" \-R "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-traditional\-format "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-v "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-w "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\^\- "\ |\ " \c
.I files\c
\&\|.\|.\|.\|]

.\"O .I i960-only options:
.I i960 固有のオプション:
.br
.RB "[\|" \-ACA "\||\|" \-ACA_A "\||\|" \-ACB\c
.RB "\||\|" \-ACC "\||\|" \-AKA "\||\|" \-AKB\c
.RB "\||\|" \-AKC "\||\|" \-AMC "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-b "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-no-relax "\|]"

.\"O .I m680x0-only options:
.I m680x0 固有のオプション:
.br
.RB "[\|" \-l "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-mc68000 "\||\|" \-mc68010 "\||\|" \-mc68020 "\|]"
.ad b

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O GNU \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& is really a family of assemblers.  
.\"O If you use (or have used) the GNU assembler on one architecture, you
.\"O should find a fairly similar environment when you use it on another
.\"O architecture.  Each version has much in common with the others,
.\"O including object file formats, most assembler directives (often called
.\"O \c
.\"O .I pseudo-ops)\c
.\"O \& and assembler syntax.  
GNU
.B as
は実際には各アーキテクチャ向けアセンブラのファミリーである。あるアーキ
テクチャで GNU アセンブラを使えば (あるいは使った経験があれば)、他のアー
キテクチャでもほぼ同様の環境で作業ができる。バージョンによる違いもほと
んどない。オブジェクトファイルのフォーマット、ほとんどのアセンブラ命令 
(しばしば擬似命令:
.I pseudo-ops
と呼ばれる)、アセンブラの文法などはほとんど変わらない。

.\"O For information on the syntax and pseudo-ops used by GNU \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \&, see `\|\c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \|' entry in \c
.\"O .B info \c
.\"O (or the manual \c
.\"O .I
.\"O .I
.\"O Using as: The GNU Assembler\c
.\"O \&).
GNU アセンブラで用いられる文法や擬似命令に関しては
.B info
の
.B as
エントリ (またはマニュアルである
.I Using as: The GNU Assembler
) を参照のこと。

.\"O \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& is primarily intended to assemble the output of the GNU C
.\"O compiler \c
.\"O .B gcc\c
.\"O \& for use by the linker \c
.\"O .B ld\c
.\"O \&.  Nevertheless,
.\"O we've tried to make \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& assemble correctly everything that the native
.\"O assembler would.
.\"O This doesn't mean \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& always uses the same syntax as another
.\"O assembler for the same architecture; for example, we know of several
.\"O incompatible versions of 680x0 assembly language syntax.
.B as
はもともと GNU C コンパイラ \fBgcc\fP の出力をリンカ \fBld\fP で利用で
きるようにアセンブルするためのものである。しかし我々は
.B as
がネイティブなアセンブラと同様な動作をすることを目指してきた。ただしこ
れは
.B as
の文法が常に他のアセンブラのものと同じであることを保証するものではない。
例えば 680x0 アセンブリ言語の文法には、
.B as
とは互換性のないものも存在する。

.\"O Each time you run \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& it assembles exactly one source
.\"O program.  The source program is made up of one or more files.
.\"O (The standard input is also a file.)
.B as
は実行のたびにただ一つのプログラムをアセンブルする。プログラムは一つ以
上のファイルから構成される (標準入力もファイルである)。

.\"O If \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& is given no file names it attempts to read one input file
.\"O from the \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& standard input, which is normally your terminal.  You
.\"O may have to type \c
.\"O .B ctl-D\c
.\"O \& to tell \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& there is no more program
.\"O to assemble.  Use `\|\c
.\"O .B \-\^\-\c
.\"O \|' if you need to explicitly name the standard input file
.\"O in your command line.
ファイル名が指定されなければ
.B as
は標準入力 (通常は端末) をアセンブルしようとする。
.B ctl-D
とタイプすれば、アセンブルするプログラムの終わりを
.B as
に伝えることができる。標準入力ファイルを用いることをコマンドラインで明
示したい場合には
.B \-\^\-
を用いる。

.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& may write warnings and error messages to the standard error
.\"O file (usually your terminal).  This should not happen when \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& is
.\"O run automatically by a compiler.  Warnings report an assumption made so
.\"O that \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& could keep assembling a flawed program; errors report a
.\"O grave problem that stops the assembly.
.B as
は警告やエラーのメッセージを標準エラー出力 (通常は端末) に書き出す。た
だし \fBas\fP がコンパイラによって自動的に実行された場合にはこの限りで
はない。警告メッセージは「プログラムに問題 (flaw) があり、アセンブルを
続けるためにこのような仮定をした」ことを報告するものであり、エラーメッ
セージは「アセンブルを停止しなければならない重大な障害が存在した」こと
を報告するものである。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-a
.\"O Turn on assembly listings.  There are various suboptions.
アセンブリリストを表示する。多くの副オプションがある。
.B d
.\"O omits debugging directives.
デバッグ命令を除く。
.B h
.\"O includes the high level source code; this is only available if the
.\"O source file can be found, and the code was compiled with
.\"O .B \-g.
は高位レベルのソースコードを含める。これはソースファイルにアクセスでき、
またコードが \fB\-g\fP でコンパイルされた場合にのみ有効となる。
.B l
.\"O includes an assembly listing.
はアセンブリリストを含める。
.B n
.\"O omits forms processing.
はフォーム処理を含めない。
.B s
.\"O includes a symbol listing.
はシンボルのリストを含める
.B =
.I file
.\"O sets the listing file name; this must be the last suboption.
はリストのファイル名を設定する。
これは最後の副オプションでなければならない。
.\"O The default suboptions are
.\"O .B hls.
デフォルトの副オプションは
.B hls
である。
.TP
.B \-D
.\"O This option is accepted only for script compatibility with calls to
.\"O other assemblers; it has no effect on \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \&.
他のアセンブラとの互換性のためだけに用意されたオプションであり、
.B as
では効果を持たない。
.TP
.B \-\-defsym SYM=VALUE
.\"O Define the symbol SYM to be VALUE before assembling the input file.
.\"O VALUE must be an integer constant.  As in C, a leading 0x indicates a
.\"O hexadecimal value, and a leading 0 indicates an octal value.
入力ファイルをアセンブルする前にシンボル SYM の値を VALUE に定義する。
VALUE は整定数でなければならない。 C と同様に 0x が前置されれば 16 進
数として扱われ、 0 が前置されれば 8 進数として扱われる。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O ``fast''--skip preprocessing (assume source is compiler output).
高速 (fast) オプション。プリプロセスを行わない (ソースがコンパイラ出力
であるとみなす)。
.TP
.BI "\-I\ " path
.\"O Add 
.\"O .I path
.\"O to the search list for 
.\"O .B .include
.\"O directives.
.B .include
命令における探索リストに
.I path
を追加する。
.TP
.B \-\-gstabs
.\"O Generate stabs debugging information for each assembler line.  This
.\"O may help debugging assembler code, if the debugger can handle it.
アセンブリ各行に、スタブデバッグ情報 (stabs debugging information)
を生成する。デバッガがこの情報を扱える場合、
アセンブリコードのデバッグに役立つかもしれない。
.TP
.TP
.B \-K
.\"O Issue warnings when difference tables altered for long displacements.
long displacement のための difference table
が変更されたときに警告メッセージを発する。
.\"?? この辺りの適当な言葉は...(^_^;;
.TP
.B \-L
.\"O Keep (in symbol table) local symbols, starting with `\|\c
.\"O .B L\c
.\"O \|'
シンボルテーブルにローカルシンボル (
.B L
で始まるシンボル) を保存する。
.TP
.B \-M, \-\-mri
.\"O Assemble in MRI compatibility mode.
MRI 互換モードでアセンブルする。
.TP
.BI "\-o\ " objfile
.\"O Name the object-file output from \c
.\"O .B as
.B as
が出力するオブジェクトファイルの名前をつける。
.TP
.B \-R
.\"O Fold data section into text section
データセクションをテキストセクションと一緒にする。
.TP
.B \-\-traditional\-format
.\"O Use same format as native assembler, when possible.
可能ならネイティブのアセンブラと同じ書式を用いる。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Announce \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& version
.B as
のバージョンを表示する。
.TP
.B \-W
.\"O Suppress warning messages
警告メッセージを抑制する。
.TP
.IR "\-\^\-" "\ |\ " "files\|.\|.\|."
.\"O Source files to assemble, or standard input (\c
.\"O .BR "\-\^\-" ")"
アセンブルするソースファイルを指定する
.RB "('" "\-\^\-" "' は標準入力)。"
.TP
.BI \-A var
.\"O .I
.\"O (When configured for Intel 960.)
.\"O Specify which variant of the 960 architecture is the target.
(Intel 960 用オプション)
960 アーキテクチャのどのタイプをターゲットとするかを指定する。
.TP
.B \-b
.\"O .I
.\"O (When configured for Intel 960.)
.\"O Add code to collect statistics about branches taken.
(Intel 960 用オプション)
分岐 (branch) に関する統計情報を取得するコードを追加する。
.\"??怪しい。
.TP
.B \-no-relax
.\"O .I
.\"O (When configured for Intel 960.)
.\"O Do not alter compare-and-branch instructions for long displacements;
.\"O error if necessary.
(Intel 960 用オプション)
long displacement のために比較-分岐命令を変更しない。必要な場合はエラー 
とする。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O .I
.\"O (When configured for Motorola 68000).  
.\"O .br
.\"O Shorten references to undefined symbols, to one word instead of two.
(Motorola 68000 用オプション)
未定義シンボルへのリファレンスを 2 ワードではなく 1 ワードに短縮する。
.TP
.BR "\-mc68000" "\||\|" "\-mc68010" "\||\|" "\-mc68020"
.\"O .I
.\"O (When configured for Motorola 68000).  
.\"O .br
.\"O Specify what processor in the 68000 family is the target (default 68020)
(Motorola 68000 用オプション)
68000 ファミリのどのプロセッサをターゲットとするかを指定する (デフォル
トは 68020)。
.PP
.\"O Options may be in any order, and may be
.\"O before, after, or between file names.  The order of file names is
.\"O significant.
オプションの指定順序は任意である。またファイル名の前でも後でも間でもよ
い。一方ファイル名の順序は重要な意味を持つ。

.\"O `\|\c
.\"O .B \-\^\-\c
.\"O \|' (two hyphens) by itself names the standard input file
.\"O explicitly, as one of the files for \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \& to assemble.
.B \-\^\-
のようにハイフン二つだけを指定した場合は、
.B as
がアセンブルするファイルのひとつとして標準入力を明示的に指定したことに
なる。

.\"O Except for `\|\c
.\"O .B \-\^\-\c
.\"O \|' any command line argument that begins with a
.\"O hyphen (`\|\c
.\"O .B \-\c
.\"O \|') is an option.  Each option changes the behavior of
.\"O \c
.\"O .B as\c
.\"O \&.  No option changes the way another option works.  An
.\"O option is a `\|\c
.\"O .B \-\c
.\"O \|' followed by one or more letters; the case of
.\"O the letter is important.   All options are optional.
`\fB\-\^\-\fP' を除き、ハイフン (`\fB\-\fP') で始まる全てのコマンドラ
イン引数はオプショ
ンである。それぞれのオプションは \fBas\fP の振る舞いを変更する。またあ
るオプションによって他のオプションが影響されることはない。オプションは
`\fB\-\fP' に一つまたは二つの文字が付いたものである。大文字と小文字は
別の意味を持つ。全てのオプションは指定してもしなくても良い。

.\"O The `\|\c
.\"O .B \-o\c
.\"O \|' option expects exactly one file name to follow.  The file
.\"O name may either immediately follow the option's letter (compatible
.\"O with older assemblers) or it may be the next command argument (GNU
.\"O standard).  
`\fB\-o\fP' オプションの後にはファイル名を一つだけ指定する。ファイル名
はオプション文字の直後に指定しても良い (古いアセンブラとの互換のため) 
し、次のコマンド引数として指定しても良い (GNU 流)。

.\"O These two command lines are equivalent:
以下の二つのコマンドラインは等価である:
.br
.B
as\ \ \-o\ \ my\-object\-file.o\ \ mumble.s
.br
.B
as\ \ \-omy\-object\-file.o\ \ mumble.s

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .RB "`\|" as "\|'"
.\"O entry in 
.\"O .B
.\"O info\c
.\"O \&; 
.\"O .I
.\"O Using as: The GNU Assembler\c
.\"O \&;
.\"O .BR gcc "(" 1 "),"
.\"O .BR ld "(" 1 ")."
.B info
の `\fBas\fP' エントリ; 
.IR "Using as: The GNU Assembler" ;
.BR gcc "(" 1 ")、"
.BR ld "(" 1 ")"

.\"O .SH COPYING
.SH 著作権
Copyright (c) 1991, 1992 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.

