.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1996  Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Dec 25 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH nlmconv 1 "March 1996" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O nlmconv \- converts object code into an NLM
.SH 名前
nlmconv \- オブジェクトコードを NLM に変換する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.hy 0
.na
.TP
.B nlmconv
.RB "[\|" \-I\ \fIbfdname\fB\ |\ \-\-input\-target=\fIbfdname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-O\ \fIbfdname\fB\ |\ \-\-output\-target=\fIbfdname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-T\ \fIheaderfile\fB\ |\ \-\-header\-file=\fIheaderfile\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-V\ |\ \-\-version\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-help\fR "\|]" 
.B infile
.B outfile

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B nlmconv
.\"O converts the relocatable object file 
.\"O .B infile
.\"O into the NetWare Loadable Module 
.\"O .BR outfile ,
.\"O optionally reading 
.\"O .I headerfile
.\"O for NLM header information.  For instructions on writing the NLM
.\"O command file language used in header files, see 
.\"O .IR "The NetWare Tool Maker Specification Manual" ,
.\"O available from Novell, Inc.
.B nlmconv
はリロケータブルなオブジェクトファイル
.I infile
を NetWare ローダブルモジュール
.B outfile
に変換する。この際 NLM のヘッダ情報
.I headerfile
を読むようにもできる。 NLM コマンドファイル言語の記述に関する説明は
.I The NewWare Tool Maker Specification Manual
を見よ。これは Novell, Inc. より入手できる。
.\"O .B nlmconv
.\"O currently works with i386 object files in 
.\"O .BR COFF ,
.\"O .BR ELF ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B a.out
.\"O format, and with SPARC object files in
.\"O .B ELF
.\"O or
.\"O .B a.out
.\"O format.
現在
.B nlmconv
が対応している i386 のオブジェクトファイル形式は
.BR COFF 、 ELF 、 a.out
である。 SPARC のオブジェクトファイル形式としては
.BR ELF と a.out
に対応している。
.br
.\"O .B nlmconv
.\"O uses the GNU Binary File Descriptor library to read 
.\"O .IR infile .
.B nlmconv
は
.I infile
の読み込みに GNU Binary File Descriptor library を利用している。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-I \fIbfdname\fR, \fB\-\-input\-target=\fIbfdname
.\"O Consider the source file's object format to be 
.\"O .IR bfdname ,
.\"O rather than attempting to deduce it.
ソースファイルのオブジェクトフォーマットを
.I bfdname
として取り扱う。デフォルトではフォーマットを推測する。
.TP
.B \-O \fIbfdname\fR, \fB\-\-output\-target=\fIbfdname
.\"O Write the output file using the object format 
.\"O .IR bfdname .
.\"O .B nlmconv
.\"O infers the output format based on the input format, e.g. for an i386
.\"O input file the output format is
.\"O .IR nlm32\-i386 .
出力ファイルのオブジェクトフォーマットを
.I bfdname
にする。デフォルトでは
.B nlmconv
は出力フォーマットを入力フォーマットから導出する。例えば入力ファイルが 
i386 のものなら、出力ファイルは
.I nlm32\-i386
となる。
.TP
.B \-T \fIheaderfile\fR, \fB\-\-header\-file=\fIheaderfile
.\"O Reads 
.\"O .I headerfile
.\"O for NLM header information.  For instructions on writing the NLM
.\"O command file language used in header files, see 
.\"O .IR "The NetWare Tool Maker Specification Manual" ,
.\"O available from Novell, Inc.
NLM ヘッダ情報を
.I headerfile
から得る。 NLM コマンドファイル言語の記述に関する説明は
.I The NewWare Tool Maker Specification Manual
を見よ。これは Novell, Inc. より入手できる。
.TP
.B \-V\fR, \fB\-\-version
.\"O Show the version number of
.\"O .B nlmconv
.\"O and exit.
.B nlmconv
のバージョン番号を表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-h\fR, \fB\-\-help
.\"O Show a summary of the options to
.\"O .B nlmconv
.\"O and exit.
.B nlmconv
のオプションの要約を表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .RB "`\|" binutils "\|'" 
.\"O entry in 
.\"O .B
.\"O info\c
.\"O \&; 
.\"O .I
.\"O The GNU Binary Utilities\c
.\"O \&, Roland H. Pesch (June 1993).
.B info
の `\fB binutils \fP' エントリ、
.IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
Roland H. Pesch (October 1993)、

.\"O .SH COPYING
.SH 著作権
Copyright (c) 1993 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
