.\" Copyright (c) 1991 Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec 17 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH nm 1 "5 November 1991" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O nm \- list symbols from object files.
.SH 名前
nm \- オブジェクトファイルのシンボルをリストする

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.hy 0
.na
.TP
.B nm
.RB "[\|" \-a | \-\-debug\-syms "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-g | \-\-extern\-only "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-B "\|]"  
.RB "[\|" \-C | \-\-demangle "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-D | \-\-dynamic "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-s | \-\-print\-armap "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-o | \-\-print\-file\-name "\|]"  
.RB "[\|" \-n | \-\-numeric\-sort "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-p | \-\-no\-sort "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-r | \-\-reverse\-sort "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-size\-sort "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-u | \-\-undefined\-only "\|]"  
.RB "[\|" \-l | \-\-line\-numbers "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-help "\|]"  
.RB "[\|" \-\-version "\|]"  
.RB "[\|" "\-t \fIradix" | \-\-radix=\fIradix "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-P | --portability "\|]"
.RB "[\|" "\-f \fIformat" | \-\-format=\fIformat "\|]"
.RB "[\|" "\-\-target=\fIbfdname" "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \c
.I objfile\c
\&.\|.\|.\|]
.ad b
.hy 1
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O GNU \c
.\"O .B nm\c
.\"O \& lists the symbols from object files \c
.\"O .I objfile\c
.\"O \&.  If no object files are given as arguments, \c
.\"O .B nm\c
.\"O \& assumes `\|\c
.\"O .B a.out\c
.\"O \|'.
GNU
.B nm
はオブジェクトファイル
.I objfile
からシンボルを抽出して表示する。 引数にオブジェクトファイルが与えられ
なかった場合は、
.B a.out
ファイルに対して動作する。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O The long and short forms of options, shown here as alternatives, are
.\"O equivalent.
オプションには長い形式と短い形式がある。並べて書いてある場合は、それら
が等価なオプションであることを意味する。

.TP
.B \-A
.TP
.B \-o
.TP
.B \-\-print\-file\-name 
.\"O Precede each symbol by the name of the input file where it was found,
.\"O rather than identifying the input file once only before all of its
.\"O symbols. 
それぞれのシンボルの前に、そのシンボルが含まれていた入力ファイルの名前
を配置する。通常は入力ファイルは一度だけ表示し、その後にそのファイルに
含まれているシンボルの一覧が続く。
 
.TP
.B \-a
.TP
.B \-\-debug\-syms 
.\"O Display debugger-only symbols; normally these are not listed.
デバッガ専用のシンボルも表示する。これらは通常はリストされない。
 
.TP
.B \-B
.\"O The same as
.\"O .B \-\-format=bsd
.\"O (for compatibility with the MIPS \fBnm\fP).
.B \-\-format=bsd
と同じ (MIPS の \fBnm\fP との互換性のために用意された)。
 
.TP
.B \-C
.TP
.B \-\-demangle
.\"O Decode (\fIdemangle\fP) low-level symbol names into user-level names.
.\"O Besides removing any initial underscore prepended by the system, this
.\"O makes C++ function names readable.
低位レベルのシンボル名をユーザーレベルの名前にデコード 
(\fIdemangle\fP) する。システムによって追加された、先頭部のアンダース
コアを全て削除するほか、 C++ の関数名を可読にする。

.TP
.B \-D
.TP
.B \-\-dynamic
.\"O Display the dynamic symbols rather than the normal symbols.  This is
.\"O only meaningful for dynamic objects, such as certain types of shared
.\"O libraries.
通常のシンボルではなく動的 (dynamic) なシンボルを表示する。これはある
種の共有ライブラリなど、動的なオブジェクトに対してのみ意味を持つ。

.TP
.B "\-f \fIformat"
.\"O Use the output format \fIformat\fP, which can be ``bsd'',
.\"O ``sysv'', or ``posix''.  The default is ``bsd''.
.\"O Only the first character of \fIformat\fP is significant; it can be
.\"O either upper or lower case.
出力フォーマットに \fIformat\fP を用いる。 \fIformat\fP には ``bsd''、
``sysv''、 ``posix'' のいずれかを指定する。デフォルトは ``bsd'' である。
\fIformat\fP で認識されるのは最初の一文字だけである。大文字小文字は関
係ない。

.TP
.B \-g
.TP
.B \-\-extern\-only 
.\"O Display only external symbols.
外部シンボル (external symbol) のみを表示する。

.TP
.B \-n
.TP
.B \-v
.TP
.B \-\-numeric\-sort 
.\"O Sort symbols numerically by their addresses, not alphabetically by their
.\"O names. 
シンボルをアドレスの数値によってソートする。通常は名前のアルファベット
順にソートされる。
 
.TP
.B \-p
.TP
.B \-\-no\-sort 
.\"O Don't bother to sort the symbols in any order; just print them in the
.\"O order encountered.
シンボルをまったくソートしない。単純に現われた順に表示する。
 
.TP
.B \-P
.TP
.B \-\-portability
.\"O Use the POSIX.2 standard output format instead of the default format.
.\"O Equivalent to ``\-f posix''.
出力フォーマットに、デフォルトのものではなく POSIX.2 標準のものを用い
る。 ``-f posix'' と等価。
 
.TP
.B \-s
.TP
.B \-\-print\-armap
.\"O When listing symbols from archive members, include the index: a mapping
.\"O (stored in the archive by \c
.\"O .B ar\c
.\"O \& or \c
.\"O .B ranlib\c
.\"O \&) of what modules
.\"O contain definitions for what names.
書庫のメンバーからシンボルをリストするとき、インデックスをインクルード
する。インデックスとは
.B ar
または
.B ranlib
によって書庫に追加されるもので、その書庫にあるどのファイルにどんな名前
定義が含まれているかをマップする。

.TP
.B \-r
.TP
.B \-\-reverse\-sort 
.\"O Reverse the sense of the sort (whether numeric or alphabetic); let the
.\"O last come first.
ソート順を逆にする (数値の場合でもアルファベット順の場合でも)。最後の
ものが最初に来ることになる。

.TP
.B \-\-size\-sort 
.\"O Sort symbols by size.  The size is computed as the difference between
.\"O the value of the symbol and the value of the symbol with the next higher
.\"O value.  The size of the symbol is printed, rather than the value.
シンボルをサイズの順にソートする。サイズはシンボルの値を、次に現われる
シンボルの値から引いた物である。シンボルの値ではなく、サイズが表示される。

.TP
.B "\-t \fIradix"
.TP
.B "\-\-radix=\fIradix"
.\"O Use \fIradix\fP as the radix for printing the symbol values.  It must be
.\"O ``d'' for decimal, ``o'' for octal, or ``x'' for hexadecimal.
\fIradix\fP をシンボルの値を表示するときの基数にする。 10 進数の場合は 
``d''、 8 進数には ``o''、 16 進数には ``x'' を指定する。

.TP
.BI "\-\-target=" "bfdname"
.\"O Specify an object code format other than your system's default format.
.\"O See 
.\"O .BR objdump ( 1 ),
.\"O for information on listing available formats.
オブジェクトコードのフォーマットを指定する。通常はシステムのデフォルト
であるフォーマットが用いられる。指定できるフォーマットに関する情報を得
るための手法については
.BR objdump ( 1 )
を見よ。

.TP
.B \-u
.TP
.B \-\-undefined\-only 
.\"O Display only undefined symbols (those external to each object file).
未定義なシンボル (それぞれのオブジェクトファイルの外部にあるもの) のみ
を表示する。

.TP
.B \-l
.TP
.B \-\-line\-numbers
.\"O For each symbol, use debugging information to try to find a filename and
.\"O line number.  For a defined symbol, look for the line number of the
.\"O address of the symbol.  For an undefined symbol, look for the line
.\"O number of a relocation entry which refers to the symbol.  If line number
.\"O information can be found, print it after the other symbol information.
それぞれのシンボルに対して、デバッグ情報を用いてファイル名と行番号を見
つけようとする。定義されているシンボルに対しては、シンボルのアドレスの
行番号を探す。未定義なシンボルに対しては、シンボルを参照しているリロケー
ションエントリの行番号を探す。行番号の情報を見つけることができたら、他
のシンボルの情報に続いてそれを表示する。

.TP
.B \-V
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Show the version number of
.\"O .B nm
.\"O and exit.
.B nm
のバージョン番号を表示して終了する。

.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Show a summary of the options to
.\"O .B nm
.\"O and exit.
.B nm
のオプション一覧を表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .RB "`\|" binutils "\|'"
.\"O entry in 
.\"O .B
.\"O info\c
.\"O \&; 
.\"O .I
.\"O The GNU Binary Utilities\c
.\"O \&, Roland H. Pesch (October 1991);
.\"O .BR ar "(" 1 "),"
.\"O .BR objdump ( 1 ),
.\"O .BR ranlib "(" 1 ")."
.B info
の `\fB binutils \fP' エントリ、
.IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
Roland H. Pesch (October 1991)、
.BR ar "(" 1 ")、"
.BR objdump "(" 1 ")"
.BR ranlib "(" 1 ")"

.\"O COPYING
.SH 著作権
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
