.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 93, 94, 95, 96, 1997 Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 5 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 27 Oct 2000 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH objcopy 1 "October 1994" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O objcopy \- copy and translate object files
.SH 名前
objcopy \- オブジェクトファイルのコピーや変換を行う

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.hy 0
.na
.TP
.B objcopy
.RB "[\|" \-F\ \fIbfdname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-target=\fIbfdname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-I\ \fIbfdname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-input\-target=\fIbfdname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-O\ \fIbfdname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-output\-target=\fIbfdname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-R\ \fIsectionname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-remove\-section=\fIsectionname\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-S\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-strip\-all\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-g\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-strip\-debug\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-strip\-unneeded\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-K\ \fIsymbolname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-keep\-symbol=\fIsymbolname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-N\ \fIsymbolname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-strip\-symbol=\fIsymbolname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-L\ \fIsymbolname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-localize\-symbol=\fIsymbolname\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-W\ \fIsymbolname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-weaken\-symbol=\fIsymbolname\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-x\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-discard\-all\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-X\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-discard\-locals\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-b\ \fIbyte\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-byte=\fIbyte\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-i\ \fIinterleave\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-interleave=\fIinterleave\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-p\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-preserve\-dates\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-debugging "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-gap\-fill=\fIval\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-pad\-to=\fIaddress\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-set\-start=\fIval\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-adjust\-start=\fIincr\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-adjust\-vma=\fIincr\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-adjust\-section\-vma=\fIsection{=,+,-}val\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-adjust\-warnings\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-no\-adjust\-warnings\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-set\-section\-flags=\fIsection=flags\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-add\-section=\fIsectionname=filename\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-change\-leading\-char\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-remove\-leading\-char\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-weaken\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-v\ |\ \-\-verbose\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-V\ |\ \-\-version\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-help\fR "\|]" 
.B infile
.RB "[\|" outfile\fR "\|]" 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The GNU 
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O utility copies the contents of an object file to another.  
.\"O .B objcopy 
.\"O uses the GNU BFD Library to read and write the object files.  It can
.\"O write the destination object file in a format different from that of
.\"O the source object file.  The exact behavior of 
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O is controlled by command-line options.
GNU
.B objcopy
ユーティリティはオブジェクトファイルの内容を別ファイルにコピーする。
.B objcopy
はオブジェクトファイルの読み書きに GNU BFD ライブラリを用いる。これに
よって書き込み先のファイルのオブジェクトフォーマットを読み込みファイル
のフォーマットから変更することができる。
.B objcopy
の詳細な動作はコマンドラインオプションによって決定される。
.PP
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O creates temporary files to do its translations and deletes them
.\"O afterward.
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O uses BFD to do all its translation work; it knows about all the
.\"O formats BFD knows about, and thus is able to recognize most formats
.\"O without being told explicitly.
.B objcopy
は変換を行う際に一時ファイルを作成し、動作後にこれを消去する。
.B objcopy
変換作業はすべて BFD によって行われる。したがって BFD が種々のフォー
マットに関して持っているすべての情報を利用することができ、明示しないで
もほとんどのフォーマットを認識できる。
.PP
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O can be used to generate S-records by using an output target of
.\"O .B srec
.\"O (e.g., use
.\"O .B -O srec).
.B objcopy
はターゲットを
.B srec
に指定する (つまり
.B -O srec
とする) ことによって S-record を生成することもできる。
.PP
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O can be used to generate a raw binary file by using an output target of
.\"O .B binary
.\"O (e.g., use
.\"O .B -O binary).
.\"O When
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O generates a raw binary file, it will essentially produce a memory dump
.\"O of the contents of the input object file.  All symbols and relocation
.\"O information will be discarded.  The memory dump will start at the
.\"O virtual address of the lowest section copied into the output file.
.B objcopy
は出力ターゲットを
.B binary
に指定する (つまり
.B -O binary
とする) ことによって raw バイナリファイルを生成することもできる。この
際には、基本的には入力オブジェクトファイルの内容のメモリダンプが作られ
る。メモリダンプは出力ファイルにコピーされる最抵位のセクションの仮想ア
ドレスからスタートする。
.PP
.\"O When generating an S-record or a raw binary file, it may be helpful to
.\"O use
.\"O .B -S
.\"O to remove sections containing debugging information.  In some cases
.\"O .B -R
.\"O will be useful to remove sections which contain information which is
.\"O not needed by the binary file.
S-record や raw バイナリファイルを生成する場合に
.B \-S
を用いれば、デバッグ情報を持つセクションを削除できる。また、バイナリファ
イルに不要な情報を持ったセクションを消去するのに
.B \-R
が役に立つ場合もある。
.PP
.\"O .I infile
.\"O and
.\"O .I outfile
.\"O are the source and output files respectively.  If you do not specify
.\"O .IR outfile ,
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O creates a temporary file and destructively renames the result with the
.\"O name of the input file.
.I infile
と
.I outfile
はそれぞれ入力・出力ファイルである。
.I outfile
が指定されないと
.B objcopy
は一時ファイルを作成し、その結果を入力ファイルの名前にリネームする (す
なわちもとの入力ファイルは破壊される)。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-I \fIbfdname\fR, \fB\-\-input\-target=\fIbfdname
.\"O Consider the source file's object format to be 
.\"O .IR bfdname ,
.\"O rather than attempting to deduce it.
入力ファイルのオブジェクトフォーマットを
.I bfdname
として取り扱う。通常は自動的に認識する。
.TP
.B \-O \fIbfdname\fR, \fB\-\-output\-target=\fIbfdname
.\"O Write the output file using the object format 
.\"O .IR bfdname .
出力ファイルのオブジェクトフォーマットを
.I bfdname
にする。
.TP
.B \-F \fIbfdname\fR, \fB\-\-target=\fIbfdname
.\"O Use 
.\"O .I bfdname
.\"O as the object format for both the input and the output file; i.e.
.\"O simply transfer data from source to destination with no translation.
入出力ファイルのオブジェクトフォーマットに
.I bfdname
を用いる。すなわち入力ファイルを変換せずに単に出力ファイルにコピーする。
.TP
.B \-R \fIsectionname\fR, \fB\-\-remove-section=\fIsectionname
.\"O Remove the named section from the file.  This option may be given more
.\"O than once.  Note that using this option inappropriately may make the
.\"O output file unusable.
指定したセクションをファイルから削除する。このオプションは複数回指定す
ることができる。このオプションを誤って用いると、出力ファイルが役立たず
になる可能性がある。
.TP
.B \-S\fR, \fB\-\-strip\-all
.\"O Do not copy relocation and symbol information from the source file.
リロケーション情報とシンボル情報を入力ファイルからコピーしない。
.TP
.B \-g\fR, \fB\-\-strip\-debug
.\"O Do not copy debugging symbols from the source file.
デバッグシンボルを入力ファイルからコピーしない。
.TP
.B \-\-strip\-unneeded
.\"O Strip all symbols that are not needed for relocation processing.
リロケーション処理に不要なシンボルをすべて取り去る。
.TP
.B \-K \fIsymbolname\fR, \fB\-\-keep\-symbol=\fIsymbolname
.\"O Copy only symbol \fIsymbolname\fP from the source file. This option
.\"O may be given more than once.
入力ファイルから \fIsymbolname\fP という名前のシンボルだけをコピーする。
複数回指定できる。
.TP
.B \-N \fIsymbolname\fR, \fB\-\-strip\-symbol=\fIsymbolname
.\"O Do not copy symbol \fIsymbolname\fP from the source file. This option
.\"O may be given more than once.
入力ファイルの \fIsymbolname\fP という名前のシンボルをコピーしない。
複数回指定できる。
.TP
.B \-L \fIsymbolname\fR, \fB\-\-localize\-symbol=\fIsymbolname
.\"O Make symbol \fIsymbolname\fP local to the file, so that it is not
.\"O visible externally.  This option may be given more than once.
.I symbolname
をそのファイルにローカルなものにし、外部から見えないようにする。
複数回指定できる。
.TP
.B \-W \fIsymbolname\fR, \fB\-\-weaken\-symbol=\fIsymbolname
.\"O Make symbol \fIsymbolname\fP weak. This option may be given more than once.
.I symbolname
を weak にする。
複数回指定できる。
.TP
.B \-x\fR, \fB \-\-discard\-all
.\"O Do not copy non-global symbols from the source file.
入力ファイルのグローバルでないシンボルはコピーしない。
.TP
.B \-X\fR, \fB\-\-discard\-locals
.\"O Do not copy compiler-generated local symbols. (These usually start
.\"O with "L" or ".").
コンパイラが生成したローカルなシンボル (通常 "L" または 
"." ではじまるシンボル) はコピーしない。
.TP
.B \-b \fIbyte\fR, \fB\-\-byte=\fIbyte
.\"O Keep only every \fIbyte\fPth byte of the input file (header data is
.\"O not affected).  \fIbyte\fP can be in the range from 0 to the
.\"O interleave-1.  This option is useful for creating files to program
.\"O ROMs.  It is typically used with an srec output target.
入力ファイルを interleave づつ区切った各セクションから \fIbyte\fP バイ
ト目だけをコピーする (ヘッダデータは影響されない)。 \fIbyte\fP の範囲は
0 から interleave-1 までである。 \fIinterleave\fP の値は
.BR \-i "(または" \-\-interleave ")"
オプションで指定する。
このオプションは ROM プログラム用のファイルを作成するときに便利である。出
力ターゲット srec と共に用いられることが多い。
.TP
.B \-i \fIinterleave\fR, \fB\-\-interleave=\fIinterleave
.\"O Only copy one out of every \fIinterleave\fP bytes.  Which one to copy is
.\"O selected by the \fB\-b\fP or \fB\-\-byte\fP option.  The default is 4.
.\"O The interleave is ignored if neither \fB\-b\fP nor \fB\-\-byte\fP is given.
\fIinterleave\fP バイトにつき 1 バイトづつをコピーする。デフォルトは 4
である。何番目のバイトをコピーするかは
.BR \-b "(または" \-\-byte
) オプションで指定する。 \fB\-b\fP も \fB\-\-bytes\fP も指定されなかっ
た場合は interleave は無視される。
.TP
.B \-p\fR, \fB\-\-preserve\-dates
.\"O Set the access and modification dates of the output file to be the same
.\"O as those of the input file.
出力ファイルのアクセス時刻と修正時刻を入力ファイルと同じにする。
.TP
.B \-\-debugging
.\"O Convert debugging information, if possible.  This is not the default
.\"O because only certain debugging formats are supported, and the
.\"O conversion process can be time consuming.
可能ならばデバッグ情報を変換する。このオプションはデフォルトにはなって
いない。すべてのデバッグフォーマットがサポートされているわけではないし、
この変換には時間がかかるからである。
.TP
.B \-\-gap\-fill=\fIval
.\"O Fill gaps between sections with \fIval\fP.  This operation applies to
.\"O the \fIload address\fP (LMA) of the sections.  It is done by increasing
.\"O the size of the section with the lower address, and filling in the extra
.\"O space created with \fIval\fP.
セクション間のギャップを \fIval\fP で埋める。この動作は
セクションの
.I load address
(LMA) に適用される。これはセクションのサイズを抵位アドレスの分増やし、
その余分を \fIval\fP で埋めることでなされる。
.TP
.B \-\-pad\-to=\fIaddress
.\"O Pad the output file up to the load address \fIaddress\fP.  This is
.\"O done by increasing the size of the last section.  The extra space is
.\"O filled in with the value specified by \fB\-\-gap\-fill\fP (default
.\"O zero).
出力ファイルをロードアドレス \fIaddress\fP まで水増しする。
これは最後のセクションのサイズを増やすことでなされる。
余分なスペースは 
\fB\-\-gap\-fill\fP で指定された値で埋められる (デフォルトは 0)。
.TP
.B \fB\-\-set\-start=\fIval
.\"O Set the start address of the new file to \fIval\fP.  Not all object
.\"O file formats support setting the start address.
新しいファイルのスタートアドレスを \fIval\fP に設定する。すべてのオブ
ジェクトファイルフォーマットでこの指定が可能ではないことに注意すること。
.TP
.B \fB\-\-adjust\-start=\fIincr
.\"O Adjust the start address by adding \fIincr\fP.  Not all object file
.\"O formats support setting the start address.
スタートアドレスを \fIincr\fP だけ増やす。すべてのオブジェクトファイル
フォーマットでこの指定が可能ではないことに注意すること。
.TP
.B \fB\-\-adjust\-vma=\fIincr
.\"O Adjust the address of all sections, as well as the start address, by
.\"O adding \fIincr\fP.  Some object file formats do not permit section
.\"O addresses to be changed arbitrarily.  Note that this does not relocate
.\"O the sections; if the program expects sections to be loaded at a
.\"O certain address, and this option is used to change the sections such
.\"O that they are loaded at a different address, the program may fail.
すべてのセクション (スタートアドレスも含まれる) のアドレスを 
\fIincr\fP だけ増やす。すべてのオブジェクトファイルフォーマットで任意
のアドレス設定が指定が可能なわけではないことに注意すること。またこのオ
プションではそれぞれのセクションがロードされるアドレスを変えてしまうの
で、プログラムが動かなくなる可能性がある
.TP
.B \fB\-\-adjust\-section\-vma=\fIsection{=,+,-}val
.\"O Set or adjust the address of the named \fIsection\fP.  If \fI=\fP is
.\"O used, the section address is set to \fIval\fP.  Otherwise, \fIval\fP
.\"O is added to or subtracted from the section address.  See the comments
.\"O under \fB\-\-adjust\-vma\fP, above.  If \fIsection\fP does not exist
.\"O in the input file, a warning will be issued, unless
.\"O \fB\-\-no\-adjust\-warnings\fP is used.
名前が \fIsection\fP のセクションのアドレスを設定する。 \fI=\fP が用い
られた場合はセクションのアドレスは \fIval\fP にされる。それ以外の場合
はセクションのアドレスから \fIval\fP が増減される。上記の 
\fB\-\-adjust\-vma\fP に関するコメントを参照のこと。 \fIsection\fP が
入力ファイルに存在しない場合は警告グメッセージが表示される (ただし 
\fB\-\-no\-adjust\-warning\fP が指定されていたら表示しない)。
.TP
.B \fB\-\-adjust\-warnings
.\"O If \fB\-\-adjust\-section\-vma\fP is used, and the named section does
.\"O not exist, issue a warning.  This is the default.
\fB\-\-adjust\-section\-vma\fP が指定されているとき、
対象となるセクションが存在しなければ警告メッセージを表示する。
デフォルトの動作である。
.TP
.B \fB\-\-no\-adjust\-warnings
.\"O Do not issue a warning if \fB\-\-adjust\-section\-vma\fP is used, even
.\"O if the named section does not exist.
\fB\-\-adjust\-section\-vma\fP が指定されているとき、かつ対象となるセ
クションが存在していなくても警告メッセージを表示しない。
.TP
.B \fB\-\-set\-section\-flags=\fIsection=flags
.\"O Set the flags for the named section.  The \fIflags\fP argument is a
.\"O comma separated string of flag names.  The recognized names are
.\"O \fIalloc\fP, \fIload\fP, \fIreadonly\fP, \fIcode\fP, \fIdata\fP, and
.\"O \fIrom\fP.  Not all flags are meaningful for all object file
.\"O formats.
指定したセクションのフラグを設定する。引数 \fIflags\fP はコンマ (,) で
区切られたフラグ文字列である。認識される文字列は \fIalloc\fP、 
\fIload\fP、 \fIreadonly\fP、 \fIcode\fP、 \fIdata\fP、 \fIrom\fP であ
る。すべてのフラグがあらゆるフォーマットで有効なわけではないことに注意
すること。
.TP
.B \fB\-\-add\-section=\fIsectionname=filename
.\"O Add a new section named \fIsectionname\fR while copying the file.  The
.\"O contents of the new section are taken from the file \fIfilename\fR.
.\"O The size of the section will be the size of the file.  This option
.\"O only works on file formats which can support sections with arbitrary
.\"O names.
ファイルをコピーするときに \fIsectionname\fP という名前のセクションを
追加する。この新しいセクションの内容はファイル \fIfilename\fP から取ら
れる。このオプションが機能するのは、任意のセクション名をサポートしてい
るフォーマットだけである。
.TP
.B \-\-change\-leading\-char
.\"O Some object file formats use special characters at the start of
.\"O symbols.  The most common such character is underscore, which compilers
.\"O often add before every symbol.  This option tells 
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O to change the leading character of every symbol when it converts
.\"O between object file formats.  If the object file formats use the same
.\"O leading character, this option has no effect.  Otherwise, it will add
.\"O a character, or remove a character, or change a character, as
.\"O appropriate.
オブジェクトファイルのフォーマットによっては、シンボル名の先頭に特定の
文字を使っている場合がある。よくある例はアンダースコア (_) で、これは
コンパイラがすべてのシンボル名に前置する。このオプションを指定すると
.B objcopy
はフォーマット変換の際にすべてのシンボルにおける先頭文字を変更しようと
する。同じ先頭文字を持つオブジェクト間では、このオプションは意味を持た
ない。異なる場合は、場合に応じて先頭文字が追加されたり削除、変更された
りする。
.TP
.B \-\-remove\-leading\-char
.\"O If the first character of a global symbol is a special symbol leading
.\"O character used by the object file format, remove the character.  The
.\"O most common symbol leading character is underscore.  This option will
.\"O remove a leading underscore from all global symbols.  This can be
.\"O useful if you want to link together objects of different file formats
.\"O with different conventions for symbol names.  This is different from
.\"O @code{--change-leading-char} because it always changes the symbol name
.\"O when appropriate, regardless of the object file format of the output
グローバルシンボルの先頭文字がオブジェクトファイルに特有のものであった
場合、これを削除する。通常はアンダースコア (_) がこれにあたる。このオ
プションはすべてのグローバルシンボルから先頭にあるアンダースコアを削除
する。これは (シンボル名の命名流儀が異なる) 複数のフォーマットに属する
オブジェクト群を同時にリンクする場合に有用である。このオプションは 
\fB\-\-change\-leading\-char\fP とは異なる。後者では出力のフォーマット
にかかわらず、該当したケースではすべて変更が行われる。
.TP
.B \-\-weaken
.\"O Change all global symbols in the file to be weak.
ファイルのすべての global なシンボルを weak に変更する。
.TP
.\" weak symbol?
.B \-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose
.\"O Verbose output: list all object files modified.  In the case of
.\"O archives, "\fBobjcopy \-V\fR" lists all members of the archive.
詳細出力モード。修正されたすべてのオブジェクトファイルをリストする。書
庫の場合は"\fBobjcopy \-V\fR" とすると書庫のすべてのメンバーを表示する。
.TP
.B \-V\fR, \fB\-\-version
.\"O Show the version number of
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O and exit.
.B objcopy
のバージョン番号を表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Show a summary of the options to
.\"O .B objcopy
.\"O and exit.
.B objcopy
のオプションの要約を表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .RB "`\|" binutils "\|'" 
.\"O entry in 
.\"O .B
.\"O info\c
.\"O \&; 
.\"O .I
.\"O The GNU Binary Utilities\c
.\"O \&, Roland H. Pesch (June 1993).
.B info
の `\fB binutils \fP' エントリ、
.IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
Roland H. Pesch (June 1993)、

.\"O .SH COPYING
.SH 著作権
Copyright (c) 1993, 94, 95, 96, 1997 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
