.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1996, 1997 Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Dec 29 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH objdump 1 "5 November 1991" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O objdump \- display information from object files.
.SH 名前
objdump \- オブジェクトファイルの情報を表示する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.hy 0
.na
.TP
.B objdump
.RB "[\|" \-a | \-\-archive\-headers "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" "\-b\ "\c
.I bfdname\c
.RB " | " "\-\-target="\c
.I bfdname\c
\&\|] 
.RB "[\|" \-C | \-\-demangle "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-debugging "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-d | \-\-disassemble "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-D | \-\-disassemble-all "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-disassemble\-zeroes "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-EB | \-EL | \-\-endian=\c
.I {big|little}\c
\&\|]
.RB "[\|" \-f | \-\-file\-headers "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-h | \-\-section\-headers
.RB "| " \-\-headers "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-i | \-\-info "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" "\-j\ "\c
.I section\c
.RB " | " "\-\-section="\c
.I section\c
\&\|] 
.RB "[\|" \-l | \-\-line\-numbers "\|]"
.RB "[\|" "\-m\ "\c
.I machine\c
.RB " | " "\-\-architecture="\c
.I machine\c
\&\|] 
.RB "[\|" \-\-prefix\-addresses "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-r | \-\-reloc "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-R | \-\-dynamic\-reloc "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-s | \-\-full\-contents "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-S | \-\-source "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-[no\-]show\-raw\-insn "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-stabs "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-t | \-\-syms "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-T | \-\-dynamic\-syms "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-x | \-\-all\-headers "\|]"
.RB "[\|" "\-\-start\-address="\c
.I address\c
\&\|]
.RB "[\|" "\-\-stop\-address="\c
.I address\c
\&\|]
.RB "[\|" "\-\-adjust\-vma="\c
.I offset\c
\&\|]
.RB "[\|" \-\-version "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-help "\|]"
.I objfile\c
\&.\|.\|.
.ad b
.hy 1
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \c
.\"O .B objdump\c
.\"O \& displays information about one or more object files.
.\"O The options control what particular information to display.  This
.\"O information is mostly useful to programmers who are working on the
.\"O compilation tools, as opposed to programmers who just want their
.\"O program to compile and work.
.B objdump
は指定されたひとつ以上のオブジェクトファイルについて、その情報を表示す
る。オプションで表示する情報の種類を指定できる。この情報はコンパイルツー
ルに関する作業をしているプログラマーにとってもっとも有益であろう。逆に
単に自分のプログラムをコンパイルして実行させているだけの場合にはあまり
役に立たないかもしれない。
.PP
.\"O .IR  "objfile" .\|.\|.
.\"O are the object files to be examined.  When you specify archives,
.\"O \c
.\"O .B objdump\c
.\"O \& shows information on each of the member object files.
.I objfile
は調べるオブジェクトファイルである。書庫 (archive) を指定した場合には、
.B objdump
は書庫のメンバーであるオブジェクトファイルそれぞれについての情報を表示
する。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O Where long and short forms of an option are shown together, they are
.\"O equivalent.  At least one option besides
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O (\fB\-\-line\-numbers\fP) must be given.
長い形式と短い形式が併記されている場合は、それらは等価である。少なくと
も
.BR \-l " (" \-\-line\-numbers ")"
以外のオプションをひとつ指定しなければならない。

.TP
.B \-a
.TP
.B \-\-archive\-headers
.\"O If any files from \c
.\"O .I objfile\c
.\"O \& are archives, display the archive
.\"O header information (in a format similar to `\|\c
.\"O .B ls \-l\c
.\"O \|').  Besides the
.\"O information you could list with `\|\c
.\"O .B ar tv\c
.\"O \|', `\|\c
.\"O .B objdump \-a\c
.\"O \|' shows
.\"O the object file format of each archive member.
.I objfile
に書庫が含まれている場合は、書庫のヘッダ情報を
.B ls \-l
のような形式で表示する。
.B ar tv
によって得られる情報に加え、
.B objdump -a
ではそれぞれの書庫メンバーのオブジェクトファイルフォーマットも表示する。

.TP
.BI "\-\-adjust\-vma=" "offset"
.\"O When dumping information, first add
.\"O .I offset
.\"O to all the section addresses.  This is useful if the section addresses
.\"O do not correspond to the symbol table, which can happen when putting
.\"O sections at particular addresses when using a format which can not
.\"O represent section addresses, such as a.out.
情報をダンプするときに、まず
.I offset
を全てのセクションアドレスに加える。これはセクションアドレスがシンボル
テーブルに関連付けされていないときに便利である。このような状況が起こる
のは、 a.out のようにセクションアドレスを持てないフォーマットの使用時
に、セクションを特定のアドレスに置く場合などである。

.TP
.BI "\-b " "bfdname"\c
.TP
.BI "\-\-target=" "bfdname"
.\"O Specify the object-code format for the object files to be
.\"O \c
.\"O .I bfdname\c
.\"O \&.  This may not be necessary; \c
.\"O .I objdump\c
.\"O \& can
.\"O automatically recognize many formats.  For example,
オブジェクトファイルのオブジェクトコードフォーマットを
.I bfdname
として取り扱う。通常これは必要ではなく、
.B objdump
は自動的に多くのフォーマットを認識できる。例えば
.sp
.br
objdump\ \-b\ oasys\ \-m\ vax\ \-h\ fu.o
.br
.sp
.\"O display summary information from the section headers (`\|\c
.\"O .B \-h\c
.\"O \|') of
.\"O `\|\c
.\"O .B fu.o\c
.\"O \|', which is explicitly identified (`\|\c
.\"O .B \-m\c
.\"O \|') as a Vax object
.\"O file in the format produced by Oasys compilers.  You can list the
.\"O formats available with the `\|\c
.\"O .B \-i\c
.\"O \|' option.
とすれば
.B fu.o
のセクションヘッダ (`\|\c
.B \-h\c
\|') が表示される。この際
.B fu.o
は Oasys コンパイラによって生成されたフォーマットの Vax オブジェクトファ
イルであるとして取り扱われる。指定可能なフォーマットのリストは `\|\c
.B \-i\c
\|' オプションによって得られる。

.TP
.B \-C
.TP
.B \-\-demangle
.\"O Decode (\fIdemangle\fP) low-level symbol names into user-level names.
.\"O Besides removing any initial underscore prepended by the system, this
.\"O makes C++ function names readable.
低レベルのシンボル名をユーザーレベルのシンボル名にデコード 
(\fIdemangle\fP) する。このときシステムによって前置されたアンダースコ
アも削除される。この操作によって C++ の関数名が可読になる。

.TP
.B \-\-debugging
.\"O Display debugging information.  This attempts to parse debugging
.\"O information stored in the file and print it out using a C like syntax.
.\"O Only certain types of debugging information have been implemented.
デバッグ情報を表示する。ファイル中のデバッグ情報を解析して、 C のよう
な文法で表示しようと試みる。対応しているデバッグ情報の形式はあまり多く
ない。

.TP
.B \-d
.TP
.B \-\-disassemble
.\"O Display the assembler mnemonics for the machine
.\"O instructions from \c
.\"O .I objfile\c
.\"O \&.
.\"O This option only disassembles those sections which are
.\"O expected to contain instructions.
.I objfile
の機械語命令に対応するアセンブラのニーモニックを表示する。このオプショ
ンは、命令を含むと思われるセクションのみを逆アセンブルする。

.TP
.B \-D
.TP
.B \-\-disassemble-all
.\"O Like \fB\-d\fP, but disassemble the contents of all sections, not just
.\"O those expected to contain instructions.
.B -d
と似ているが、命令を含むと思われるセクションだけでなく、全てのセクショ
ンを逆アセンブルする。

.TP
.B \-\-prefix\-addresses
.\"O When disassembling, print the complete address on each line.  This is
.\"O the older disassembly format.
逆アセンブルするとき、それぞれの行に絶対アドレスを表示する。これは古い
逆アセンブルフォーマットである。

.TP
.B \-\-disassemble\-zeroes
.\"O Normally the disassembly output will skip blocks of zeroes.  This
.\"O option directs the disassembler to disassemble those blocks, just like
.\"O any other data.
通常逆アセンブルの出力では 0 からなるブロックはスキップする。このオプ
ションを指定すると、これらの 0 ブロックも他のデータと同様に逆アセンブ
ルされる。

.TP
.B \-EB
.TP
.B \-EL
.TP
.BI "\-\-endian=" "{big|little}"
.\"O Specify the endianness of the object files.  This only affects
.\"O disassembly.  This can be useful when disassembling a file format which
.\"O does not describe endianness information, such as S-records.
オブジェクトファイルのエンディアンを指定する。逆アセンブルにのみ影響す
る。これは S-record のようなエンディアン情報を含まないフォーマットを逆
アセンブルするときに効果的である。

.TP
.B \-f
.TP
.B \-\-file\-headers
.\"O Display summary information from the overall header of
.\"O each file in \c
.\"O .I objfile\c
.\"O \&.
.I objfile
のそれぞれに対して overall ヘッダ情報の要約を表示する。
.\" overall header って適切な日本語あるでしょうか？

.TP
.B \-h
.TP
.B \-\-section\-headers
.TP
.B \-\-headers
.\"O Display summary information from the section headers of the
.\"O object file.
オブジェクトファイルのセクションヘッダ情報の要約を表示する。

.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Print a summary of the options to
.\"O .B objdump
.\"O and exit.
.B objdump
のオプションの要約を表示して終了する。

.TP
.B \-i
.TP
.B \-\-info
.\"O Display a list showing all architectures and object formats available
.\"O for specification with \c
.\"O .B \-b\c
.\"O \& or \c
.\"O .B \-m\c
.\"O \&.
オプション
.B \-b
および
.B \-m
と共に指定できるアーキテクチャとオブジェクトフォーマットの一覧を表示す
る。

.TP
.BI "\-j " "name"\c
.TP
.BI "\-\-section=" "name"
.\"O Display information only for section \c
.\"O .I name\c
.\"O \&.
セクション
.I name
だけの情報を表示する。

.TP
.B \-l
.TP
.B \-\-line\-numbers
.\"O Label the display (using debugging information) with the filename
.\"O and source line numbers corresponding to the object code shown.
.\"O Only useful with \fB\-d\fP, \fB\-D\fP, or \fB\-r\fP.
表示しているオブジェクトコードに、ソースのファイル名と行を (デバッグ情
報を用いて) 関連付けし、表示する。 \fB\-d\fP、 \fB\-D\fP、 \fB\-r\fP 
などと同時に用いる。

.TP
.BI "\-m " "machine"\c
.TP
.BI "\-\-architecture=" "machine"
.\"O Specify the architecture to use when disassembling object files.  This
.\"O can be useful when disassembling object files which do not describe
.\"O architecture information, such as S-records.  You can list the available
.\"O architectures with the \fB\-i\fP option. 
オブジェクトファイルを逆アセンブルするとき、アーキテクチャを指定する。
これは S-record のような、アーキテクチャの情報を持たないオブジェクトファ
イルを逆アセンブルするときに有用である。指定可能なアーキテクチャンのリ
ストは \fB\-i\fP オプションによって得られる。

.TP
.B \-r
.TP
.B \-\-reloc
.\"O Print the relocation entries of the file.  If used with \fB\-d\fP or
.\"O \fB\-d\fP, the relocations are printed interspersed with the
.\"O disassembly.
ファイルのリロケーションエントリを表示する。 \fB\-d\fP または 
\fB\-D\fP とともに用いると、エントリは逆アセンブルコードの中に埋め込ま
れて表示される。

.TP
.B \-R
.TP
.B \-\-dynamic\-reloc
.\"O Print the dynamic relocation entries of the file.  This is only
.\"O meaningful for dynamic objects, such as certain types of shared
.\"O libraries.
ファイルのダイナミックリロケーションエントリを表示する。これはある種の
共有ライブラリのような、ダイナミックオブジェクトに対してのみ意味を持つ。

.TP
.B \-s
.TP
.B \-\-full\-contents
.\"O Display the full contents of any sections requested.
指定したそれぞれのセクションに対して、全ての内容を表示する。

.TP
.B \-S
.TP
.B \-\-source
.\"O Display source code intermixed with disassembly, if possible.  Implies
.\"O \fB-d\fP.
(可能であれば) ソースコードを逆アセンブル結果と混在させて表示する。 
\fB\-d\fP が暗黙のうちに指定される。

.TP
.B \-\-show\-raw\-insn
.\"O When disassembling instructions, print the instruction in hex as well as
.\"O in symbolic form.  This is the default except when
.\"O .B \-\-prefix\-addresses
.\"O is used.
マシン語を逆アセンブルするとき、命令コードを 16 進コードとシンボリック
な記法と両方で表示する。これは
.B \-\-prefix\-addresses
が指定されていない場合のデフォルトである。

.TP
.B \-\-no\-show\-raw\-insn
.\"O When disassembling instructions, do not print the instruction bytes.
.\"O This is the default when
.\"O .B \-\-prefix\-addresses
.\"O is used.
マシン語を逆アセンブルするとき、16 進のバイトコードを表示しない。これ
は
.B \-\-prefix\-addresses
が指定された場合のデフォルトである。

.TP
.B \-\-stabs
.\"O Display the contents of the .stab, .stab.index, and .stab.excl
.\"O sections from an ELF file.  This is only useful on systems (such as
.\"O Solaris 2.0) in which .stab debugging symbol-table entries are carried
.\"O in an ELF section.  In most other file formats, debugging symbol-table
.\"O entries are interleaved with linkage symbols, and are visible in the
.\"O \-\-syms output.
ELF ファイルの .stab、 .stab.index、 .stab.excl 各セクションの内容を表
示する。これは .stab のデバッグ用シンボルテーブルエントリが ELF セクショ
ンに含まれているシステム (Solaris 2.0 など) に対してのみ有効である。他
のほとんどのフォーマットでは、デバッグ用シンボルテーブルエントリはリン
ク用のシンボルに混ざっており、 \-\-syms の出力によって見ることができる。

.TP
.BI "\-\-start\-address=" "address"
.\"O Start displaying data at the specified address.  This affects the output
.\"O of the
.\"O .B \-d\c
.\"O ,
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O options.
データの表示開始点を指定したアドレスにする。これは \fB\-d\fP、 
\fB\-r\fP、 \fB\-s\fP オプションの出力に対して効力を持つ。

.TP
.BI "\-\-stop\-address=" "address"
.\"O Stop displaying data at the specified address.  This affects the output
.\"O of the
.\"O .B \-d\c
.\"O ,
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O options.
データの表示終了点を指定したアドレスにする。これは \fB\-d\fP、 
\fB\-r\fP、 \fB\-s\fP オプションの出力に対して効力を持つ。

.TP
.B \-t
.TP
.B \-\-syms
.\"O Symbol Table.  Print the symbol table entries of the file.
.\"O This is similar to the information provided by the `\|\c
.\"O .B nm\c
.\"O \|' program.
ファイルのシンボルテーブルエントリを表示する。これは
.B nm
プログラムによって得られる情報とほぼ同じ。

.TP
.B \-T
.TP
.B \-\-dynamic\-syms
.\"O Dynamic Symbol Table.  Print the dynamic symbol table entries of the
.\"O file.  This is only meaningful for dynamic objects, such as certain
.\"O types of shared libraries.  This is similar to the information
.\"O provided by the `\|\c
.\"O .B nm\c
.\"O \|' program when given the
.\"O .B \-D (\-\-dynamic)
.\"O option.
ファイルの動的なシンボルテーブルエントリを表示する。これはある種の共有
ライブラリのように、動的なオブジェクトの場合にのみ意味を持つ。これは
.B nm
プログラムに
.IR \-D " (" \-\-dynamic ")"
オプションを指定した場合に得られる情報とほぼ同じ。

.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Print the version number of
.\"O .B objdump
.\"O and exit.
.B objdump
のバージョン番号を表示して終了する。

.TP
.B \-x
.TP
.B \-\-all\-headers
.\"O Display all available header information, including the symbol table and
.\"O relocation entries.  Using `\|\c
.\"O .B \-x\c
.\"O \|' is equivalent to specifying all of
.\"O `\|\c
.\"O .B \-a \-f \-h \-r \-t\c
.\"O \|'.
表示可能な全てのヘッダ情報を表示する。シンボルテーブル、リロケーション
エントリも表示する。
.B \-x
は
.B \-a \-f \-h \-r \-t
の全てを指定した場合と等価である。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .RB "`\|" binutils "\|'"
.\"O entry in 
.\"O .B
.\"O info\c
.\"O \&; 
.\"O .I
.\"O The GNU Binary Utilities\c
.\"O \&, Roland H. Pesch (October 1991); 
.\"O .BR nm "(" 1 ")."
.B info
の `\fB binutils \fP' エントリ、
.IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
Roland H. Pesch (October 1991)、
.BR nm "(" 1 ")"

.\"O .SH COPYING
.SH 著作権
Copyright (c) 1991, 92, 93, 94, 95, 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
