.\" Copyright (c) 1991 Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec 17 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 27 Oct 2000 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.\"WORD:	archive		書庫
.\"
.TH ranlib 1 "5 November 1991" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ranlib \- generate index to archive.
.SH 名前
ranlib \- 書庫のインデックスを作成する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.hy 0
.na
.B ranlib \c
.RB "[\|" \-v | \-V "\|]"
.I archive\c
\&
.ad b
.hy 1
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ranlib
.\"O generates an index to the contents of an archive, and
.\"O stores it in the archive.  The index lists each symbol defined by a
.\"O member of an archive that is a relocatable object file.  
.B ranlib
は書庫 (archive) の内容に関するインデックスを作成し、その書庫に書き込
む。インデックスはアーカイブのメンバー（リロケータブルなオブジェクトファ
イル）で定義されているシンボルを全てリストする。
.PP
.\"O You may use
.\"O .RB ` "nm \-s" '
.\"O or
.\"O .RB ` "nm \-\-print-armap" '
.\"O to list this index.
このリストを見るには
.RB ` "nm \-s" '
または
.RB ` "nm \-\-print\-armap" '
を用いれば良い。
.PP
.\"O An archive with such an index speeds up linking to the library, and
.\"O allows routines in the library to call each other without regard to
.\"O their placement in the archive.
このようなインデックスを持つ書庫は、ライブラリとしてリンクするときの動
作が高速になる。またライブラリの中のルーチンが（書庫内部での位置には関
係なく）お互いをコールすることができるようになる。
.PP
.\"O The GNU
.\"O .B ranlib
.\"O program is another form of GNU
.\"O .BR ar ;
.\"O running
.\"O .B ranlib
.\"O is completely equivalent to executing
.\"O .RB ` "ar \-s" '.
GNU
.B ranlib
プログラムは GNU
.B ar
の別名である。
.B ranlib
を実行するのと
.RB ` "ar \-s" '
とは完全に等価である。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Print the version number of
.\"O .B ranlib
.\"O and exit.
.B ranlib
のバージョン番号を表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .RB "`\|" binutils "\|'"
.\"O entry in 
.\"O .B
.\"O info\c
.\"O \&; 
.\"O .I
.\"O The GNU Binary Utilities\c
.\"O \&, Roland H. Pesch (October 1991); 
.\"O .BR ar "(" 1 "),"
.\"O .BR nm "(" 1 ")."
.B info
の `\fB binutils \fP' エントリ、
.IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
Roland H. Pesch (October 1991)、
.BR ar "(" 1 ")、"
.BR nm "(" 1 ")"


.\"O .SH COPYING
.SH 著作権
Copyright (c) 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
