.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec 24 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH strings 1 "25 June 1993" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O strings \- print the strings of printable characters in files
.SH 名前
strings \- ファイル中の表示可能な文字列を表示する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.hy 0
.na
.TP
.B strings
.RB "[\|" \-a | \-\c
.RB | \-\-all "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-f | \-\-print\-file\-name "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-o "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-\-help "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-v | \-\-version "\|]"  
.RB "[\|" \-n
.I min\-len\c
.RI | \-min\-len\c
.RB | "\-\-bytes="\c
.I min\-len\c
\&\|]
.RB "[\|" \-t
.I {o,x,d}\c
.RB "[\|" "\-\-target=\fIbfdname" "\|]"
.RB | "\-\-radix="\c
.I {o,x,d}\c
\&\|]
.I file\c
.ad b
.hy 1
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O For each
.\"O .I file
.\"O given, GNU \c
.\"O .B strings
.\"O prints the printable character sequences that are at least 4
.\"O characters long (or the number given with the options below) and are
.\"O followed by an unprintable character.  By default, it only prints the
.\"O strings from the initialized and loaded sections of object files; for
.\"O other types of files, it prints the strings from the whole file.
GNU
.B strings
は、与えられたそれぞれの
.I file
から表示可能なキャラクタの列を表示する。デフォルトでは 4 文字以上の長
さのものを、可能な限り表示するが、この長さは以下で説明するオプションに
よって変更可能である。ファイルがオブジェクトファイルの場合のデフォルト
では、初期化・ロードされたセクションからの文字だけを表示する。他のファ
イルについては、ファイル全体から文字列を探し、表示する。

.PP
.\"O .B strings
.\"O is mainly useful for determining the contents of non-text files.
.B strings
は主としてテキストファイル以外のファイル内容を判断するために用いられる。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O The long and short forms of options, shown here as alternatives, are
.\"O equivalent.
長いフォーマットと短いフォーマットが並べて書いてある場合は、それらは等
価である。

.TP
.B \-a
.TP
.B \-\-all
.TP
.B \-
.\"O Do not scan only the initialized and loaded sections of object files;
.\"O scan the whole files.
オブジェクトファイルから初期化・ロードされたセクションのみをスキャンす
るのではなく、ファイル全体をスキャンする。

.TP
.B \-f
.TP
.B \-\-print\-file\-name
.\"O Print the name of the file before each string.
それぞれの文字列の前にファイル名を表示する。

.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Print a summary of the options to
.\"O .B strings
.\"O on the standard output and exit.
.B strings
のオプションの要約を標準出力に表示して終了する。

.TP
.B \-v
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Print the version number
.\"O of
.\"O .B strings
.\"O on the standard output and exit.
.B strings
のバージョン番号を標準出力に表示して終了する。

.TP
.B "\-n \fImin\-len\fP"
.TP
.B "\-\fImin\-len\fP"
.TP
.B "\-bytes=\fImin\-len\fP"
.\"O Print sequences of characters that are at least
.\"O .I min\-len
.\"O characters long, instead of the default 4.
.I min\-len
以上の長さを持つ文字のシーケンスを表示する。デフォルトは 4。

.TP
.BR "\-t " {o,x,d}
.TP
.BR "\-\-radix=" {o,x,d}
.\"O Print the offset within the file before each string.  The single
.\"O character argument specifies the radix of the offset\(emoctal,
.\"O hexadecimal, or decimal.
それぞれの文字列の前にファイル中のオフセットを表示する。引数として与え
られる一文字で、オフセットの基数を （8, 16, 10) 進数で与えるように指定
する。

.TP
.BI "\-\-target=" "bfdname"
.\"O Specify an object code format other than your system's default format.
.\"O See 
.\"O .BR objdump ( 1 ),
.\"O for information on listing available formats.
オブジェクトコードのフォーマットを、システムのデフォルト以外のものに指
定する。指定できるフォーマットをリストするための方法については
.BR objdump ( 1 )
を見よ。

.TP
.B \-o
.\"O Like
.\"O .BR "\-t o" .
.B \-t o
と同じ。

.PP

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .RB "`\|" binutils "\|'"
.\"O entry in 
.\"O .B
.\"O info\c
.\"O \&; 
.\"O .I
.\"O The GNU Binary Utilities\c
.\"O \&, Roland H. Pesch (October 1991);
.\"O .BR ar ( 1 ),
.\"O .BR nm ( 1 ),
.\"O .BR objdump ( 1 ),
.\"O .BR ranlib ( 1 ).
.B info
の `\fB binutils \fP' エントリ、
.IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
Roland H. Pesch (October 1991)、
.BR ar "(" 1 ")、"
.BR nm "(" 1 ")、"
.BR objdump "(" 1 ")、"
.BR ranlib "(" 1 ")"

.\"O .SH COPYING
.SH 著作権
Copyright (c) 1993 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
