.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 1997 Free Software Foundation
.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec 24 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH strip 1 "5 November 1991" "cygnus support" "GNU Development Tools"
.de BP
.sp
.ti \-.2i
\(**
..

.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O strip \- Discard symbols from object files.
.SH 名前
strip \- オブジェクトファイルからシンボルを切り捨てる

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.hy 0
.na
.TP
.B strip
.RB "[\|" \-F\ \fIbfdname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-target=\fIbfdname\fP "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-I\ \fIbfdname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-input\-target=\fIbfdname\fP "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-O\ \fIbfdname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-output\-target=\fIbfdname\fP "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-R\ \fIsectionname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-remove\-section=\fIsectionname\fP "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-s\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-strip\-all "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-S\fR\ |\ \fB\-g\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-strip\-debug "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-\-strip\-unneeded\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-x\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-discard\-all "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-X\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-discard\-locals "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-K\ \fIsymbolname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-keep\-symbol=\fIsymbolname\fR "\|]" 
.RB "[\|" \-N\ \fIsymbolname\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-strip\-symbol=\fIsymbolname\fR "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-o\ \fIfile\f\R "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-p\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-preserve\-dates "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-v\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-verbose "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-V\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-version "\|]"
.RB "[\|" \-V\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-help "\|]"
.I objfile\c
\&.\|.\|.

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O GNU
.\"O .B strip
.\"O discards all symbols from the object files
.\"O .IR objfile .
.\"O The list of object files may include archives.
.\"O At least one object file must be given.
GNU
.B strip
はオブジェクトファイル
.I objfile
から全てのシンボルを切り捨てる。オブジェクトファイルのリストには書庫 
(archive) を指定することもできる。最低ひとつのオブジェクトファイルを指
定する必要がある。

.P
.\"O .B strip
.\"O modifies the files named in its argument,
.\"O rather than writing modified copies under different names.
.B strip
は修正した内容を別のファイルに書き出すのではなく、引き数に指
定されたファイルを直接修正する。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-F \fIbfdname"
.TP
.B "\-\-target=\fIbfdname"
.\"O Treat the original \fIobjfile\fP as a file with the object
.\"O code format \fIbfdname\fP, and rewrite it in the same format.
オリジナルの
.I objfile
のオブジェクトコードフォーマットを
.I bfdname
として取り扱う。また
.I bfdname
に指定されたフォーマットで書き戻す。

.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Show a summary of the options to
.\"O .B strip
.\"O and exit.
.B strip
のオプションの要約を表示して終了する。

.TP
.B "\-I \fIbfdname
.TP
.B "\-\-input\-target=\fIbfdname"
.\"O Treat the original \fIobjfile\fP as a file with the object
.\"O code format \fIbfdname\fP.
オリジナルの
.I objfile
のオブジェクトコードフォーマットを
.I bfdname
として取り扱う。

.TP
.B "\-O \fIbfdname\fP"
.TP
.B "\-\-output\-target=\fIbfdname"
.\"O Replace \fIobjfile\fP with a file in the output format \fIbfdname\fP.
.I objfile
を
.I bfdname
フォーマットの出力で書き換える。

.TP
.B "\-R \fIsectionname\fP"
.TP
.B "\-\-remove\-section=\fIsectionname"
.\"O Remove the named section from the file.  This option may be given more
.\"O than once.  Note that using this option inappropriately may make the
.\"O object file unusable.
ファイルから指定した名前のセクションを削除する。このオプションは複数指
定できる。このオプションを誤ってもちいると、オブジェクトファイルが使い
物にならなくなる可能性がある。

.TP
.B \-s
.TP
.B \-\-strip\-all
.\"O Remove all symbols.
全てのシンボルを削除する。

.TP
.B \-S
.TP
.B \-g
.TP
.B \-\-strip\-debug
.\"O Remove debugging symbols only.
デバッギングシンボルのみを削除する。

.TP
.B \-\-strip\-unneeded
.\"O Strip all symbols that are not needed for relocation processing.
リロケーション処理に不必要なシンボルを全て削除する。

.TP
.B \-N \fIsymbolname\fR
.TP
.B \-\-strip\-symbol=\fIsymbolname
.\"O Remove symbol \fIsymbolname\fP from the source file. This option
.\"O may be given more than once, and may be combined with other strip
.\"O options.
元のファイルから
.I symbolname
というシンボルを削除する。このオプションは複数用いることもできるし、他
のオプションと同時に指定することもできる。

.TP
.B \-o \fIfile\fR
.\"O Put the stripped output in \fIfile\fR, rather than replacing the
.\"O existing file.  When this argument is used, only one \fIobjfile\fR
.\"O argument may be specified.
strip 処理を行った結果を元のファイルと置き換えるのではなく、
.I file
に書き出す。この引数が用いられた場合には
.I objfile
に指定できる引数はひとつだけである。

.TP
.B \-p
.TP
.B \-\-preserve-dates
.\"O Preserve the access and modification dates of the file.
ファイルのアクセス時刻、修正時刻を変更しない。

.TP
.B \-x
.TP
.B \-\-discard\-all
.\"O Remove non-global symbols.
グローバルでないシンボルを削除する。

.TP
.B \-X
.TP
.B \-\-discard\-locals
.\"O Remove compiler-generated local symbols.
.\"O (These usually start with ``L'' or ``.''.)
コンパイラによって生成されたローカルなシンボルを削除する (これらは通常 
``L'' または ``.'' で始まる文字列である)。

.TP
.B \-K \fIsymbolname\fR, \fB\-\-keep\-symbol=\fIsymbolname
.\"O Copy only symbol \fIsymbolname\fP from the source file. This option
.\"O may be given more than once.
シンボル
.I symbolname
だけを元のファイルからコピーする。このオプションは複数指定することがで
きる。

.TP
.B \-N \fIsymbolname\fR, \fB\-\-strip\-symbol=\fIsymbolname
.\"O Do not copy symbol \fIsymbolname\fP from the source file. This option
.\"O may be given more than once, and may be combined with strip options
.\"O other than \fB\-K\fR.
シンボル
.I symbolname
を元のファイルからコピーしない。このオプションは複数指定することができ、
また
.B \-K
以外の他のオプションと組み合わせることもできる。

.TP
.B \-v
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
.\"O Verbose output: list all object files modified.  In the case of
.\"O archives,
.\"O .B "strip \-V"
.\"O lists all members of the archive.
饒舌出力モード。変更された全てのオブジェクトファイルをリストする。書庫
の場合に
.B "strip \-v"
とすると、書庫内のメンバー全てをリストする。

.TP
.B \-V
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Show the version number for \fBstrip\fP and exit.
.B strip
のバージョン番号を表示して終了する。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .RB "`\|" binutils "\|'" 
.\"O entry in 
.\"O .BR info ;
.\"O .IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
.\"O Roland H. Pesch (October 1991).
.B info
の `\fB binutils \fP' エントリ、
.IR "The GNU Binary Utilities" ,
Roland H. Pesch (October 1991)

.\"O .SH COPYING
.SH 著作権
Copyright (c) 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
