.\" Copyright (c) 1995
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software developed by the Computer Systems
.\" Engineering group at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory under DARPA contract
.\" BG 91-66 and contributed to Berkeley.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Dec 14 18:22:51 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd December 14, 1995
.Dt LOGIN 3
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm login ,
.Nm logout ,
.Nm logwtmp
.\"O .Nd login utility functions
.Nd ログインユーティリティ関数
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Fd #include <utmp.h>
.Ft void
.Fn login "struct utmp *ut"
.Ft int
.Fn logout "const char *line"
.Ft void
.Fn logwtmp "const char *line" "const char *name" "const char *host"
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn login ,
.\"O .Fn logout ,
.\"O and
.\"O .Fn logwtmp
.\"O functions operate on the database of current users in
.\"O .Pa /var/run/utmp
.\"O and on the logfile
.\"O .Pa /var/log/wtmp
.\"O of logins and logouts.
関数
.Fn login ,
.Fn logout ,
.Fn logwtmp
は、
.Pa /var/run/utmp
にある現在のユーザーのデータベースと、
ログイン・ログアウトのログファイル
.Pa /var/log/wtmp
を操作する。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn login
.\"O function updates the
.\"O .Pa /var/run/utmp
.\"O and
.\"O .Pa /var/log/wtmp
.\"O files with user information contained in
.\"O .Fa ut .
.Fn login
関数は、構造体
.Fa ut
に含まれるユーザー情報でファイル
.Pa /var/run/utmp
と
.Pa /var/log/wtmp
を更新する。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn logout
.\"O function removes the entry from
.\"O .Pa /var/run/utmp
.\"O corresponding to the device
.\"O .Fa line .
.Fn logout
関数は、デバイス
.Fa line
に対応するエントリを
.Pa /var/run/utmp
から削除する。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Fn logwtmp
.\"O function adds an entry to
.\"O .Pa /var/log/wtmp .
.\"O Since
.\"O .Fn login
.\"O will add the appropriate entry for
.\"O .Pa /var/log/wtmp
.\"O during a login,
.\"O .Fn logwtmp
.\"O is usually used for logouts.
.Fn logwtmp
関数は、
.Pa /var/log/wtmp
にエントリを追加する。
.Fn login
は、ログインのときに適切なエントリを
.Pa /var/log/wtmp
を追加するので、
.Fn logwtmp
は通常、ログアウトのために使われる。
.\"O .Sh RETURN VALUES
.Sh 返り値
.\"O .Fn logout
.\"O returns non-zero if it was able to find and delete an entry for
.\"O .Fa line ,
.\"O and zero if there is no entry for
.\"O .Fa line
.\"O in
.\"O .Pa /var/run/utmp .
.Fn logout
は、
.Pa /var/run/utmp
で
.Fa line
というエントリが見つかったり削除できたりした場合、0 以外を返す。
.Fa line
というエントリがない場合、0 を返す。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width /var/run/wtmp -compact
.It Pa /dev/\(**
.It Pa /etc/ttys
.It Pa /var/run/utmp
.It Pa /var/log/wtmp
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr utmp 5
