.\"$Id: groupadd.8,v 1.10 2002/03/09 11:16:14 ankry Exp $
.\" Copyright 1991, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat 21 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH GROUPADD 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O groupadd \- Create a new group
groupadd \- 新しいグループを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBgroupadd\fR [\fB-g\fI gid \fR[\fB-o\fR]] \fIgroup\fR
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The \fBgroupadd\fR command
.\"O creates a new group account using the values specified on the
.\"O command line and the default values from the system.
.\"O The new group will be entered into the system files as needed.
.\"O The options which apply to the \fBgroupadd\fR command are
\fBgroupadd\fR コマンドは、
コマンドライン上で指定された値と
システムのデフォルト値とを用いて新しいグループを作成する。
新しいグループが必要に応じてシステムファイルに記入される。
\fBgroupadd\fR コマンドに指定できるオプションは次の通り。
.IP "\fB-g \fIgid\fR"
.\"O The numerical value of the group's ID.
.\"O This value must be unique, unless the \fB-o\fR option is used.
.\"O The value must be non-negative.
.\"O The default is to use the smallest ID value greater than 99 and
.\"O greater than every other group.
.\"O Values between 0 and 99 are typically reserved for system accounts.
新規グループの ID 番号。
この値は、\fB-o\fR オプションを用いる場合を除き、他と重複してはならない。
また非負値でなければならない。
デフォルトでは、99 および他のあらゆる既存グループの ID よりも大きい、
最小の数値となる。
0 から 99 までの値は、
通常システム用のアカウントに予約されている。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/group \- group account information
/etc/group \- グループアカウント情報
.br
.\"O /etc/gshadow \- secure group account information
/etc/gshadow \- 安全なグループアカウント情報
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR chfn (1),
.BR chsh (1),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR groupdel (8),
.BR groupmod (8),
.BR useradd (8),
.BR userdel (8),
.BR usermod (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
