.\"$Id: lastlog.8,v 1.10 2001/01/27 02:55:52 kloczek Exp $
.\" Copyright 1992, Phillip Street and Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"	@(#)lastlog.8	3.3	08:24:58	29 Sep 1993 (National Guard Release)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Oct 14 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Jan 12 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Mon Mar  4 2002 by kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Modified Sat 21 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH LASTLOG 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O lastlog \- examine lastlog file
lastlog \- lastlog ファイルを調べる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .TP 8
\fBlastlog\fR [<\fB-u\fR|\fB--user\fR> \fIlogin-name\fR]
[<\fB-t\fR|\fB--time\fR> \fIdays\fR] [<\fB-h\fR|\fB--help\fR>]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .PP
.\"O \fBlastlog\fR formats and prints the contents of the last login log
.\"O \fI/var/log/lastlog\fR file . The \fBlogin-name\fR, \fBport\fR, and \fBlast
.\"O login time\fR will be printed. The default (no flags) causes lastlog entries
.\"O to be printed, sorted by the numerical UID.
\fBlastlog\fR は最終ログインの記録ファイル
\fI/var/log/lastlog\fR の内容を整形して表示する。
\fBログイン名\fR・\fBポート\fR・\fB最終ログイン時刻\fR、が表示される。
オプションを指定しなかった場合、デフォルトでは
lastlog エントリを UID の数値でソートして表示する。
.TP
.\"O \fB-u\fR, \fB--user\fR \fIlogin-name\fR will cause the lastlog record for
.\"O \fIlogin-name\fR only to be printed
\fB-u\fR, \fB--user\fR \fIlogin-name\fR
\fIlogin-name\fR の記録だけを表示する。
.TP
.\"O \fB-t\fR, \fB--time\fR \fIdays\fR will cause only the lastlogins more recent
.\"O \than fIdays\fR to be printed
\fB-t\fR, \fB--time\fR \fIdays\fR
最近 \fIdays\fR 日以内の最終ログインを表示する。
.TP
.\"O \fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR print a one-line help message and exit.
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
オンラインヘルプを表示して終了する。
.\"O .BR
.\"O .TP
.PP
.\"O The \fB-t\fR flag overrides the use of \fB-u\fR.
\fB-u\fR フラグを用いると \fB-t\fR は無視される。
.\"nakano というのが実際の動作のように見えるのだが。
.PP
.\"O If the user has never logged in the message \fB"**Never logged in**"\fR will
.\"O be displayed instead of the port and time.
一度もログインしていないユーザに対しては、
ポートと時刻の代わりに
\fB"**Never logged in**"\fR
というメッセージが表示される。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /var/log/lastlog \- lastlog logging file
/var/log/lastlog \- lastlog 記録ファイル
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O Large gaps in uid numbers will cause the lastlog program to run longer with
.\"O no output to the screen (i.e. if mmdf=800 and last uid=170, program will
.\"O appear to hang as it processes uid 171-799).
UID 番号に大きな飛びがあると、
lastlog プログラムは長時間画面に何も出力しないまま
実行を続ける (例えば mmdf が 800 で最後の UID が 170 の場合、
UID が 171-799 の間プログラムは何も出力しないので、
ハングしたように見える)。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
.BR
Phillip Street
