.\"$Id: logoutd.8,v 1.7 2001/01/25 10:43:50 kloczek Exp $
.\" Copyright 1991, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Modified Sat 21 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH LOGOUTD 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O logoutd \- Enforce login time restrictions
logoutd \- ログイン時間の制限を実施する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B logoutd
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B logoutd
.\"O enforces the login time and port restrictions specified in
.\"O .IR /etc/porttime .
.\"O .B logoutd
.\"O should be started from \fI/etc/rc\fR.
.\"O The \fI/etc/utmp\fR file is scanned periodically and each user name
.\"O is checked to see if the named user is permitted on the named port
.\"O at the current time.
.\"O Any login session which is violating the restrictions in \fI/etc/porttime\fR
.\"O is terminated.
.B logoutd
は
.I /etc/porttime
に記されているログイン時間・ポートに対する制限を実施する。
.B logoutd
は \fI/etc/rc\fR によって起動されるようにする。
\fI/etc/utmp\fR ファイルが定期的にスキャンされ、
ログインしている各ユーザが
\fI/etc/porttime\fR 中でのそのユーザの許可
(ポートと時刻) に反していないか調べる。
\fI/etc/porttime\fR の制限に反するログインセッションは終了させられる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/porttime \- login and port permissions
/etc/porttime \- ログインとポートの許可
.br
.\"O /etc/utmp \- current login sessions
/etc/utmp \- 現在のログインセッション
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
