.\"$Id: pwck.8,v 1.9 2002/03/08 04:39:12 kloczek Exp $
.\" Copyright 1992, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated  Sun 3 Mar 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Sun 22 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.\"O .TH PWCK 1
.TH PWCK 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pwck \- verify integrity of password files
pwck \- パスワードファイルが正しいかどうか検査する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBpwck\fR [\fB-sr\fR] [\fIpasswd\fR \fIshadow\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBpwck\fR verifies the integrity of the system authentication information.
.\"O All entries in the \fI/etc/passwd\fR and \fI/etc/shadow\fR are checked to
.\"O see that the entry has the proper format and valid data in each field.
.\"O The user is prompted to delete entries that are improperly formatted or
.\"O which have other incorrectable errors.
\fBpwck\fR コマンドはシステムの認証情報が正しいかどうか検査する。
\fI/etc/passwd\fR と \fI/etc/shadow\fR
各ファイルのすべてのエントリに対し、
各フィールドの書式が正しいか、
そのデータが有効なものかどうかを検証する。
書式が正しくないエントリや、
修正不能な誤りを含むエントリは削除するようプロンプトを出す。
.P
.\"O Checks are made to verify that each entry has
各々のエントリに対して
.sp
.in +.5i
.\"O - the correct number of fields
- フィールドの数が正しいか
.br
.\"O - a unique user name
- ユーザ名に重複がないか
.br
.\"O - a valid user and group identifier
- ユーザやグループの ID が正しいか
.br
.\"O - a valid primary group
- プライマリグループが正しいか
.br
.\"O - a valid home directory
- ホームディレクトリが正しいか
.br
.\"O - a valid login shell
- ログインシェルが正しいか
.in -.5i
.sp
がチェックされる。
.P
.\"O The checks for correct number of fields and unique user name are fatal.
.\"O If the entry has the wrong number of fields, the user will be prompted to
.\"O delete the entire line.
.\"O If the user does not answer affirmatively, all further checks are bypassed.
.\"O An entry with a duplicated user name is prompted for deletion, but the
.\"O remaining checks will still be made.
.\"O All other errors are warning and the user is encouraged to run the
.\"O \fBusermod\fR command to correct the error.
フィールドの数が間違っていたり、
グループ名が重複しているのは致命的なエラーである。
フィールドの数が正しくない場合、
ユーザーはそのエントリ行を削除するよう促される。
削除に同意しなかった場合は、それ以降のチェックは行われない。
重複したグループ名があった場合も削除を促されるが、
この場合は削除しなくてもそれ以降のチェックは続行される。
他のすべてのエラーに対しては警告がなされる。
\fBusermod\fR コマンドを実行してそのエラーを修正すると良いだろう。
.P
.\"O The commands which operate on the \fI/etc/passwd\fR file are not able to
.\"O alter corrupted or duplicated entries.
.\"O \fBpwck\fR should be used in those circumstances to remove the offending
.\"O entry.
\fI/etc/passwd\fR ファイルを操作するコマンドは、
壊れたエントリや重複したエントリを変更できない。
そのような際に誤りのあるエントリを削除するには
\fBpwck\fR を用いるとよい。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O By default, \fBpwck\fR operates on the files \fI/etc/passwd\fR and
.\"O \fI/etc/shadow\fR.
.\"O The user may select alternate files with the \fIpasswd\fR and \fIshadow\fR
.\"O parameters.
.\"O Additionally, the user may execute the command in read-only mode by
.\"O specifying the \fB-r\fR flag.
.\"O This causes all questions regarding changes to be answered \fBno\fR
.\"O without user intervention.
.\"O \fBpwck\fR can also sort entries in \fI/etc/passwd\fR and \fI/etc/shadow\fR
.\"O by UID. To run it in sort mode pass it \fB-s\fR flag. No checks are
.\"O performed then, it just sorts.
デフォルトでは \fBpwck\fR は \fI/etc/passwd\fR ファイルと
\fI/etc/shadow\fR に対して動作する。
\fIpasswd\fR パラメータと \fIshadow\fR パラメータを用いて、
別のファイルを選択することもできる。
さらに \fB-r\fR フラグを指定すれば、
リードオンリーモードでコマンドを実行することもできる。
この場合、変更を行うかどうかはユーザへ問い合わされず、
自動的に \fBno\fR と回答される。
.B pwck
は
.I /etc/passwd
と
.I /etc/shadow
のエントリを UID でソートすることもできる。
ソートモードで動作させるには \fB-s\fR フラグを与える。
この場合チェックは行われず、単にソートするだけである。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/passwd \- user account information
/etc/passwd \- ユーザーアカウント情報
.br
.\"O /etc/shadow \- encrypted password information
/etc/shadow \- 暗号化されたパスワード情報
.br
.\"O /etc/group \- group information
/etc/group \- グループ情報
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR group (5),
.BR passwd (5),
.BR shadow (5),
.BR usermod (8)
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O The \fBpwck\fR command exits with the following values:
\fBpwck\fR コマンドは以下の値を返して終了する:
.IP 0 5
.\"O Success
成功
.IP 1 5
.\"O Syntax Error
構文エラー
.IP 2 5
.\"O One or more bad password entries
誤ったパスワードエントリーが存在する
.IP 3 5
.\"O Cannot open password files
パスワードファイルをオープンできない
.IP 4 5
.\"O Cannot lock password files
パスワードファイルをロックできない
.IP 5 5
.\"O Cannot update password files
パスワードファイルを更新出来ない
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
