.\"$Id: pwconv.8,v 1.10 2002/03/08 04:39:12 kloczek Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Dec  1 20:09:17 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Modified Sun 22 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PWCONV 8 "26 Sep 1997"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pwconv, pwunconv, grpconv, grpunconv \- convert to and from shadow passwords and groups.
pwconv, pwunconv, grpconv, grpunconv \- パスワード・グループの shadow 化と、通常ファイルへの逆変換
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pwconv
.br
.B pwunconv
.br
.B grpconv
.br
.B grpunconv
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O These four programs all operate on the normal and shadow password and
.\"O group files:
.\"O .IR /etc/passwd ", " /etc/group ", " /etc/shadow ", and " /etc/gshadow .
これら 4 つのプログラムは、
通常のパスワードファイル・グループファイルと、
shadow 化されたパスワードファイル・グループファイルである
.IR /etc/passwd ", " /etc/group ", " /etc/shadow ", " /etc/gshadow
を操作する。

.\"O .B pwconv
.\"O .RI "creates " shadow " from " passwd " and an optionally existing " shadow .
.\"O .B pwunconv
.\"O .RI "creates " passwd " from " passwd " and " shadow " and then removes " shadow .
.\"O .B grpconv
.\"O .RI "creates " gshadow " from " group " and an optionally existing " gshadow .
.\"O .B grpunconv
.\"O .RI "creates " group " from " group " and " gshadow " and then removes " gshadow .
\fBpwconv\fR は \fIpasswd\fR から \fIshadow\fR を作成する
(すでに存在する場合は \fIshadow\fR の情報も用いる)。
\fBpwunconv\fR は \fIpasswd\fR と \fIshadow\fR から
\fIpasswd\fR を作成し、\fIshadow\fR を削除する。
\fBgrpconv\fR は \fIgroup\fR から \fIgshadow\fR を作成する
(すでに存在する場合は \fIgshadow\fR の情報も用いる)。
\fBgrpunconv\fR は \fIgroup\fR と \fIgshadow\fR から
\fIgroup\fR を作成し、\fIgshadow\fR を削除する。

.\"O Each program acquires the necessary locks before conversion.
各プログラムは変換前に、必要なロックを要求する。

.\"O .BR pwconv " and " grpconv
.\"O are similiar.  First, entries in the shadowed file which don't exist
.\"O in the main file are removed.  Then, shadowed entries which don't have
.\"O `x' as the password in the main file are updated.  Any missing
.\"O shadowed entries are added.  Finally, passwords in the main file are
.\"O replaced with `x'.  These programs can be used for initial conversion
.\"O as well to update the shadowed file if the main file is edited by
.\"O hand.
.B pwconv 
と
.B grpconv
とは以下の点で類似している。
まず、shadow 化ファイルにあるエントリのうち、
通常ファイルにないものは、削除される。
また、shadow 化ファイルにあるエントリのうち、
通常ファイルでパスワードが `x' になっていないものは、更新される。
最後に、通常ファイルに書かれたパスワードは `x' に置き換えられる。
これらのプログラムは、初めて変換を行うときにも、
また通常のファイルを手動で編集した際に、
shadow 化ファイルを更新するときにも利用できる。

.\"O .B pwconv
.\"O will use the values of
.\"O .BR PASS_MIN_DAYS ", " PASS_MAX_DAYS ", and " PASS_WARN_AGE
.\"O from
.\"O .I /etc/login.defs
.\"O when adding new entries to
.\"O .IR /etc/shadow .
.I /etc/shadow
に新しいエントリを追加するとき、
.B pwconv
は
.I /etc/login.defs
の
.BR PASS_MIN_DAYS ", " PASS_MAX_DAYS ", " PASS_WARN_AGE
の値を使う。

.\"O .RB "Likewise, " pwunconv " and " grpunconv
.\"O are similiar.  Passwords in the main file are updated from the
.\"O shadowed file.  Entries which exist in the main file but not in the
.\"O shadowed file are left alone.  Finally, the shadowed file is removed.
同じように、
.B pwunconv
と
.B grpunconv
とは以下の点で類似している。
通常ファイルのパスワードは、
shadow 化ファイルのもので更新される。
通常ファイルにあるエントリは、
shadow 化ファイルにはそのエントリがなくても、
そのまま置かれ続ける。
最後に、 shadow 化ファイルは削除される。

.\"O Some password aging information is lost by
.\"O .BR pwunconv .
.\"O It will convert what it can.
パスワードの有効期限情報の一部は、
.B pwunconv 
によって失われる。変換できるものは変換される。
.\"O .SH "BUGS"
.SH バグ
.\"O Errors in the password or group files (such as invalid or duplicate
.\"O entries) may cause these programs to loop forever or fail in other
.\"O strange ways.  Please run \fBpwck\fR and \fBgrpck\fR to correct any
.\"O such errors before converting to or from shadow passwords or groups.
(不正なエントリや重複したエントリといった)
エラーがパスワードファイルやグループファイルにあると、
プログラムは永遠にループしたり、おかしな形で失敗するかもしれない。
shadow パスワード・グループへの変換や
shadow 化ファイルからの逆変換を行う前に、
\fBpwck\fR と \fBgrpck\fR を実行してエラーを修正すること。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR login.defs (5),
.BR grpck (8),
.BR pwck (8)
