.\"$Id: sulogin.8,v 1.8 2002/03/08 04:39:12 kloczek Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 - 1992, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Modified Sun 22 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SULOGIN 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sulogin \- Single-user login
sulogin \- シングルユーザ login
.\"O .SH SYNTAX
.SH 書式
\fBsulogin\fR [\fItty-device\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B sulogin
.\"O is invoked by \fBinit\fR prior to allowing the user
.\"O access to the system when in single user mode.
.\"O This feature may only be available on certain systems where
.\"O \fBinit\fR has been modified accordingly, or where the
.\"O \fB/etc/inittab\fR has an entry for a single user login.
.B sulogin
は、シングルユーザモードの時、
ユーザがシステムにアクセス可能となる前に、
\fI/etc/init\fR によって起動される。
この機能は、\fBinit\fR が適切に変更されているシステムか、
あるいは \fB/etc/inittab\fR にシングルユーザ login
のエントリがあるシステムでのみ利用できる。
.PP
.\"O The user is prompted
次のようなプロンプトが出る。
.IP "" .5i
Type control-d to proceed with normal startup,
.br
(or give root password for system maintenance):
.PP
.\"O Input and output will be performed with the standard file
.\"O descriptors unless the optional device name argument is provided.
オプションのデバイス名引数が指定された場合を除き、
標準のファイルディスクリプタを用いて入出力を行なう。
.PP
.\"O If the user enters the correct root password, a login session
.\"O is initiated.
.\"O When \fBEOF\fR is pressed instead, the system enters multi-user
.\"O mode.
ユーザが正しい root のパスワードを入力した場合は、
ログインセッションが開始される。
\fBEOF\fR が押された場合は、
システムはマルチユーザモードに入る。
.PP
.\"O After the user exits the single-user shell, or presses \fBEOF\fR,
.\"O the system begins the initialization process required to enter
.\"O multi-user mode.
ユーザがシングルユーザシェルを抜けた、
あるいは (シェルに入る前に) \fBEOF\fR を押した後には、
システムはマルチユーザモードに入るために必要な初期化処理を開始する。
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O .PP
.\"O This command can only be used if \fBinit\fR has been modified to call
.\"O \fBsulogin\fR instead of \fB/bin/sh\fR,
.\"O or if the user has set the \fIinittab\fR to support a single user
.\"O login.
.\"O For example, the line
このコマンドが利用できるようにするには、
\fBinit\fR が \fB/bin/sh\fR ではなく
\fBsulogin\fR を呼ぶようになっているか、
または
\fIinittab\fR
中にシングルユーザログインに対する設定がされている必要がある。
例えば、
.br
.sp 1
co:s:respawn:/etc/sulogin /dev/console
.br
.sp 1
.\"O should execute the sulogin command in single user mode.
という行を書いておけば、
シングルユーザモードでは sulogin コマンドが実行される。
.PP
.\"O As complete an environment as possible is created.
.\"O However, various devices may be unmounted or uninitialized and many 
.\"O of the user commands may be unavailable or nonfunctional as a result.
可能な限り完全な環境が提供される。
しかし、
様々なデバイスがマウントされていなかったり初期化されていなかったりするため、
多くのユーザコマンドが使えなかったり機能しないかもしれない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/passwd \- user account information
/etc/passwd \- ユーザアカウント情報
.br
.\"O /etc/shadow \- encrypted passwords and age information
/etc/shadow \- 暗号化されたパスワードと有効期限の情報
.br
.\"O /.profile \- initialization script for single user shell
/.profile \- シングルユーザシェル用の初期化スクリプト
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1),
.BR sh (1),
.BR init (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
