.\"$Id: useradd.8,v 1.7 2002/09/22 21:04:17 jm Exp $
.\" Copyright 1991 - 1994, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Nov 20 17:42:39 JST 1996
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya 
.\" Updated Mon Mar  5 JST 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Modified Sun 22 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        initial group           主グループ
.\"WORD:        supplementary group     補助グループ
.\"
.TH USERADD 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O useradd \- Create a new user or update default new user information
useradd \- 新規ユーザの作成・新規ユーザのデフォルト情報の更新
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.TP 8
\fBuseradd\fR [\fB-c\fR \fIcomment\fR] [\fB-d\fR \fIhome_dir\fR]
.br
[\fB-e\fR \fIexpire_date\fR] [\fB-f\fR \fIinactive_time\fR]
.br
[\fB-g\fR \fIinitial_group\fR] [\fB-G\fR \fIgroup\fR[,...]]
.br
[\fB-m\fR [\fB-k\fR \fIskeleton_dir\fR]] [\fB-o\fR] [\fB-p\fR \fIpasswd\fR]
.br
[\fB-s\fR \fIshell\fR] [\fB-u\fR \fIuid\fR] \fIlogin\fR
.TP 8
\fBuseradd\fR \fB-D\fR [\fB-g\fI default_group\fR] [\fB-b\fI default_home\fR]
.br
[\fB-e\fI default_expire_date\fR] [\fB-f\fI default_inactive\fR]
.br
[\fB-s\fI default_shell\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .SS Creating New Users
.SS 新規ユーザの作成
.\"O When invoked without the \fB-D\fR option, the \fBuseradd\fR command
.\"O creates a new user account using the values specified on the
.\"O command line and the default values from the system.
.\"O The new user account will be entered into the system files as needed,
.\"O the home directory will be created, and initial files copied, depending
.\"O on the command line options.
.\"O The options which apply to the \fBuseradd\fR command are:
\fB-D\fR オプションなしで実行された場合、
\fBuseradd\fR コマンドは
コマンドラインの値とデフォルトの設定値をもとに
新規ユーザのアカウントを作成する。
コマンドラインオプションに応じて、
新規ユーザのアカウントが必要なシステムファイルに追加され、
ホームディレクトリが作成され、
設定ファイルがコピーされる。
\fBuseradd\fR コマンドのオプションは次の通り。
.IP "\fB-c \fIcomment\fR"
.\"O The new user's password file comment field.
パスワードファイルに追加する新規ユーザのコメントフィールド。
.IP "\fB-d \fIhome_dir\fR"
.\"O The new user will be created using \fIhome_dir\fR as the value for
.\"O the user's login directory.
.\"O The default is to append the \fIlogin\fR name to \fIdefault_home\fR
.\"O and use that as the login directory name.
新規ユーザのログインディレクトリを \fIhome_dir\fR にする。
デフォルトでは \fIlogin\fR を
\fIdefault_home\fR に付け加えたものがログインディレクトリとなる。
.IP "\fB-e \fIexpire_date\fR"
.\"O The date on which the user account will be disabled.
.\"O The date is specified in the format \fIYYYY-MM-DD\fR.
ユーザアカウントが使用不能になる日付。
日付は \fIYYYY-MM-DD\fR という書式で指定する。
.IP "\fB-f \fIinactive_days\fR"
.\"O The number of days after a password expires until the account
.\"O is permanently disabled.
.\"O A value of 0 disables the account as soon as the password has
.\"O expired, and a value of -1 disables the feature.
.\"O The default value is -1.
パスワードの使用期限が切れてからアカウントが永久に使用不能になるまでの日数。
0 にすると、
パスワードの期限が切れると同時にこのアカウントは使用不能になる。
-1 にするとこの機能が無効になる。デフォルト値は -1。
.IP "\fB-g \fIinitial_group\fR"
.\"O The group name or number of the user's initial login group.
.\"O The group name must exist.  A group number must refer to an
.\"O already existing group.
.\"O The default group number is 1 or whatever is specified in
.\"O \fI/etc/default/useradd\fR.
ユーザの属する主グループのグループ名または ID。
グループ名はすでに存在していなければならない。
グループ ID は既存のグループに対応するものでなければならない。
デフォルトのグループ ID は 1 か、
または \fI/etc/default/useradd\fR
で指定されているものがあればそれに従う。
.IP "\fB-G \fIgroup,[...]\fR"
.\"O A list of supplementary groups which the user is also a member
.\"O of.
.\"O Each group is separated from the next by a comma, with no
.\"O intervening whitespace.
.\"O The groups are subject to the same restrictions as the group
.\"O given with the \fB-g\fR option.
.\"O The default is for the user to belong only to the initial group.
ユーザの属する補助グループ (supplementary groups) のリスト。
グループはコンマで区切り、間に空白を入れてはならない。
指定できるグループには \fB-g\fR オプションと同様の制限がある。
デフォルトでは、ユーザは主グループのみに属する。
.IP \fB-m\fR
.\"O The user's home directory will be created if it does not exist.
.\"O The files contained in \fIskeleton_dir\fR will be copied to the
.\"O home directory if the \fB-k\fR option is used, otherwise the
.\"O files contained in \fI/etc/skel\fR will be used instead.
.\"O Any directories contained in \fIskeleton_dir\fR or \fI/etc/skel\fR
.\"O will be created in the user's home directory as well.
.\"O The \fB-k\fR option is only valid in conjunction with the \fB-m\fR
.\"O option.
.\"O The default is to not create the directory and to not copy any
.\"O files.
ホームディレクトリが存在しない場合には、ホームディレクトリを作成する。
\fB-k\fR オプションを同時に指定すると \fIskeleton_dir\fR 以下のファイルが、
指定しないと \fI/etc/skel\fR 以下のファイルが、
ホームディレクトリにコピーされる。
ホームディレクトリには、
\fIskeleton_dir\fR または \fI/etc/skel\fR
に含まれるすべてのディレクトリも作成される。
\fB-k\fR オプションは、
\fB-m\fR オプションとともに使われる場合のみ有効である。
デフォルトでは、ホームディレクトリを作らず、ファイルのコピーもしない。
.IP "\fB-o\fR"
.\"O Allow create user with duplicate (non-unique) UID.
重複した (固有でない) UID でユーザを作成できるようにする。
.IP "\fB-p \fIpasswd\fR"
.\"O The encrypted password, as returned by \fBcrypt\fR(3).
.\"O The default is to disable the account.
\fBcrypt\fR(3) の返り値である暗号化パスワード。
デフォルトでは、アカウントは使えない状態となる。
.IP "\fB-s \fIshell\fR"
.\"O The name of the user's login shell.
.\"O The default is to leave this field blank, which causes the system
.\"O to select the default login shell.
ユーザのログインシェルの名前。
デフォルトではこのフィールドは空白となり、
システムがデフォルトのログインシェルを選ぶ。
.IP "\fB-u \fIuid\fR"
.\"O The numerical value of the user's ID.
.\"O This value must be unique, unless the \fI-o\fR option is used.
.\"O The value must be non-negative.
.\"O The default is to use the smallest ID value greater than 99 and
.\"O greater than every other user.
.\"O Values between 0 and 99 are typically reserved for system accounts.
ユーザの ID 番号。
この値は、\fB-o\fR オプションを用いる場合を除き、他と重複してはならない。
また非負値でなくてはならない。
デフォルトでは、99 および他のあらゆる既存ユーザの ID よりも大きい、
最小の数値となる。
0 から 99 までの値は、
通常システム用のアカウントに予約されている。
.\"O .SS Changing the default values
.SS デフォルト値の変更
.\"O When invoked with the \fB-D\fR option, \fBuseradd\fR will either
.\"O display the current default values, or update the default values
.\"O from the command line.
.\"O The valid options are
\fB-D\fR オプションを指定すると、
\fBuseradd\fR は現在のデフォルト値を表示するか、
またはオプションで与えられた値に応じてデフォルト値を変更する。
使用可能なオプションは次の通り。
.IP "\fB-b \fIdefault_home\fR"
.\"O The initial path prefix for a new user's home directory.
.\"O The user's name will be affixed to the end of \fIdefault_home\fR
.\"O to create the new directory name if the \fB-d\fI option is not
.\"O used when creating a new account.
新規ユーザのホームディレクトリのパスのプレフィックス。
新規ユーザアカウントの作成時に \fB-d\fI オプションが指定されないと、
\fIdefault_home\fR の後にユーザ名を付け加えたものが
新規ディレクトリ名として使われる。
.IP "\fB-e \fIdefault_expire_date\fR"
.\"O The date on which the user account is disabled.
ユーザアカウントが使用不能となる日付。
.IP "\fB-f \fIdefault_inactive\fR"
.\"O The number of days after a password has expired before the
.\"O account will be disabled.
パスワードの使用期限が切れてからアカウントが使用不能となるまでの日数。
.IP "\fB-g \fIdefault_group\fR"
.\"O The group name or ID for a new user's initial group.
.\"O The named group must exist, and a numerical group ID must have
.\"O an existing entry .
新規ユーザの属する主グループのグループ名またはグループ ID。
グループ名はすでに存在するものでなければならない。
グループ ID は既存のグループに対応するものでなければならない。
.IP "\fB-s \fIdefault_shell\fR"
.\"O The name of the new user's login shell.
.\"O The named program will be used for all future new user accounts.
新規ユーザのログインシェル。
指定されたプログラムは、
今後作られるすべての新規ユーザアカウントに適用される。
.PP
.\"O If no options are specified, \fBuseradd\fR displays the current
.\"O default values.
オプションを指定しないと、
\fBuseradd\fR は現在のデフォルト値を表示する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The system administrator is responsible for placing the default
.\"O user files in the \fI/etc/skel\fR directory.
\fI/etc/skel\fR ディレクトリにデフォルトのユーザファイルを置くのは
システム管理者の行うべき作業である。
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O You may not add a user to an NIS group.
.\"O This must be performed on the NIS server.
NIS のグループにユーザを加えてはならない。
これは必ず NIS サーバ上で行うこと。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/passwd \- user account information
/etc/passwd \- ユーザアカウント情報
.br
.\"O /etc/shadow \- secure user account information
/etc/shadow \- 安全なユーザアカウント情報
.br
.\"O /etc/group \- group information
/etc/group \- グループ情報
.br
.\"O /etc/default/useradd \- default information
/etc/default/useradd \- デフォルト情報
.br
.\"O /etc/skel \- directory containing default files
/etc/skel \- ファイルの雛形が置かれるディレクトリ
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR chfn (1),
.BR chsh (1),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR crypt (3),
.BR groupadd (8),
.BR groupdel (8),
.BR groupmod (8),
.BR userdel (8),
.BR usermod (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
