.\" Copyright (c) 1994, 1995 Jacques Gelinas (jacques@solucorp.qc.ca)
.\" Copyright (c) 1995, 1999 Bjorn Ekwall (bj0rn@blox.se)
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the base distribution directory
.\"
.\" Translated Sun Aug 15 10:53:46 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Thu 12 Oct 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat 5 Jan 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 24 Apr 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Sun 23 Feb 2003 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH DEPMOD 8 "January 26, 2002" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O depmod \- handle dependency descriptions for loadable kernel modules
.SH 名前
depmod \- ローダブルカーネルモジュールの依存関係の記述を扱う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B depmod
[\-aA] [\-ehnqrsuvV]
.RI [\-C\  configfile "] [\-F\ " kernelsyms "] [\-b " basedirectory ]
.RI [ forced_version ]
.br
.B depmod \fR[\-enqrsuv] [\-F \fIkernelsyms\fR] module1.o module2.o ...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B depmod
.\"O and
.\"O .B modprobe
.\"O utilities are intended
.\"O to make a Linux modular kernel manageable for all users,
.\"O administrators and distribution maintainers.
.B depmod
および
.B modprobe
は、 Linux のモジュール化カーネルを管理するための、
ユーザー・管理者・ディストリビューションメンテナ向けユーティリティである。
.PP
.\"O .B Depmod
.\"O creates a "Makefile"-like dependency file, based on the symbols it finds
.\"O in the set of modules mentioned on the command line
.\"O or from the directories specified in the configuration file.
.\"O This dependency file is later used by
.\"O .B modprobe
.\"O to automatically load the correct module or stack of modules.
.B depmod
は、コマンドラインで指定されたモジュール
(あるいは設定ファイルで指定されたディレクトリにあるモジュール)
のセットにあるシンボルに基づき、
"Makefile" 的な依存関係ファイルを作成する。
.PP
.\"O The normal use of
.\"O .B depmod
.\"O is to include the line
.\"O 
.\"O .br
.\"O .B "/sbin/depmod \-a"
.\"O .br
.\"O 
.\"O somewhere in the rc-files
.\"O in
.\"O .IR /etc/rc.d ,
.\"O so that the correct module dependencies will be available
.\"O immediately after booting the system.
.B depmod
の普通の使い方は、
.I /etc/rc.d
にある rc ファイルのどれかに

.br
.B "/sbin/depmod -a"
.br

という行を入れることである。
これにより、正しいモジュールの依存関係をシステムの起動直後に使用できる。
.\"O Note that the option
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O now is optional.
.\"O For boot-up purposes, the option
.\"O .B \-q
.\"O might be more appropriate since that make depmod silent about
.\"O unresolved symbols.
現在は
.B \-a
オプションは省略可能である。
起動時には、
.B \-q
オプションの方がより適切である。
こちらは解決できなかったシンボルに関するワーニングを出力しない。
.PP
.\"O It is also possible to create the dependency file immediately
.\"O after compiling a new kernel.
.\"O If you do "\fBdepmod\ -a\ 2.2.99\fR"
.\"O when you have compiled kernel 2.2.99 and
.\"O its modules the first time, while still running e.g. 2.2.98, the file will
.\"O be created in the correct place.
新しいカーネルのコンパイル直後に依存関係ファイルを作成することもできる。
例えば 2.2.98 カーネルのもとで
カーネル 2.2.99 とそのモジュールを初めてコンパイルしたとき、
"\fBdepmod\ -a\ 2.2.99\fR" とすれば、正しい位置にファイルが作成される。
.\"O In this case however,
.\"O the dependencies on the kernel will not be guaranteed to be correct.
.\"O See the options
.\"O .BR \-F ,\  \-C\  and\  \-b
.\"O above for more information on handling this.
しかしこの場合、
カーネルへの依存関係は正しいとは保証されない。
この扱いに関しては、上記の
.BR \-F ", " \-C ", " \-b
各オプションの説明を参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O While building the relationship between modules and the symbols
.\"O exported by other modules,
.\"O .B depmod
.\"O does not consider the GPL status of the modules nor of the exported
.\"O symbols.  That is, depmod will not flag an error if a module without a
.\"O GPL compatible license refers to a GPL only symbol (EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL
.\"O in the kernel).  However insmod will refuse to resolve GPL only symbols
.\"O for non-GPL modules so the actual load will fail.
モジュールと、他のモジュールからエクスポートされたシンボルとの関係を
構築する際に、
.B depmod
はモジュールやエクスポートされたシンボルの GPL 状態を考慮しない。
つまり、depmod は GPL 互換でないライセンスのモジュールが GPL 専用シンボル
(カーネル中の EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL)を参照してもエラーを出さない。
しかし、insmod は 非 GPL モジュールを GPL 専用シンボルで解決することを
拒否するので、実際の読み込みは失敗する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
.\"O Search for modules in all directories specified in the (optional)
.\"O configuration file
.\"O .I /etc/modules.conf\fR.
設定ファイル
.I /etc/modules.conf
があれば、そこで指定されている全てのディレクトリでモジュールを検索する。
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-quick
.\"O Compare file timestamps and, if necessary, act like
.\"O .BR "depmod \-a" .
.\"O This option only updates the dependency file if anything has changed.
ファイルのタイムスタンプを比較し、さらに必要ならば
.B "depmod \-a"
と同じように振る舞う。
このオプションは、何か変更があった場合にのみ
依存関係ファイルを更新する。
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-errsyms
.\"O Show all the unresolved symbols for each module.
各モジュールごとに、解決されていない全てのシンボルを表示する。
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
.\"O Display a summary of options and immediately exit.
オプションの一覧を表示して直ちに終了する。
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-show
.\"O Write the dependency file on stdout instead of in the \fI/lib/modules\fR tree.
依存関係ファイルを\fI/lib/modules\fR以下ではなく標準出力に書き出す。
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
.\"O Tell depmod to keep quiet and not to complain about missing symbols.
quiet モード。見付からないシンボルがあっても文句を言わない。
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-root
.\"O Some users compile modules under a non-root userid then install the
.\"O modules as root.  This process can leave the modules owned by the
.\"O non-root userid, even though the modules directory is owned by root.
.\"O If the non-root userid is compromised, an intruder can overwrite
.\"O existing modules owned by that userid and use this exposure to
.\"O bootstrap up to root access.
ユーザによっては、モジュールを root 以外のユーザー ID でコンパイルし、
そのモジュールを root でインストールすることがある。
このプロセスでは、モジュールの所有者が root 以外のユーザー ID
のままになることがある (ディレクトリの所有者が root であっても)。
非 root のユーザー ID を許してしまうと、
侵入者がそのユーザー ID 保有のモジュールを置き換えることが
可能になるかもしれず、
これをきっかけに root アクセスを奪取されてしまうかもしれない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I ""
.sp
.\"O By default, modutils will reject attempts to use a module that is not
.\"O owned by root.  Specifying \fB\-r\fR will suppress the error and allow root to
.\"O load modules that are not owned by root.
デフォルトでは、 modutils は root の所有でないモジュールの利用を
拒否しようとする。 \fB\-r\fR を指定すると、このエラーを抑制し、
root 以外の所有するモジュールを root がロードできるようになる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I ""
.sp
.\"O .B Use of -r is a major security exposure and is not recommended.
\-r の利用は大きなセキュリティ上の危険を招く可能性があり、推奨できない。
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-syslog
.\"O Write all error messages via the syslog daemon instead of stderr.
全てのエラーメッセージを、標準出力ではなく syslog デーモン経由で書き出す。
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-unresolved-error
.\"O \fBdepmod\fR 2.4 does not set a return code when there are any unresolved
.\"O symbols.  The next major release of modutils (2.5) will set a return
.\"O code for unresolved symbols.  Some distributions want a non-zero return
.\"O code in modutils 2.4 but that change might cause problems for users who
.\"O expect the old behaviour.  If you want a non-zero return code in depmod
.\"O 2.4, specify \fB\-u\fR.  \fBdepmod\fR 2.5 will silently ignore the
.\"O \fB\-u\fR flag and will always give a non-zero return code for unresolved
.\"O symbols.
\fBdepmod\fR 2.4 は解決できないシンボルがあったときには返り値を設定しない。
次の modutils のメジャーリリース (2.5) では、
解決できないシンボルに対して返り値を設定する予定である。
modutils 2.4 に対して非ゼロの返り値を期待している
ディストリビューションもあるが、
この変更は古い動作を期待しているユーザに対して問題を引き起こすかもしれない。
depmod 2.4 に非ゼロの返り値を希望する場合は \fB\-u\fR を指定すること。
\fBdepmod\fR 2.5 は \fB\-u\fR フラグを黙って無視し、
解決できないシンボルがあった場合には常に非ゼロの返り値を戻す。
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
.\"O Show the name of each module as it is being processed.
各モジュールを処理するごとに、それらのモジュールの名前を表示する。
.TP
.I \-V
.\"O Display the version of \fBdepmod\fR.
\fBdepmod\fR のバージョンを表示する。
.PP
.\"O The following options are useful for people managing distributions:
以下のオプションは、ディストリビューションを管理する人々に便利であろう。
.TP
\fB\-b \fIbasedirectory\fR, \fB\-\-basedir \fIbasedirectory
.\"O If the directory tree
.\"O .I /lib/modules
.\"O containing the sub-trees of modules is moved somewhere else in order to
.\"O handle modules for a different environment, the
.\"O .B \-b
.\"O option tells depmod where to find the moved image of the
.\"O .I /lib/modules
.\"O tree.
環境を変更するために、モジュールのサブツリーが含まれるディレクトリツリー
.I /lib/modules
をどこか別の場所に移したい場合、
その移動された
.I /lib/modules
イメージを探す場所を
.B \-b
オプションを使って depmod に伝える。
.\"O The file references in the depmod output file that is built,
.\"O .IR modules.dep ,
.\"O will not contain the
.\"O .I basedirectory
.\"O path.
depmod が出力するファイル
.I modules.dep
におけるファイル参照は、
.I basedirectory
パスを含まない。
.\"O This means that when the file tree is moved back from
.\"O .I basedirectory/lib/modules
.\"O into
.\"O .I /lib/modules
.\"O in the final distribution, all references will be correct.
すなわち、最終的なディストリビューションでファイルツリーが
.I basedirectory/lib/modules
から
.I /lib/modules
に戻されても、全ての参照は正しく利用できる。
.TP
\fB\-C \fIconfigfile\fR, \fB\-\-config \fIconfigfile
.\"O Use the file
.\"O .I configfile
.\"O instead of
.\"O .IR /etc/modules.conf .
.I configfile
を
.I /etc/modules.conf
の代わりに用いる。
.\"O The environment variable
.\"O .B MODULECONF
.\"O can also be used to select a different
.\"O configuration file from the default
.\"O .I /etc/modules.conf
.\"O (or
.\"O .I /etc/conf.modules
.\"O (deprecated)).
環境変数
.B MODULECONF
を使っても、設定ファイルを
.I /etc/modules.conf
(あるいは
.I /etc/conf.modules
(使わないほうが良い))
以外に指定できる。
.TP
.\"O When environment variable
.\"O .B UNAME_MACHINE
.\"O is set, modutils will use its value instead of the machine field from
.\"O the uname() syscall.
環境変数
.B UNAME_MACHINE
をセットすると、modutils は uname() システムコールの machine フィールドの
代わりにこの変数の値を用いる。
.\"O This is mainly of use when you are compiling 64 bit modules in 32 bit
.\"O user space or vice versa, set
.\"O .B UNAME_MACHINE
.\"O to the type of the modules being built.
これは主に 32 ビットユーザー空間で 64 ビットモジュールをコンパイルする
(またはその逆)場合に用いる。
.\"O Current modutils does not support full cross build mode for modules, it
.\"O is limited to choosing between 32 and 64 bit versions of the host
.\"O architecture.
現在の modutils はモジュールに対する完全なクロスビルドモードに対応しておらず、
ホストアーキテクチャの 32 ビット版と 64 ビット版を選択できるだけである。
.TP
\fB\-F kernelsyms\fR,\fB\-\-filesyms \fIkernelsyms
.\"O When building dependency files for a different kernel than the currently
.\"O running kernel, it is important that
.\"O .B depmod
.\"O uses the correct set of kernel symbols to resolve the kernel references
.\"O in each module.
現在実行されているカーネルとは
別のカーネルに対して依存関係ファイルを作成する場合、
.B depmod
に正しいカーネルシンボルのセットを利用させ、
各モジュールのカーネル参照を正しく解決させることが重要である。
.\"O These symbols can either be a copy of
.\"O .I System.map
.\"O from the other kernel,
.\"O or a copy of the output from
.\"O .IR /proc/ksyms .
これらのシンボルには、他のカーネルの
.I System.map
のコピーか、あるいは
.I /proc/ksyms
の出力のコピーを使える。
.\"O If your kernel uses versioned symbols, it is best to
.\"O use a copy of the
.\"O .I /proc/ksyms
.\"O output, since that file contains the symbol versions of the kernel
.\"O symbols.  However you can use a
.\"O .I System.map
.\"O even with versioned symbols.
利用しているカーネルがバージョン付きのシンボルを使っている場合は、
.I /proc/ksyms
の出力を用いるのがもっともよい。なぜならこのファイルには
カーネルシンボルのシンボルバージョンが含まれているからである。
しかしバージョン付きのシンボルに対して
.I System.map
を使ってもかまわない。
.\"O .SH CONFIGURATION
.SH 設定
.\"O The behavior of
.\"O .B depmod
.\"O and
.\"O .B modprobe
.\"O can be adjusted by the (optional) configuration file
.\"O .IR /etc/modules.conf .
.B depmod
と
.B modprobe
の動作は、設定ファイル
.I /etc/modules.conf
によって調整できる (このファイルは無くても良い)。
.\"O .br
.\"O See
.\"O .BR modprobe (8)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR modules.conf (5)
.\"O for a complete description.
詳細は
.BR modprobe (8)
および
.BR modules.conf (5)
を参照のこと。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH STRATEGY
.SH 方針
.\"O Each time you compile a new kernel, the command "\fBmake modules_install\fR"
.\"O will create a new directory, but won't change the default.
新しいカーネルをコンパイルして、
コマンド "\fBmake modules_install\fR" を実行すると、
新しいディレクトリが作成されるがデフォルトは変更されない。
.\"NAKANO なんの default?
.PP
.\"O When you get a module unrelated to the kernel distribution
.\"O you should place it in one of the version-independent directories
.\"O under
.\"O .IR /lib/modules .
カーネル配布に含まれないモジュールを利用したい場合は、
そのファイルは、 
.I /lib/modules
以下の、
カーネルバージョンに関係しないディレクトリに置くのが良い。
.PP
.\"O This is the default strategy, which can be overridden in /etc/modules.conf.
これはデフォルトの方針であるが、
/etc/modules.conf によって変更できる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.nf
.\"O .IR /etc/modules.conf\  "(alternatively but deprecated\ " /etc/conf.modules )
.IR /etc/modules.conf (あるいは /etc/conf.modules (非推奨)) ,
.IR /lib/modules/*/modules.dep ,
.I /lib/modules/*
.fi
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR modules.conf "(5), " modprobe "(8), "  modinfo "(8), "
.BR lsmod "(8), " ksyms "(8) "
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O \fBdepmod\fR [ \-V | \-\-version ] should exit immediately.  Instead, it
.\"O prints the version information and behaves as if no options were given.
\fBdepmod\fR [ \-V | \-\-version ] は直ちに終了するべきである。
しかしながら、現在はバージョン情報を表示した後、
何もオプションが指定されなかったかのように振舞う。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Jacques Gelinas (jack@solucorp.qc.ca)
.br
Bjorn Ekwall (bj0rn@blox.se)
