.\" Copyright (c) 1994 Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se>
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Linux International
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the kernel source directory /linux
.\"
.\" Translated Sun Aug 15 10:58:55 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Mon Mar 18 JST 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH GENKSYMS 8 "January 30, 2002" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O genksyms \- generate symbol version information
genksyms \- シンボルのバージョン情報を生成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B genksyms
[\-wq] [\-dD] [\-V] [\-k\ \fIversion\fR] [\-p string]
[\fIoutput\ directory\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Genksyms
.\"O reads (on standard input) the output from "\fBgcc -E source.c\fR" and
.\"O generates a file containing version information.
.B genksyms
は (標準入力から) "\fBgcc -E source.c\fR" の出力を読み込み、
バージョン情報を含むファイルを生成する。
.PP
.\"O Depending on the output format indicated by the \fB\-k\fR\ option,
.\"O the output will either be written to a \fB.ver\fR file in the named
.\"O output directory, or to the standard output.
\fB\-k\fR\ オプションで指定される出力フォーマットにしたがって、
出力は指定された出力ディレクトリの \fB.ver\fR ファイルまたは標準出力に
書き出される。
.PP
.\"O .B Genksyms
.\"O normally looks for explicit symbol table definitions in the source
.\"O file.  All definitions and declarations of
.\"O .BR typedef ,\  struct ,\  union "\ and\ " enum
.\"O will be saved for later expansion.
.B genksyms
は普通ソースファイル中の明示的なシンボルテーブル定義を探す。
.BR typedef ,\  struct ,\  union ,\  enum
の全ての定義と宣言は後で展開するために保存される。
.\"O Every global symbol will also be saved, together with pointers
.\"O that will enable a full expansion later on.
全てのグローバルなシンボルも、後で全て展開できるようにするポインタと共に
保存される。
.PP
.\"O When a symbol table is found in the source, the symbol will be
.\"O expanded to its full definition, where all structs, unions, enums
.\"O and typedefs will be expanded down to their basic part, recursively.
シンボルテーブルがソース中で見つかると、シンボルは完全な定義に展開される。
この際には全ての構造体、共用体、列挙指定子、型宣言は基本部分まで再帰的に
展開される。
.\"O This final string will then be used as input to a CRC algorithm
.\"O that will give an integer that will change as soon as any of the
.\"O included definitions changes, for this symbol.
こうして得られた最終的な文字列が、CRC アルゴリズムへの入力として使われる。
このアルゴリズムは、このシンボルについて含まれている定義が変更されると
すぐに値が変わる整数を与える。
.PP
.\"O The version information in the kernel normally looks like:
.\"O .BR symbol_R12345678 ,
カーネルが持っているバージョン情報は普通、
.B symbol_R12345678
のようになっている。
.\"O where 12345678 is the hexadecimal representation of the CRC.
ここで 12345678 は CRC を表す 16 進値である。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
.\"O Output debugging information; repeating this option increases the
.\"O verbosity.  Debug level 1 generates moderate information about the
.\"O actions being taken; debug level 2 enables parser recognition
.\"O output; debug level 3 enables lexical analysis output.
デバッグ情報を出力する。このオプションを繰り返して指定すると、
出力の詳しさのレベルが大きくなる。デバッグレベル 1 では行った動作に関する
普通の情報が表示される。デバッグレベル 2 ではパーザの認識した情報の出力が
有効になる。デバッグレベル 3 では構文解析の情報が出力されるようになる。
.TP
.BR \-D ", " \-\-dump
.\"O Dump expanded symbol definitions to stderr.  For debugging use only.
展開したシンボル定義を標準エラー出力にダンプする。デバッグ専用の
オプションである。
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
.\"O Display a summary of options and immediately exit.
オプションの一覧を表示して直ちに終了する。
.TP
\fB\-k\fR\ \fIversion\fR,\ \fB\-\-kernel\fR\ \fIversion\fR
.\"O Select the version of the kernel for which to generate output.  Omitting
.\"O this option assumes a version below 2.1.0.  Versions below 2.1.18 
.\"O use checksum version 1, and produce their output in the directory given
.\"O on the command line.  Versions 2.1.18 and above use checksum version 2
.\"O and produce their output on stdout.
出力を生成する対象となるカーネルのバージョンを選択する。このオプションを
省略すると、バージョンは 2.1.0 より前として扱われる。2.1.18 より前では
バージョン 1 のチェックサムを使っており、出力は直接コマンドライン上に
生成される。バージョン 2.1.18 以降ではバージョン 2 のチェックサムを
使っており、出力は標準出力に生成される。
.TP
\fB\-p\fR\ \fIstring\fR,\ \fB\-\-prefix\fR\ \fIstring\fR
.\"O Prepend the given string to the CRCs generated for all symbols.  This is
.\"O intended for use with, e.g., SMP kernels, wherein the modules are not
.\"O compatible at a level below that described by the data types.  This is
.\"O primarily caused by inline function expansions in the module code itself.
全てのシンボルについて、生成した CRC の前に与えられた文字列を付ける。
これは SMP 対応カーネル等で使うためのオプションである。このような場合には、
データの型で記述するよりも低いレベルにおいてモジュールの互換性がない。
非互換性の主な原因は、モジュールのコード自体におけるインライン関数の
展開である。
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
.\"O Quiet warnings, i.e. reverse the \fB\-w\fR option.
警告を出さないようにする。つまり、\-w オプションの逆である。
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
.\"O Display the version of \fBgenksyms\fR.
\fBgenksyms\fR のバージョンを表示する。
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-warnings
.\"O Enable warnings due to unrecognized syntax and declared but undefined
.\"O structures.  These warnings are normally suppressed.
認識できない構文や、宣言されているにも関わらず定義されていない構造体に
対する警告を表示するようにする。通常はこのような警告は行われない。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR insmod "(8), " modprobe "(8) "
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The \fB\-h\fR\ option is broken; \fB\-\-help\fR\ is fine.
\fB\-h\fR\ オプションは壊れている。\fB\-\-help\fR\ は正しく動く。
.br
.\"O \fBgenksyms\fR [\fB\-V\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-version\fR] should display version
.\"O information and then exit immediately.  Instead, it prints the version
.\"O information and behaves as if no options were given.
\fBgenksyms\fR [\fB\-V\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-version\fR] はバージョン情報を
表示して直ちに終了するべきである。
しかしながら、現在はバージョン情報を表示した後、
何もオプションが指定されなかったかのように振舞う。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O This versioning concept is a result from discussions, not at least
.\"O on the KERNEL-channel, with a lot of people.
このバージョン付けの概念は議論の結果得られたものである。
議論も KERNEL-channel だけでなく、多くの人々によって行われた。
.PP
.\"O The genksyms utility was created in 1994 by Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se>
.\"O being mostly inspired by Jacques Gelinas <jack@solucorp.ca>
.\"O and Jeremy Fitzhardinge <jeremy@suite.sw.oz.au>
genksyms ユーティリティは 1994 年に Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se> が作成した。
その多くのアイディアは Jacques Gelinas <jack@solucorp.ca> と
Jeremy Fitzhardinge <jeremy@suite.sw.oz.au> によるものである。
.PP
.\"O It was rewritten in 1996 by Richard Henderson to use a proper lexer
.\"O and parser.
このユーティリティは 1996 年に Richard Hendersnon が書き直し、より適切な
字句解析器とパーザを使うようにした。
