.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu 12 Oct 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH KDSTAT 8 "Debian GNU/Linux" "DEBIAN"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O kdstat \- program to show and change internal kerneld state
.SH 名前
kdstat \- kerneld の内部状態の表示・変更を行うプログラム
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B kdstat
.br
.B kdstat
.I "[debug|nodebug]"
.br
.B kdstat
.I "[keep|nokeep]"
.br
.B kdstat
.I "flush"
.br
.B kdstat
.I delay=<time>
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH 説明
.\"O This manual package describes
.\"O .BR kdstat
.\"O , a program used to debug kerneld. You can use it to view (and change)
.\"O the internal state of a running kerneld.
このマニュアルページは
.B kdstat
について記述する。このプログラムは kerneld のデバッグに用いる。
これを使うと、実行中の kerneld の内部状態を閲覧 (及び変更) できる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O When run,
.\"O .BR kdstat
.\"O always displays the current state of kerneld. Given the proper options it can
.\"O do much more. All legal options are explained below.
.B kdstat
は実行中常に kerneld の現在の状態を表示する。
適切なオプションを与えれば、もっといろいろなことができる。
利用できるオプションを以下で説明する。
.TP
.B debug, nodebug
.\"O Turn kerneld debugging mode on or off. If turned on, kerneld displays
.\"O what it is doing on the console.
kerneld のデバッグモードを on/off する。
on にすると、 kerneld は実行内容をコンソールに表示する。
.TP
.B keep, nokeep
.\"O Turn keeping of modules on or off. If turned off (the default), modules
.\"O are unloaded when they have not been used for a while. See
.\"O .I delay
.\"O for more information about the timeout used.
モジュールの keeping を on/off する。
off にする (デフォルト) と、
モジュールは一定時間利用されない状態が続くとアンロードされる。
利用されるタイムアウトの詳細は
.I delay
を見よ。
.TP
.B flush
.\"O Flush the IPC message queue used to communicate with kerneld
kerneld との通信に用いる IPC メッセージキューをフラッシュする。
.TP
.B delay=<time>
.\"O Change the timeout kerneld waits before removing a module from the kernel.
kerneld がモジュールをカーネルから削除する前に待つタイムアウト時間を変更する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O \fBmodules\fP(2), \fBkerneld\fP(8).
.BR modutils (2),
.BR kerneld (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This manual page was written by Wichert Akkerman <wakkerma@debian.org>
.\"O for the Debian GNU/Linux system.
このマニュアルページは Wichert Akkerman <wakkerma@debian.org>
が Debian GNU/Linux システム向けに書いた。

