.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se>
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the kernel source directory /linux
.\"
.\" Translated Sun Aug 15 10:59:35 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Wed 11 Nov 2000
.\"         by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH KERNELD 8 "May 14, 1995" Linux "Linux Extensions"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O kerneld \- perform kernel action in user space (such as on-demand loading of modules)
.SH 名前
kerneld \- ユーザ空間でカーネルの動作を実行する (モジュールのオンデマンドロードなど)
.\"O .SH WARNING
.\"O .B kerneld
.\"O is obsolete as of Linux kernel 2.1.90, it was replaced by the kmod
.\"O kernel thread and cron entries.  Do not even think of using kerneld
.\"O unless you are running a 2.0 kernel.
.SH 警告
.B kerneld
は Linux カーネル 2.1.90 の時点で obsolete となり、
kmod カーネルスレッドと cron エントリによって置き換えられた。
2.0 カーネルを使っているのでなければ、
kerneld は使おうなどとも思わないほうがよい。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B kerneld
[ debug ] [ keep ] [ delay=<seconds> ] [ type=<message number> ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Apart from automatically removing unused modules,
.\"O .B kerneld
.\"O also performs specific kernel tasks in user space by responding to requests
.\"O from the kernel via a dedicated IPC message queue.
.B kerneld
は未使用モジュールを自動削除するほか、
専用の IPC メッセージキューを経由してカーネルからのリクエストに応答し、
カーネルの特定のタスクをユーザ空間で実行する。
.\"O Access to this queue can be made from user space by opening the queue
.\"O with:
ユーザ空間からこのキューへのアクセスは、
以下の操作でキューをオープンすることによって行える:
.\"O 
.sp
.nf
	qid = msgget(IPC_PRIVATE, 0600 | IPC_KERNELD);
.\"O
.fi
.sp
.\"O A specific task is requested with the message type,
.\"O as specified in <linux/kerneld.h>.
各タスクはメッセージタイプを使ってリクエストする。
これは <linux/kerneld.h> で指定されている。
.PP
.\"O The structure of a kerneld message is:
kerneld メッセージの構造体は以下の通り。
.sp
.nf
	struct kerneld_msg {
		long mtype;
		long id;
		char text[1];
	};
.fi
.sp
.\"O where the id field is used as the number of the response message
.\"O from kerneld back to the kernel.
.\"O If the id field is zero, there will be no response from kerneld.
ここで id フィールドは kerneld
 からカーネルへの応答メッセージの数として使われる。
id フィールドが 0 ならば、kerneld からの応答はないということである。
.br
.\"O (Note that a new structure is proposed that will include the pid of
.\"O the requester into the protocol header.)
(なお、要求側の pid をプロトコルヘッダに入れる、
新しい構造体が提案されている。)

.\"O If a response was requested, the exit status of the kerneld action
.\"O will be stored in the id field.
応答が求められた場合には、kerneld の動作の終了ステータスが
id フィールドに格納される。

.\"O The text field us used to hold the parameters from the kernel
.\"O to the specified kerneld action.
.\"O In return messages, this field can contain the output from the action,
.\"O to be used (if wanted) by the kernel.
text フィールドは、特定の kerneld 動作に
カーネルから渡されたパラメータを保持するために使われる。
.PP
.\"O The options are as follows:
オプションを以下に示す:
.TP 8
debug
.\"O With debugging enabled, you will be able to see the current status
.\"O of kerneld as it performs its tasks.  Note that you can control
.\"O debugging, as well as all the other parameters via the utility kdstat.
デバッグ機能を有効にすると、タスクを実行する度に
kerneld の現在のステータスを見ることができるようになる。
デバッグ機能や他の全てのパラメータの制御は
kdstat ユーティリティで行える。
.TP 8
keep
.\"O The keep option makes kerneld ignore all requests for unloading modules.
.\"O This option might be usable for systems where the modules should never
.\"O be unloaded at all (for some reason or other).
.\"O This option also inhibits the automatic removal of unused modules
.\"O that kerneld performs every minute (or <delay> seconds).
keep オプションを指定すると kerneld
はアンロード中のモジュールに対する全てのリクエストを無視する。
このオプションは、(何らかの理由で)
モジュールがアンロードされることが全く起こらないシステムでは
役立つかもしれない。
このオプションは、毎分 (あるいは <delay> 秒ごとに)
実行される未使用のモジュールの自動削除も禁止する。
.TP 8
delay=<seconds>
.\"O The delay option will change the timeout in kerneld for delayed
.\"O removal of modules from the default 60 seconds to whatever the choice was.
delay オプションは未使用モジュールの削除に関する
kerneld のタイムアウト時間を変更する。
デフォルトの 60 秒から任意の時間に変更できる。
.TP 8
type=<message type>
.\"O The default type is -255, which means that kerneld will listen for
.\"O all messages where the type is less than or equal to 255.
.\"O If a positive number is given, kerneld will only listen for that message type.
デフォルトのタイプは -255 である。これは、kerneld がタイプの値が 255
以下である全てのメッセージを監視するという意味である。
正の数を指定すると、kerneld は指定されたタイプのメッセージだけを監視する。
.PP
.\"O kerneld sends error messages to the syslog facility LOG_DAEMON.
kerneld はエラーメッセージを syslog の
LOG_DAEMON ファシリティに送る。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O insmod(8), rmmod(8), modprobe(8), depmod(8), syslogd(8)
.BR insmod (8),
.BR rmmod (8),
.BR modprobe (8),
.BR depmod (8),
.BR syslogd (8)
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O The kerneld support was inspired by discussions with Jacques Gelinas
.\"O <jack@solucorp.qc.ca>
kerneld のアイディアは Jacques Gelinas <jack@solucorp.qc.ca>
との議論から思い付いた。


