.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the kernel source directory
.\"
.\" Translated Sun Aug 15 10:55:43 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Mar 16 JST 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH KSYMS 8 "January 31, 2002" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ksyms \- display exported kernel symbols.
ksyms \- エクスポートされているカーネルシンボルを表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B ksyms
[\-ahm]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Ksyms
.\"O shows information about exported kernel symbols.  The format is
.\"O address, name, and defining module.
.B ksyms
は、エクスポートされているカーネルシンボルに関する情報を表示する。表示
フォーマットはアドレス、名前、定義が行われているモジュールである。
.\"O .SS OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
.\"O Display all symbols.  By default, symbols from the kernel proper
.\"O are suppressed.
全てのシンボルを表示する。デフォルトでは、カーネル固有のシンボルは
表示されない。
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-noheader
.\"O Suppress the column header.
ヘッダ行を表示しない。
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\-help
.\"O Display a summary of options and exit.
オプションの一覧を表示して終了する。
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-info
.\"O Display module information.  Includes each module's kernel load address
.\"O and size in the listing.
モジュールの情報を表示する。各モジュールがロードされているカーネル空間上の
アドレスとモジュールの大きさも表示する。
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
.\"O Display the version of \fBksyms\fR.
\fBksyms\fR のバージョンを表示する。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR insmod (8),\  modprobe (8),\  depmod (8),\  rmmod (8),\  lsmod (8).
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O \fBksyms\fR [ \-V | \-\-version ] should exit immediately.  Instead, it
.\"O prints the version information and behaves as if no options were given.
\fBksyms\fR [ \-V | \-\-version ] は直ちに終了するべきである。
しかしながら、現在はバージョン情報を表示した後、
何もオプションが指定されなかったかのように振舞う。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O The \fBksyms\fR command was first conceived by Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se>
\fBksyms\fR を最初に考えたのは Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se> である。
.br
.\"O The '\fB\-m\fR' option was inspired by David Hinds
.\"O <dhinds@allegro.stanford.edu>
\&'\fB\-m\fR' オプションを考えたのは David Hinds <dhinds@allegro.stanford.edu>
である。
.br
.\"O Updated for 2.1.17 by Richard Henderson <rth@tamu.edu>
バージョン 2.1.17 への更新は Richard Henderson <rth@tamu.edu> が行った。
