.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the kernel source directory
.\"
.\" Translated Sun Aug 15 10:56:25 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Jan 23 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Fri Mar 15 JST 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH LSMOD 8 "February 4, 2002" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O lsmod \- list loaded modules.
lsmod \- ロードされているモジュールの一覧を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B lsmod
[-hV]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B lsmod
.\"O shows information about all loaded modules.
.B lsmod
は、全てのロードされているモジュールに関する情報を表示する。
.PP
.\"O The format is name, size, use count, list of referring modules.  The
.\"O information displayed is identical to that available from /proc/modules.
表示のフォーマットは名前、大きさ、使用カウント数、
参照しているモジュールの一覧である。
表示される情報は /proc/modules から入手できる情報と全く同じである。
.PP
.\"O If the module controls its own unloading via a
.\"O .I can_unload
.\"O routine then the user count displayed by lsmod is always -1,
.\"O irrespective of the real use count.
モジュールが自分のアンロードを
.I can_unload
ルーチンを使って制御している場合、
lsmod が表示する使用カウント数は実際の使用カウント数とは関係なく -1 となる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
.\"O Display a summary of options and immediately exit.
オプションの一覧を表示して直ちに終了する。
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
.\"O Display the version of \fBlsmod\fR and immediately exit.
\fBlsmod\fR のバージョンを表示して直ちに終了する。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
insmod(8), modprobe(8), depmod(8), rmmod(8), ksyms(8)
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O Module support was first conceived by Anonymous
モジュール対応を誰が最初に考えたのかは不明である。
.br
.\"O Initial Linux version by Bas Laarhoven <bas@vimec.nl>
Linux 用の最初のバージョンは Bas Laarhoven <bas@vimec.nl> が作成した。
.br
.\"O Version 0.99.14 by Jon Tombs <jon@gtex02.us.es>
バージョン 0.99.14 は Jon Tombs <jon@gtex02.us.es> が作成した。
.br
.\"O Extended by Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se>
Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se> が拡張を行った。
.br
.\"O Updated for 2.1.17 by Richard Henderson <rth@tamu.edu>
バージョン 2.1.17 への更新は Richard Henderson <rth@tamu.edu> が行った。
.br
.\"O Updated by Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se> in March 1999
Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se> が 1999 年 3 月に更新した。
