.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the kernel source directory
.\"
.\" Translated Sun Aug 15 10:54:37 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Apr  3 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Fri Nov 30 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Sat Mar 16 JST 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Fri Oct 16 JST 2002 by kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH MODINFO 8 "March 19, 2002" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O modinfo \- display information about a kernel module
modinfo \- カーネルモジュールに関する情報を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B modinfo
[ options ] <module_file>
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B modinfo
.\"O utility examines the object file
.\"O .I module_file
.\"O associated with a kernel module and displays any information that it
.\"O can glean.
.B modinfo
ユーティリティはカーネルモジュールに対応するオブジェクトファイル
.I module_file
を調べ、取得できたデータを全て表示する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-author
.\"O Display the module's author.
モジュールの作者を表示する。
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-description
.\"O Display the module's description.
モジュールの説明を表示する。
.TP
.BI \-f format_string ", \-\-format " format_string
.\"O Let the user specify an arbitrary format string which can extract
.\"O values from the ELF section in
.\"O .I module_file
.\"O which contains the module information.
.\"O Replacements consist of a percent sign followed by a tag name in curly
.\"O braces.
フォーマット文字列を指定することによって、 
モジュール情報を含む
.I module_file
の ELF セクションから、値を取り出すことができる。
パーセント文字 (%) のあとにタグ名を中括弧 {} で括って指定すると置換される。
.\"O A tagname of
.\"O .I %{filename}
.\"O is always supported, even if the module has no modinfo section.
モジュールに modinfo セクションが無い場合でも、
.I %{filename}
というタグ名は常にサポートされる。
.\"O .I %{kernel_version}
.\"O shows the version of the kernel the module was compiled for.
.I %{kernel_version}
はモジュールがコンパイルされたカーネルのバージョンに置換される。
.\"O .I %{using_checksums}
.\"O expands to 1 is the module has versioned symbols and to 0 or <none>
.\"O otherwise.
.\"argrath: is は if のまちがい?
.I %{using_checksums}
はモジュールがバージョン付きシンボルを持っていれば 1 に、
さもなければ 0 か空文字列に置換される。
.\"O 
.\"O A tagname of
.\"O .I %{parm}
.\"O is special: the format string line is repeated for each known module
.\"O parameter (which may be zero times) and
.\"O .I %{parm}
.\"O is then replaced by descriptions of module parameters (one parameter
.\"O on each repeated line).
.I %{parm}
というタグ名は特別である。
フォーマット文字列行は既知の各モジュールパラメータに対して繰り返され
(0 回の場合もある)、その後
.I %{parm}
はモジュールパラメータの内容と置換される
(繰り返された 1 行に対して 1 パラメータ)。
.\"O 
.\"O Alternatively,
.\"O .I %a\fR,
.\"O .I %d\fR,
.\"O .I %l\fR,
.\"O .I %n
.\"O and
.\"O .I %p
.\"O can be used instead of
.\"O .I %{author}\fR,
.\"O .I %{description}\fR,
.\"O .I %{filename}\fR,
.\"O .I %{license}
.\"O and
.\"O .I %{parm}\fR,
.\"O respectively.
代替手段として、
.I %a\fR,
.I %d\fR,
.I %l\fR,
.I %n,
.I %p
がそれぞれ
.I %{author}\fR,
.I %{description}\fR,
.I %{filename}\fR,
.I %{license},
.I %{parm}\fR
の代わりとして使える。
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
.\"O Display a summary of options and immediately exit.
オプションの一覧を表示して、直ちに終了する。
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-license
.\"O Display the module's license.
モジュールのライセンスを表示する。
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-filename
.\"O Display the module's filename.
モジュールのファイル名を表示する。
.TP
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-parameters
.\"O Display the typed parameters that a module may support.
モジュールがサポートしている型付きパラメータを表示する。
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
.\"O Display the version of
.\"O .BR modinfo .
.B modinfo
のバージョンを表示する。
.PP
.\"O If no options are supplied, the default is filename, description,
.\"O author, license and parameters.
オプションが指定されなかった場合、デフォルトとしてファイル名、説明、
作者、ライセンス、パラメータを表示する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR insmod "(8), " modprobe "(8), " depmod "(8), " rmmod "(8), "
.BR lsmod "(8), " ksyms "(8), " modules "(2) "
