.\" Copyright (c) 1994, 1995 Jacques Gelinas (jacques@solucorp.qc.ca)
.\" Copyright (c) 1995, 1999 Bjorn Ekwall (bj0rn@blox.se)
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the base distribution directory
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu 12 Oct 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sun 28 Jan 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Tue  4 Apr 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Fri 30 Nov 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Mon 18 Mar 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Sun 23 Feb 2003 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH MODPROBE 8 "February 4, 2002" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O modprobe \- high level handling of loadable modules
modprobe \- ローダブルモジュールの高レベル管理
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.hy 0
.B modprobe
[\-adnqv]\ [\-C\ \fIconfig\fR]\ module\ [symbol=value\ ...]
.br
.B modprobe
[\-adnqv] [\-C\ \fIconfig\fR] [\-t\ \fItype\fR] pattern
.br
.B modprobe
\-l [\-C\ \fIconfig\fR] [\-t\ \fItype\fR] pattern
.br
.B modprobe
\-c [\-C\ \fIconfig\fR]
.br
.B modprobe
\-r [\-dnv] [\-C\ \fIconfig\fR] [module ...]
.br
.B modprobe
-Vh
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
.\"O Load \fBall\fR
.\"O matching modules instead of stopping after the first successful loading.
最初にロードに成功した後に停止するのではなく、
マッチしたモジュールを\fBすべて\fPロードする。
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-showconfig
.\"O Show the currently used configuration.
現在用いられている設定を表示する。
.TP
\fB\-C\fR,\ \fB\-\-config\fR\ \fIconfig\fR
.\"O Use the file \fIconfig\fR instead of (the optional) \fI/etc/modules.conf\fR
.\"O to specify the configuration.
設定ファイルを \fI/etc/modules.conf\fR ではなく \fIconfig\fR にする。
.RI ( /etc/modules.conf
はなくてもよい)。
.\"O The environment variable \fBMODULECONF\fR can also be used to select (and
.\"O override) a different configuration file from the default /etc/modules.conf (or
.\"O \fI/etc/conf.modules\fR (deprecated)).
環境変数 \fBMODULECONF\fR でも設定ファイルを /etc/modules.conf
(あるいは推奨しないが \fI/etc/conf.modules\fR) から変更できる。
.TP
.\"O When environment variable
.\"O .B UNAME_MACHINE
.\"O is set, modutils will use its value instead of the machine field from
.\"O the uname() syscall.
環境変数
.B UNAME_MACHINE
をセットすると、modutils は uname() システムコールの machine フィールドの
代わりにこの変数の値を用いる。
.\"O This is mainly of use when you are compiling 64 bit modules in 32 bit
.\"O user space or vice versa, set
.\"O .B UNAME_MACHINE
.\"O to the type of the modules being built.
これは主に 32 ビットユーザー空間で 64 ビットモジュールをコンパイルする
(またはその逆)場合に用いる。
.\"O Current modutils does not support full cross build mode for modules, it
.\"O is limited to choosing between 32 and 64 bit versions of the host
.\"O architecture.
現在の modutils はモジュールに対する完全なクロスビルドモードに対応しておらず、
ホストアーキテクチャの 32 ビット版と 64 ビット版を選択できるだけである。
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
.\"O Show information about the internal representation of the stack of modules.
モジュールのスタックの内部表現に関する情報を表示する。
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
.\"O Display a summary of options and immediately exit.
オプションの一覧を表示して直ちに終了する。
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-autoclean
.\"O Set 'autoclean' on loaded modules.  Used by the kernel when it calls on
.\"O .B modprobe
.\"O to satisfy a missing feature (supplied as a module).
ロード済みのモジュールに "autoclean" を設定する。
カーネルが
.B modprobe
に足りない機能をモジュールとして提供するよう依頼するときに用いられる。
.\"O The \fB\-q\fR option is implied by \fB\-k\fR.
.\"O These options will automatically be sent to \fBinsmod\fR.
\fB\-k\fR オプションを指定すると、自動的に \fB\-q\fR オプションも有効になる。
これらのオプションは自動的に \fBinsmod\fR に送られる。
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
.\"O List matching modules.
マッチするモジュールをリストする。
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-show
.\"O Don't actually perform the action, just show what would be done.
実際には動作を行わず、何が行われるかを表示する。
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
.\"O Do not complain about \fBinsmod\fR failing to install a module.
.\"O Continue as normal, but silently, with other possibilities for modprobe to test.
.\"O This option will automatically be sent to \fBinsmod\fR.
\fBinsmod\fR がモジュールのインストールに失敗しても報告しない。
黙って他の可能性を試しながら通常のように継続する。
このオプションは自動的に \fBinsmod\fR に送られる。
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-remove
.\"O Remove module (stacks) or do autoclean, depending on whether there are
.\"O any modules mentioned on the command line.
コマンドラインでモジュールが指定されればモジュール (のスタック) を削除する。
されなければ autoclean を実行する。
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-syslog
.\"O Report via syslog instead of stderr.
.\"O This options will automatically be sent to \fBinsmod\fR.
標準エラー出力にではなく syslog を経由してレポートする。
このオプションは自動的に \fBinsmod\fR に送られる。
.TP
\fB\-t\fR\ \fImoduletype\fR;\ \fB\-\-type\fR\ \fImoduletype\fR
.\"O Only consider modules of this type.  modprobe will only look at modules
.\"O whose directory path includes exactly "\fI/moduletype/\fR".  \fImoduletype\fR
.\"O can include more than one directory name, e.g. "\fB\-t\fR\ \fIdrivers/net\fR"
.\"O would list modules in \fIxxx/drivers/net/\fR and its subdirectories.
指定したタイプのモジュールだけを扱う。
modprobe は、ディレクトリパスに "/\fImoduletype\fR/"
をこの形で含むモジュールだけしか対象にしない。
\fImoduletype\fR にはディレクトリを複数の階層で指定しても良い。例えば
"\fB\-t\fR\ \fIdrivers/net\fR" とすれば、 
\fIxxx/drivers/net/\fR およびそのサブディレクトリにあるモジュールだけを
対象にする。
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
.\"O Print all commands as they are executed.
すべてのコマンドを、実行される通りに表示する。
.TP
.BR "\-V, \-\-version"
.\"O Display the version of \fBmodprobe\fR.
\fBmodprobe\fR のバージョンを表示する。
.TP
.\"O .B Note:
.\"O Module names must not contain paths (no '/'), nor may they contain the
.\"O trailing '.o'.  For example, slip is a valid module name for
.\"O .BR modprobe ,
.\"O /lib/modules/2.2.19/net/slip and slip.o are invalid.  This applies to
.\"O the command line and to entries in the config.
.B 注意:
モジュール名にはパス ('/') や末尾の '.o' を含めてはならない。
例えば、 'slip' は
.B modprobe
に対する正当なモジュール名だが、
'/lib/modules/2.2.19/net/slip' や 'slip.o' は不正である。
これはコマンドラインと設定ファイルの両方に適用されるルールである。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The \fBmodprobe\fR and \fBdepmod\fR utilities are intended
.\"O to make a Linux modular kernel more manageable for all users,
.\"O administrators and distribution maintainers.
\fBmodprobe\fR と \fBdepmod\fRは、Linux のモジュール化されたカーネルを、
あらゆるユーザー、管理者、ディストリビューションの作成者にとって
より管理しやすいものにするために作成された。
.PP
.\"O \fBModprobe\fR uses a "Makefile"-like dependency file, created by
.\"O \fBdepmod\fR, to automatically load the relevant module(s) from the set of
.\"O modules available in predefined directory trees.
\fBmodprobe\fR は Makefile に似た形式で依存関係を記述したファイルを用いる。
これは \fBdepmod\fR によって作成されるもので、
あらかじめ定められたディレクトリツリーに置かれたモジュールのセットから、
関連するファイル (群) を自動的にロードするためのものである。
.PP
.\"O \fBModprobe\fR is used to load a single module,
.\"O a stack of dependent modules, or all modules that are marked with a specified
.\"O tag.
\fBmodprobe\fRはモジュールのセット (単一のモジュールであることも、
依存関係にあるモジュールのスタックであることもある) のロードに用いられる。
また、特定のタグがつけられたすべてのモジュールをロードするのにも用いられる。
.PP
.\"O \fBModprobe\fR will automatically load all base modules needed in a module
.\"O stack, as described by the dependency file \fImodules.dep\fR.
.\"O If the loading of one of these modules fails, the whole current stack
.\"O of modules loaded in the current session will be unloaded automatically.
\fBmodprobe\fRはモジュールスタックに必要とされるベースモジュールを、
依存関係を記述したファイル \fImodules.dep\fR の記述にしたがって
すべてロードする。これらのモジュールのどれかをロードできないと、
現在のセッションでロードされたモジュールスタックの全体が
自動的にアンロードされることになる。
.PP
.\"O \fBModprobe\fR has two ways of loading modules. One way (the probe mode) will
.\"O try to load a module out of a list (defined by \fIpattern\fR).
.\"O \fBModprobe\fR stops loading as soon as one module loads successfully.
.\"O This could be used to autoload one Ethernet driver out of a list.
\fBmodprobe\fRがモジュールをロードするやりかたは 2 種類ある。
ひとつめ (プローブモード) は、
(\fIpattern\fR で定義された) リストからモジュールをロードしようとする。
モジュールがひとつロードできると、\fBmodprobe\fRはただちに停止する。
これはイーサネットドライバのリストから
モジュールをひとつロードするような場合に利用できるだろう。
.\"O .br
.PP
.\"O The other way \fBmodprobe\fR can be used is to load \fBall\fR modules from a
.\"O list.  See \fBEXAMPLES\fR, below.
もうひとつの方では、\fBmodprobe\fRはリストの\fBすべての\fPモジュールを
ロードする。以下の「\fB例\fP」の記述を参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O With the option \fB\-r\fR, modprobe will automatically unload a stack of
.\"O modules, similar to the way "\fBrmmod \-r\fR" does. Note that using just
.\"O "\fBmodprobe \-r\fR" will clean up unused autoloaded modules and also perform
.\"O the pre- and post-remove commands in the configuration file
.\"O \fI/etc/modules.conf\fR.
\fB\-r\fRオプションをつけると、 modprobe は自動的にモジュールのスタックを
アンロードする("\fBrmmod \-r\fR"と同様)。
"\fBmodprobe \-r\fR"とだけすると、
使われていない autoload されたモジュールを削除すると同時に、
設定ファイル \fI/etc/modules.conf\fR の記述にしたがって
削除の前処理・後処理用のコマンドを実行する。
.PP
.\"O The combining the options \fB\-l\fR and \fB\-t\fR lists all available
.\"O modules of a certain type.
\fB\-l\fR オプションと\fB\-t\fRオプションを同時に指定すると、
利用可能なすべてのモジュールのうち、特定のタイプのものだけが表示される。
.PP
.\"O Option \fB\-c\fR will print the currently used configuration (default +
.\"O configuration file).
\fB\-c\fRオプションを指定すると、
現在用いられている設定が表示される (デフォルト + 設定ファイル)。
.\"O .SH CONFIGURATION
.SH 設定
.\"O The behavior of \fBmodprobe\fR (and \fBdepmod\fR)
.\"O can be modified by the (optional) configuration file
.\"O \fI/etc/modules.conf\fR.
\fBmodprobe\fR(と\fBdepmod\fR)の動作は、設定ファイル
\fI/etc/modules.conf\fRによって変更できる (このファイルはなくてもよい)。
.\"O .br
.PP
.\"O For a more detailed description of what this file can contain,
.\"O as well as the default configuration used by \fBdepmod\fR and
.\"O \fBmodprobe\fR, see \fBmodules.conf\fR(5).
このファイルに記述できる内容の詳細や、\fBdepmod\fRと
\fBmodprobe\fRが用いるデフォルトの設定に関しては
\fBmodules.conf\fR(5)を参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O Note that the pre- and post-remove commands will \fBnot\fR be executed
.\"O if a module is "autocleaned" by kerneld!
.\"O Look for the up-coming support for persistent module storage instead.
モジュールがカーネルによって "autoload" された場合は、
削除の前処理・後処理のコマンドは\fB実行されない\fPことに注意。
将来サポートされる予定の「永続型モジュール保存 (persistent module storage)」
に期待して欲しい。
.\"NAKANO 訳語？
.\"O .br
.PP
.\"O If you want to use the pre- and post-install features, you will have to
.\"O turn off autoclean for kerneld and instead put something like the following
.\"O line in your \fBcrontab\fR (this is used for kmod systems as well)
.\"O to do autoclean every 2 minutes:
削除の前後処理の機能を用いたい場合は、
kerneld の autoload を使わないようにして、
以下のような行を \fBcrontab\fR に書きこむ必要がある
(これは kmod システムによっても用いられる)。
以下では autoclean を 2 分おきに行っている。
.\"O .br
.sp
.nf
 */2 * * * * test \-f /proc/modules && /sbin/modprobe \-r
.fi
.\"O .SH STRATEGY
.SH 動作ルール
.\"O The idea is that \fBmodprobe\fR will look first in the directory containing
.\"O modules compiled for the current release of the kernel.  If the module is not
.\"O found there, \fBmodprobe\fR will look in the directory common to the kernel
.\"O version (e.g. 2.0, 2.2).  If the module is still found, \fBmodprobe\fR
.\"O will look in the directory containing modules for a default release,
.\"O and so on.
\fBmodprobe\fRは、現在のカーネルリリース向けにコンパイルされたモジュールを
含むディレクトリをまず最初に見る。
そこにモジュールがなければ、\fBmodprobe\fRはカーネルバージョンに共通の
ディレクトリ (2.0, 2.2 など) を見る。
そこにもモジュールがなければ、
デフォルトのリリース以外のモジュールを含むディレクトリを見る。
.PP
.\"O When you install a new linux, the modules should be moved to a directory
.\"O related to the release (and version) of the kernel you are installing.
.\"O Then you should do a symlink from this directory to the "default" directory.
新しい Linux をインストールしたときは、モジュールをそのカーネルのリリース
(とバージョン) に対応したディレクトリに移動すべきである。
そしてこのディレクトリから「デフォルト」のディレクトリに
シンボリックリンクをはるようにする。
.PP
.\"O Each time you compile a new kernel, the command "\fBmake modules_install\fR"
.\"O will create a new directory, but won't change the "default" link.
新しいカーネルをコンパイルして"\fBmake modules_install\fR"
コマンドを実行すると、新しいディレクトリは作成するが、
「デフォルト」のリンクは変更しない。
.PP
.\"O When you get a module unrelated to the kernel distribution
.\"O you should place it in one of the version-independent directories
.\"O under \fI/lib/modules\fR.
カーネルの配布に含まれないモジュールを入手したら、
それは \fI/lib/modules\fR 以下のバージョンには依存しないディレクトリに
配置するとよい。
.PP
.\"O This is the default strategy, which can be overridden in
.\"O \fI/etc/modules.conf\fR.
以上がデフォルトの動作であるが、これは
\fI/etc/modules.conf\fR の記述によって変更できる。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.TP
.B modprobe \-t net
.\"O Load one of the modules that are stored in the directory tagged "net".
.\"O Each module are tried until one succeeds.
"net" という名前のディレクトリにあるモジュールのどれかひとつをロードする。
どれかのモジュールのロードに成功するまで、各モジュールがひとつづつ試みられる。
.TP
.B modprobe \-a \-t boot
.\"O All modules that are stored in directories tagged "boot" will be loaded.
"boot"という名前のディレクトリにあるすべてのモジュールがロードされる。
.TP
.B modprobe slip
.\"O This will attempt to load the module slhc.o if it was not previously loaded,
.\"O since the slip module needs the functionality in the slhc module.
.\"O This dependency will be described in the file \fImodules.dep\fR that was
.\"O created automatically by \fBdepmod\fR.
これを実行すると、
s1hc.o というモジュールがまだロードされていなければロードしようとする。
slip モジュールには s1hc モジュールの機能が必要だからである。
この依存関係は、\fBdepmod\fRによって (これ以前に) 自動的に生成された
\fImodules.dep\fR というファイルに記述されている。
.TP
.B modprobe \-r slip
.\"O This will unload the slip module.
.\"O It will also unload the slhc module automatically,
.\"O unless it is used by some other module as well (e.g. ppp).
slip モジュールをアンロードする。
s1hc モジュールも自動的にアンロードする
(ただし ppp のような他のモジュールによって利用されていない場合)。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.nf
.\"O .IR /etc/modules.conf\  "(alternatively but deprecated\ " /etc/conf.modules )
.IR /etc/modules.conf ( /etc/conf.modules も使えるが推奨しない)
.IR /lib/modules/*/modules.dep ,
.I  /lib/modules/*
.fi
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR depmod "(8), " lsmod "(8), " kerneld "(8), " ksyms "(8), " rmmod "(8)."
.BR depmod "(8), " lsmod "(8), " kerneld "(8), " ksyms "(8), " rmmod (8)
.\"O .SH SAFE MODE
.SH セーフモード
.\"O If the effective uid is not equal to the real uid then \fBmodprobe\fR treats
.\"O its input with extreme suspicion.  The last parameter is always treated
.\"O as a module name, even if it starts with '-'.  There can only be one
.\"O module name and options of the form "variable=value" are forbidden.
.\"O The module name is always treated as a string, no meta expansion is
.\"O performed in safe mode.  However meta expansion is still applied to
.\"O data read from the config file.
実効 UID が 実 UID と異なる場合、 \fBmodprobe\fR は入力を非常に慎重に扱う。
最後のパラメータは(たとえ'-'で始まっていても)モジュール名として扱われる。
一つのモジュール名だけが指定でき、"変数=値"の形のオプション指定は禁止される。
モジュール名は常に文字列として扱われ、セーフモードではメタ展開は行われない。
しかし、設定ファイルから読み込んだデータはメタ展開を行う。
.PP
.\"O euid may not be equal to uid when modprobe is invoked from the kernel,
.\"O this is true for kernels >= 2.4.0-test11.  In an ideal world, \fBmodprobe\fR
.\"O could trust the kernel to only pass valid parameters to modprobe.
.\"O However at least one local root exploit has occurred because high level
.\"O kernel code passed unverified parameters direct from the user to
.\"O modprobe.  So modprobe no longer trusts kernel input.
modprobe がカーネルから起動された場合、実効 UID は実 UID と異なるかもしれない。
これはカーネルが 2.4.0-test11 以上の時に真となる。
理想的な世界では \fBmodprobe\fR は
カーネルが正しいパラメータだけを modprobe に渡すと信用することが出来た。
しかし高レベルカーネルコードは未検証のパラメータを直接ユーザーから modprobe に渡すので、
少なくとも一つのローカル root exploit が発生する。
それで、もはや modprobe はカーネルからの入力を信用しない。
.PP
.ne 8
.\"O \fBmodprobe\fR automatically sets safe mode when the environment consists
.\"O only of these strings
\fBmodprobe\fR は環境変数が以下の文字列しか含まない場合、
自動的にセーフモードとなる。
.nf
 HOME=/
 TERM=linux
 PATH=/sbin:/usr/sbin:/bin:/usr/bin
.fi
.\"O This detects modprobe execution from the kernel on kernels 2.2 though
.\"O 2.4.0-test11, even if uid == euid, which it does on the earlier
.\"O kernels.
これは昔のカーネルのように実 UID と実効 UID が同じであっても、
カーネル 2.2 から 2.4.0-test11 までの カーネルから modprobe が起動されたことを検出する。
.\"O .SH "LOGGING COMMANDS"
.SH ログ記録コマンド
.\"O If directory \fI/var/log/ksymoops\fR exists and \fBmodprobe\fR is run with an
.\"O option that could load or a delete a module then modprobe will log its
.\"O command and return status in \fI/var/log/ksymoops/`date\ +%Y%m%d.log`\fR.
\fI/var/log/ksymoops\fR ディレクトリが存在し、\fBmodprobe\fR がモジュールを
読み込み・削除できるようなオプションを付けて起動されていた場合、
modprobe は実行したコマンドと返り値を
\fI/var/log/ksymoops/`date\ +%Y%m%d.log`\fR のファイル名で記録する。
.\"O There is no switch to disable this automatic logging, if you do not
.\"O want it to occur, do not create \fI/var/log/ksymoops\fR.  If that directory
.\"O exists, it should be owned by root and be mode 644 or 600 and you
.\"O should run script \fBinsmod_ksymoops_clean\fR every day or so.
この自動ログ記録を停止するオプションはない。
もしこのような記録をさせたくなければ、
\fI/var/log/ksymoops\fR ディレクトリを作らなければよい。
もしディレクトリを作るなら、root が所有してモードは 644 か 600 にし、
毎日ぐらいのペースで \fBinsmod_ksymoops_clean\fR を実行するべきである。
.\"O .SH REQUIRED UTILITIES
.SH 必要なユーティリティ
.\"O .BR depmod "(8), " insmod "(8)."
.BR depmod "(8), " insmod (8)
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Patterns supplied to \fBmodprobe\fR will often need to be escaped to ensure
.\"O that it is evaluated in the proper context.
\fBmodprobe\fR に与えるパターンが (シェルによって解釈されずに)
意図通りに解釈されるようにするには、
パターンにエスケープが必要となることが多いだろう。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O \fBmodprobe\fR\ [ \fB\-V\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-version\fR ] should exit immediately.
.\"O Instead, it prints the version information and behaves as if no options were
.\"O given.
\fBmodprobe\fR\ [ \fB\-V\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-version\fR ] は直ちに終了するべきである。
しかしながら、現在はバージョン情報を表示した後、
何もオプションが指定されなかったかのように振舞う。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Jacques Gelinas (jack@solucorp.qc.ca)
.br
Bjorn Ekwall (bj0rn@blox.se)
