.\" Copyright (c) 1994, 1995, 1999 Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se>
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc. (via rth)
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the distribution source directory
.\"
.\" Translated Sun Aug 15 10:58:04 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Sep 22 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jan 28 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Sun Jun  3 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Sat Mar 16 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\" WORD: generated comment	自動生成コメント
.\" WORD: persistent data	永続データ
.TH RMMOD 8 "February 6, 2002" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O rmmod \- unload loadable modules
rmmod \- ローダブルモジュールをアンロードする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.hy 0
.B rmmod
[ \-aehrsvV ] module ...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B rmmod
.\"O unloads loadable modules from the running kernel.
.B rmmod
は、実行中のカーネルからローダブルモジュールをアンロードする。
.PP
.\"O .B rmmod
.\"O tries to unload a set of modules from the kernel, with the restriction
.\"O that they are not in use and that they are not referred to by other modules.
.B rmmod
はカーネルからモジュールのセットをアンロードしようとする。アンロードに
は制限があり、そのモジュールは使用中であってはならず、また他のモジュール
から参照中であってもならない。
.PP
.\"O If more than one module is named on the command line, the modules
.\"O will be removed in the given order.  This supports unloading of stacked modules.
コマンドラインで複数のモジュールが指示されている場合、モジュールは
指示された順に削除される。
これにより、スタックしているモジュールのアンロードも行うことが出来る。
.PP
.\"O With the option '\fB-r\fR', a recursive removal of modules will be attempted.
.\"O This means that if a top module in a stack is named on the command line,
.\"O all modules that are used by this module will be removed as well, if possible.
オプション '\fB-r\fR' を与えると、モジュールを再帰的に削除しようとする。
つまり、スタックのトップにいるモジュールがコマンドラインで指定されると、
このモジュールが用いている全てのモジュールを (可能ならば) 削除する。
.PP
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
.\"O Do autoclean: tag unused modules as "to be cleaned", and also remove
.\"O already tagged modules.
自動削除を行う: 使っていないモジュールに「削除予定」のタグをつけ、
既にタグのついているモジュールを削除する。
.\"O Modules stay tagged if they stay unused since previous autoclean.
前回の自動削除以降も未使用のままであったモジュールは
タグがついたままである。
.\"O These two passes avoid removing transiently unused modules.
この 2 パスの手法により、一瞬使われなくなっただけの
モジュールが削除されるのを防ぐ。
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-persist
.\"O Save persistent data for the named modules, without unloading any
.\"O modules.  If no module names are specified then data is saved for all
.\"O modules that have persistent data.  Data is only saved if both the
.\"O kernel and modutils support persistent data and \fI/proc/ksyms\fR contains an
.\"O entry
.\"O .br
.\"O __insmod_\fImodulename\fP_P\fIpersistent_filename\fP
指定されたモジュールの永続データ(persistent data)を保存する。モジュールのアンロードは行わない。
モジュール名が指定されなかった場合は全てのモジュールの永続データが保存される。
データの保存は、カーネルと modutils の両方が永続データに対応しており、
かつ \fI/proc/ksyms\fR に
.br
__insmod_\fImodulename\fP_P\fIpersistent_filename\fP
.br
エントリがある場合にのみ行われる。
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
.\"O Display a summary of options and immediately exit.
オプションの一覧を表示して直ちに終了する。
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-stacks
.\"O Remove a module stack.
モジュールのスタックを削除する。
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-syslog
.\"O Output everything to \fBsyslog\fP(3) instead of the terminal.
全ての出力を端末ではなく \fBsyslog\fP(3) に対して行う。
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
.\"O Be verbose.
詳細に表示する。
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
.\"O Print the version of \fBmodutils\fR.
\fBmodutils\fR のバージョンを表示する。
.\"O .SH PERSISTENT DATA
.SH 永続データ
.\"O If a module contains persistent data (see
.\"O .IR insmod (8)
.\"O and
.\"O .IR modules.conf (5))
.\"O then removing the module always writes the persistent data to the
.\"O filename in the __insmod _P symbol entry.  You can also save the
.\"O persistent data at any time by rmmod\ -e, this will not unload any
.\"O modules.
モジュールに永続データ(
.IR insmod (8)
と
.IR modules.conf (5)
参照)がある場合、モジュールをアンロードした時に __insmod _P エントリの
ファイル名のファイルに永続データを保存する。
また、任意の時点で rmmod\ -e を実行することによってモジュールを
アンロードすることなく永続データを保存することも出来る。

.PP
.\"O When the persistent data is written to file, it is preceded by a
.\"O generated comment line,
永続データがファイルに書き込まれるとき、先頭に以下のような
自動生成コメント行が付く。
.br
#% \fIkernel_version timestamp\fR
.br
.\"O Generated comment lines start with '#%', all generated comments are
.\"O stripped from the existing file, other comments are preserved.  The
.\"O saved data values are written to the file, preserving the existing
.\"O order of comments and assignments.  New values are added at the end of
.\"O the file.  If the file contains values that do not exist in the module
.\"O then these values are preserved but are preceded by a generated comment
.\"O warning that they are not being used.  The latter operation allows a
.\"O user to switch between kernels without losing persistent data and
.\"O without getting any error messages.
自動生成コメント行は'#%'で始まる。
全ての自動生成コメント行は読み込み時に削除されるが、
その他のコメントは保存される。
データがファイルに保存されるとき、既に存在するコメントの順番と位置は保存される。
新しい値はファイルの最後に追加される。
モジュールにない値がファイルに合った場合、それらの値は保存されるが
「この値は使用されていない」旨の自動生成コメントによる警告がその前につく。
これにより、永続データを失ったり、警告メッセージを受け取ったりすることなく
カーネルを切り替えることが出来る。
.PP
.\"O .B Note:
.\"O Comments are only supported when the first non-space character on a
.\"O line is '#'.  Any non-blank lines that do not start with '#' are module
.\"O options, one per line.  The option lines have leading spaces removed,
.\"O the remainder of the line is passed to insmod as an option, including
.\"O any trailing characters.
.B 注意:
行の空白以外の最初の文字が'#'である場合にのみコメントとして扱われる。
空行以外で、'#'で始まっていない行はモジュールオプションとして
扱われる(一行毎に一つ)。
オプション行は先頭のスペースを取り除き、
残りは全て insmod にオプションとして渡される。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR insmod "(8), " lsmod "(8), " ksyms "(8), " modprobe "(8)."
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O \fBrmmod\fR [\fB\-V\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-version\fR] should display version
.\"O information and then exit immediately.  Instead, it prints the version
.\"O information and behaves as if no options were given.
\fBrmmod\fR [\fB\-V\fR\ |\ \fB\-\-version\fR] はバージョン情報を
表示して直ちに終了するべきである。
しかしながら、現在はバージョン情報を表示した後、
何もオプションが指定されなかったかのように振舞う。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O Module support was first conceived by Anonymous
モジュール対応を誰が最初に考えたのかは不明である。
.br
.\"O Initial Linux version by Bas Laarhoven <bas@vimec.nl>
Linux 用の最初のバージョンは Bas Laarhoven <bas@vimec.nl> が作成した。
.br
.\"O Version 0.99.14 by Jon Tombs <jon@gtex02.us.es>
バージョン 0.99.14 は Jon Tombs <jon@gtex02.us.es> が作成した。
.br
.\"O Extended by Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se>
Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se> が拡張を行った。
.br
.\"O Updated for 2.1.17 by Richard Henderson <rth@tamu.edu>
バージョン 2.1.17 への更新は Richard Henderson <rth@tamu.edu> が行った。
.br
.\"O Updated for 2.2.2 by by Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se>
バージョン 2.2.2 への更新は Bjorn Ekwall <bj0rn@blox.se> が行った。
.br
.\"O Updated for modutils 2.3.20 by by Keith Owens <kaos@ocs.com.au>
modutils 2.3.20 への更新は Keith Owens <kaos@ocs.com.au> が行った。
.br
.\"O Persistent data for modutils 2.3.22 by by Keith Owens <kaos@ocs.com.au>
2.3.22 からの永続データは Keith Owens <kaos@ocs.com.au> が行った。
