.\" This page is originally in the SysVinit package.
.\" Translated Fri 14 Feb 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated Tue  2 May 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Thu 26 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"{{{}}}
.\"{{{  Title
.TH MESG 1 "Feb 26, 2001" "" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Name
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O mesg \- control write access to your terminal
.SH 名前
mesg \- 使用中の端末への書き込み許可属性を制御する
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Synopsis
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mesg
.RB [ y | n ]
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Description
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Mesg
.\"O controls the access to your terminal by others.  It's typically used to
.\"O allow or disallow other users to write to your terminal (see \fBwrite\fP(1)).
.B mesg
は現在使用している端末への他の人からのアクセスを制御する。
通常は自分の使っている端末への他のユーザからの書き込みを
許可・禁止するために用いられる (\fBwrite\fP(1) 参照)。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Options
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.IP \fBy\fP
.\"O Allow write access to your terminal.
端末への書き込みアクセスを許可する。
.IP \fBn\fP
.\"O Disallow write access to your terminal.
端末への書き込みアクセスを禁止する。
.PP
.\"O If no option is given, \fBmesg\fP prints out the current access state of your
.\"O terminal.
オプションが与えられなかった場合は、現在のアクセス許可状態を表示する。
.\"O .PP NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O \fBMesg\fP assumes that it's standard input is connected to your
.\"O terminal. That also means that if you are logged in multiple times,
.\"O you can get/set the mesg status of other sessions by using redirection.
.\"O For example "mesg n < /dev/pts/46".
.B mesg
は標準入力が端末に接続されていると仮定している。
これを利用して、複数回ログインしている場合に、
リダイレクションを用いて他の端末の
mesg の状態を取得・設定することもできる。
例えば "mesg n < /dev/pts/46" とすればよい。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Miquel van Smoorenburg (miquels@cistron.nl)
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  See also
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR talk (1),
.BR write (1),
.BR wall (1)
.\"}}}
