.\" This page is originally in the SysVinit package.
.\" Translated Fri 14 Feb 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 27 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" 
.TH WALL 1 "12 September 2000" "" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O wall -- send a message to everybody's terminal.
.SH 名前
wall \- 全員の端末にメッセージを送る。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B wall
.RB [ " message " ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Wall
.\"O sends a message to everybody logged in with their \fImesg\fP(1) permission
.\"O set to \fByes\fP. The message can be given as an argument to \fIwall\fP, or
.\"O it can be sent to \fIwall\fP's standard input. When using the standard input
.\"O from a terminal, the message should be terminated with the \fBEOF\fP key
.\"O (usually Control-D).
.B wall
は \fImesg\fP(1) 許可属性を \fByes\fP に設定している
ログインユーザ全員にメッセージを送る。
メッセージは \fIwall\fP 起動時の引数として与えることも、
また \fIwall\fP の標準入力に送ることもできる。
端末から標準入力にメッセージを入力する場合は、
\fBEOF\fP キー (通常 Control-D)
によってメッセージを終了させなくてはならない。
.PP
.\"O The length of the message is limited to 20 lines.
メッセージの長さは 20 行までに制限されている。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O There is an undocumented (well not anymore..) option, "-n", that
.\"O supresses the banner printed by
.\"O .I wall .
.\"O This is for usage by
.\"O .I rwalld
.\"O (8).
.\"O .I Wall
.\"O will not allow you to use that flag if wall is installed set-group-id
.\"O and the user executing wall is not root.
文書化されていない (し今後書く予定もない...) オプション
"-n" があり、これは
.B wall
が表示するバナーを抑制する。
これは
.BR walld (8)
から利用するためのものである。
.B wall
が sgid でインストールされていて、実行したのが root 以外だった場合は、
このフラグは利用できない。
.PP
.\"O For every invocation of
.\"O .I wall
.\"O a notification will be written to syslog, with facility LOG_USER and
.\"O level LOG_INFO.
.B wall
は、実行されるごとに syslog に通知を行う。
facility には LOG_USER が、レベルには LOG_INFO がそれぞれ用いられる。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O .I Wall
.\"O ignores the
.\"O .B TZ
.\"O variable - the time printed in the banner is based on the systems
.\"O local time.
.B wall
は
.B TZ
環境変数を無視する。
バナーに表示する時刻はシステムのローカル時刻に基づいて決まる。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
mesg(1),
.\"O rpc.rwalld(8).
rpc.rwalld(8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl
