.\"(c) Copyright 1992 by Panagiotis Tsirigotis
.\"(c) Sections Copyright 1998-2001 by Rob Braun
.\"All rights reserved.  The file named COPYRIGHT specifies the terms 
.\"and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\" $Id: xinetd.8,v 1.5 2003/12/20 16:35:15 motoki Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 ANDO Yoko
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed July 15, 2001
.\"         by ANDO Yoko
.\"
.\" Update and Modified on Fri Feb 24 03:07:22 JST 2003
.\"	by System Design and Research Institute Co.,Ltd. <info@sdri.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: facility		機能分類
.TH XINETD 8 "14 June 2001"
.\" *************************** NAME *********************************
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O xinetd \- the extended Internet services daemon
xinetd \- 拡張されたインターネットサービスデーモン
.\" *************************** SYNOPSIS *********************************
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B xinetd
[\fIoptions\fP]
.\" *************************** DESCRIPTION *********************************
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBxinetd\fP performs the same function as \fBinetd\fP: it starts
.\"O programs that provide Internet services.  Instead of having such
.\"O servers started at system initialization time, and be dormant until a
.\"O connection request arrives, \fBxinetd\fP is the only daemon process
.\"O started and it listens on all service ports for the services listed in
.\"O its configuration file. When a request comes in, \fBxinetd\fP starts
.\"O the appropriate server.  Because of the way it operates, \fBxinetd\fP
.\"O (as well as \fBinetd\fP) is also referred to as a super-server.
\fBxinetd\fP は、\fBinetd\fPと同じ機能を提供する。
すなわち、インターネットサービスを提供するプログラムを起動させる。
インターネットサーバがシステムの初期化時に起動し、接続要求があるまで
休眠する代わりに、\fBxinetd\fP はデーモンプロセスのみを起動させ、
設定ファイルに記載された全てのサービスに対応したポートをリッスンする。
（リッスンしているポートの一つに）要求があったときに、
\fBxinetd\fP は適切なサーバを起動する。このような管理を行う事から、
\fBxinetd\fP は(\fBinetd\fP と同様に) スーパーサーバとも呼ばれる。
.LP
.\"O The services listed in \fBxinetd\fP's configuration file can be
.\"O separated into two groups.  Services in the first group are called
.\"O .I "multi-threaded"
.\"O and they require the forking of a new server process for each new
.\"O connection request.  The new server then handles that connection.  For
.\"O such services, \fBxinetd\fP keeps listening for new requests so that it
.\"O can spawn new servers.  On the other hand, the second group includes
.\"O services for which the service daemon is responsible for handling all
.\"O new connection requests.  Such services are called
.\"O .I "single-threaded"
.\"O and \fBxinetd\fP will stop handling new requests for them until the
.\"O server dies.  Services in this group are usually datagram-based.
\fBxinetd\fP の設定ファイルに記載されたサービスは、2つのグループに
分けられる。1つ目は 
.I "マルチスレッド"
と呼ばれ、新しい接続要求がある度に新しいサーバプロセスをフォークする
必要がある。新しいサーバが新しい接続を処理する。
このようなサービスの場合、新しいサーバーをつくる事ができるように
\fBxinetd\fP は新しい要求をリッスンしつづける。
一方、2つ目のグループは、一つのサービスデーモンがすべての新しい
接続要求を処理する。このようなサービスは
.I "シングルスレッド"
と呼ばれ、\fBxinetd\fP はサーバが終了するまで新しい要求の受付を中断する。
このグループのサービスは通常データグラム上のものである。
.LP
.\"O So far, the only reason for the existence of a super-server was to
.\"O conserve system resources by avoiding to fork a lot of processes which
.\"O might be dormant for most of their lifetime.  While fulfilling this
.\"O function, \fBxinetd\fP takes advantage of the idea of a super-server to
.\"O provide features such as access control and logging.  Furthermore,
.\"O \fBxinetd\fP is not limited to services listed in
.\"O .I /etc/services.
.\"O Therefore, anybody can use \fBxinetd\fP to start special-purpose
.\"O servers.
今までは、スーパーサーバの存在理由は、ほとんどの生存時間を休眠している
多くのプロセスによるシステムリソースのフォークを避けて節約することにあった。
\fBxinetd\fP はこの機能を満たすだけでなく、スーパーサーバの概念を利用し、
アクセスコントロールやログ等の機能を提供する。さらにその上、
\fBxinetd\fP は
.I /etc/services
に記載されているサービスに制限されない。
したがって、だれでも特殊な目的のサービスを起動させるために
\fBxinetd\fP を利用できる。
.\" *************************** OPTIONS *********************************
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BR \-d
.\"O Enables debug mode. This produces a lot of debugging output, and it
.\"O makes it possible to use a debugger on \fBxinetd\fP.
デバッグモード。このモードでは、多くのデバッグ出力が出力される。
また、\fBxinetd\fP 上でデバッガを使用できるようにする。
.TP
.BI \-syslog " syslog_facility"
.\"O This option enables syslog logging of \fBxinetd\fP-produced messages
.\"O using the specified syslog facility.
.\"O The following facility names are supported:
.\"O .I daemon,
.\"O .I auth,
.\"O .I user,
.\"O .I "local[0-7]"
.\"O (check \fIsyslog.conf(5)\fP for their meanings).
.\"O This option is ineffective in debug mode since all relevant messages are sent
.\"O to the terminal.
このオプションを使うと、\fBxinetd\fP からの出力を syslog で記録する際に、
指定された syslog 機能分類 (facility) が使用される。
以下の機能分類がサポートされている。
.IR daemon ,
.IR auth ,
.IR user ,
.I "local[0-7]"
(それぞれの意味は\fIsyslog.conf(5)\fP で確認のこと)。
このオプションは、デバッグモードでは無効である。
デバッグモードでは、すべての関連するメッセージは端末に送られる。
.TP
.BI \-filelog " logfile"
.\"O \fBxinetd\fP-produced messages will be placed in the specified file.
.\"O Messages are always appended to the file.
.\"O If the file does not exist, it will be created.
.\"O This option is ineffective in debug mode since all relevant messages are sent
.\"O to the terminal.
\fBxinetd\fPからの出力は指定されたファイルに保存される。
出力は常にファイルに追加される。
(指定された名前の)ファイルが存在しない場合は、新しく作成される。
このオプションは、デバッグモードでは無効である。
デバッグモードでは、すべての関連するメッセージは端末に送られる。
.TP
.BI \-f " config_file"
.\"O Determines the file that \fBxinetd\fP uses for configuration. The
.\"O default is \fI/etc/xinetd.conf\fP.
\fBxinetd\fP が設定に使用するファイルを指定する。デフォルトでは
\fI/etc/xinetd.conf\fP が使用される。
.TP
.BR \-pidfile " pid_file"
.\"O .br
.\"O The process ID is written to the file. This option is ineffective in debug mode. 
プロセス ID は指定したファイルに記述される。このオプションは、デバッグモードでは
無効である。
.TP
.BI \-stayalive 
.\"O Tells xinetd to stay running even if no services are specified.
サービスが一つも指定されていなくても、xinetd に動作しつづけるよう命令する。
.TP
.BI \-limit " proc_limit"
.\"O This option places a limit on the number of concurrently running processes
.\"O that can be started by
.\"O .B xinetd.
.\"O Its purpose is to prevent process table overflows.
このオプションは
.B xinetd
が、同時に動作させられるプロセス数の上限を定める。
プロセステーブルのオーバーフローを防止する目的がある。
.TP
.BI \-logprocs " limit"
.\"O This option places a limit on the number of concurrently running servers
.\"O for remote userid acquisition.
このオプションはリモートのユーザ ID 取得の為に動作させるサーバ数の、
同時に動作する上限を定める。
.TP
.BI \-version
.\"O This option causes xinetd to print out its version information.
xinetd にバージョン情報を表示させる。
.TP
.BI \-inetd_compat
.\"O This option causes xinetd to read /etc/inetd.conf in addition to the
.\"O standard xinetd config files.  /etc/inetd.conf is read after the
.\"O standard xinetd config files.
標準的な xinetd の設定ファイルに加え、
/etc/inetd.conf も追加で読み込むようにする。
/etc/inetd.conf は標準的な xinetd の設定ファイルの後に読み込まれる。
.TP
.BI \-cc " interval"
.\"O This option instructs
.\"O .B xinetd
.\"O to perform periodic consistency checks on its internal state every
.\"O .I interval
.\"O seconds.
このオプションは
.B xinetd
の内部状態の定期的な整合性チェックを
.I interval
秒毎に
行なう。
.LP
.\"O The \fIsyslog\fP and \fIfilelog\fP options are mutually exclusive.
.\"O If none is specified, the default is syslog using the
.\"O .I daemon
.\"O facility.
.\"O You should not confuse \fBxinetd\fP messages with messages related to
.\"O service logging. The latter are logged only if this is specified
.\"O via the configuration file.
\fIsyslog\fPと\fIfilelog\fPオプションは相互に排他的である。
どちらも設定されていない場合、デフォルトではsyslogの機能分類
.I daemon
を利用する。
\fBxinetd\fP のメッセージと、関連するサービスによるメッセージを混同しないよう
気をつけること。後者は設定ファイルによって指定された場合にのみログが残る。
.\" *********************** CONTROLLING XINETD ****************************
.\"O .SH "CONTROLLING XINETD"
.SH "XINETD の制御"
.LP
.\"O \fBxinetd\fP performs certain actions when it receives certain signals.
.\"O The actions associated with the specific signals can be redefined
.\"O by editing \fIconfig.h\fP and recompiling.
\fBxinetd\fP は一定のシグナルを受け取った時に、一定の動作をする。
特定のシグナルに関連した動作は、\fIconfig.h\fPを変更し、リコンパイル
する事で再定義できる。
.TP 15
.B SIGHUP
.\"O causes a hard reconfiguration, which means that \fBxinetd\fP re-reads 
.\"O the configuration file and terminates the servers for services that 
.\"O are no longer available. Access control is performed again on 
.\"O running servers by checking the remote location, access times and 
.\"O server instances. If the number of server instances is lowered, some 
.\"O arbitrarily picked servers will be killed to satisfy the limit; this 
.\"O will happen \fIafter\fP any servers are terminated because of failing 
.\"O the remote location or access time checks.
.B SIGHUP は再設定を行なわせる。これは、設定ファイルを再読み込みし、
使用可能でなくなったサービスのサーバを停止する。
実行中のサーバに対しては、再びアクセスコントロールがなされ、
接続元、アクセス時間、サーバの実行数がチェックされる。
サーバ実行数の制限値が低くなった場合には、制限を満たすためにいくつかの
任意のサーバが killされる。
これは、接続元・アクセス時間のチェックに失敗したサーバを
終了させた\fI後に\fP行われる。
.\"O Also, if the
.\"O .B INTERCEPT
.\"O flag was clear and is set, any running servers for that service will
.\"O be terminated;
.\"O \fIthe purpose of this is to ensure that after a hard reconfiguration
.\"O there will be no running servers that can accept packets from addresses
.\"O that do not meet the access control criteria\fP.
また、
.B INTERCEPT
フラグが新規に設定された場合、そのサービスのために動作中のサーバは
すべて停止される。
\fIこの目的は、再設定の後に、アクセス制御基準に合わないアドレスからの
パケットを受け取る事が可能な動作中のサーバがないことを確実にするため
である\fP。
.TP
.\"O .B SIGQUIT
.\"O causes program termination.
.B SIGQUIT
はプログラムを終了させる。
.TP
.\"O .B SIGTERM
.\"O terminates all running servers before terminating \fBxinetd\fP.
.B SIGTERM
は \fBxinetd\fPを終了する前にすべての起動しているサーバを終了する。
.TP
.\"O .B SIGUSR1
.\"O causes an internal state dump (the default dump file is
.\"O \fI/tmp/xinetd.dump\fP;
.\"O to change the filename, edit \fIconfig.h\fP and recompile).
.B SIGUSR1
は内部状態をダンプさせる(デフォルトのダンプファイルは
\fI/tmp/xinetd.dump\fP
であり、ファイル名を変更したい場合には、\fIconfig.h\fP の内容を
変更し、再コンパイルする)。
.TP
.\"O .B SIGIOT
.\"O causes an internal consistency check to verify that the data structures
.\"O used by the program have not been corrupted.
.\"O When the check is completed
.\"O .B xinetd
.\"O will generate a message that says if the check was successful or not.
.B SIGIOT
はプログラムが利用しているデータ構造に問題がないかを確認するために
内部の一貫性チェックを行なわせる。
チェックが終了すると、
.B xinetd
は、チェックが成功したかあるいは失敗したかのメッセージを出力する。
.LP
.\"O On reconfiguration the log files are closed and reopened. This allows
.\"O removal of old log files.
再設定時、ログファイルは一旦閉じられ、再び開かれる。これは古いログファ
イルの削除を許可する。
.\" *********************** FILES ****************************
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH 関連ファイル
.LP
.PD .1v
.TP 20
.B /etc/xinetd.conf
.\"O default configuration file
デフォルト設定ファイル
.TP
.B /var/run/xinetd.dump
.\"O default dump file
デフォルトダンプファイル
.PD
.\" *********************** SEE ALSO ****************************
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
.I "inetd(8),"
.LP
.I "xinetd.conf(5),"
.LP
.I "xinetd.log(5)"
.\" *********************** AUTHOR ****************************
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 作者
Panos Tsirigotis, CS Dept, University of Colorado, Boulder
Rob Braun
.\" *********************** PRONUNCIATION ****************************
.\"O .SH PRONUNCIATION
.SH 発音
zy-net-d
(訳注: ザイ-ネット-ディー)
