.\"
.\" MAN PAGE COMMENTS to
.\"
.\"	Chet Ramey
.\"	Information Network Services
.\"	Case Western Reserve University
.\"	chet@ins.CWRU.Edu
.\"
.\"	Last Change: Mon Mar  5 10:19:14 EST 2001
.\"
.\" bash_builtins, strip all but Built-Ins section
.if \n(zZ=1 .ig zZ
.if \n(zY=1 .ig zY
.TH BASH 1 "2001 Mar 5" "GNU Bash-2.05"
.\"
.\" There's some problem with having a `@'
.\" in a tagged paragraph with the BSD man macros.
.\" It has to do with `@' appearing in the }1 macro.
.\" This is a problem on 4.3 BSD and Ultrix, but Sun
.\" appears to have fixed it.
.\" If you're seeing the characters
.\" `@u-3p' appearing before the lines reading
.\" `possible-hostname-completions
.\" and `complete-hostname' down in READLINE,
.\" then uncomment this redefinition.
.\"
.\" Translated Wed Apr  7 22:55:11 JST 1999
.\"    by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Proofed by
.\"       Shinya Hanataka <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"       NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" Updated to 2.04  Sun Apr 1 2001
.\"    by the members of JM Project (JM@linux.or.jp)
.\"       Satoshi Asakawa <asakawa@kanagawa.hitachi.co.jp>
.\"       Shinya Hanataka <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\"       Akihiro Motoki <mokkun@iname.com>
.\"       NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"       Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"       Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"       TAKEI Nobumitsu <takei@webmasters.gr.jp>
.\"       UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.\"
.\" Updated to 2.05  Sat 14 Apr 2001
.\"    by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.\"WORD:	positional parameter	位置パラメータ
.\"WORD:	preamble		前置部分
.\"WORD:	postscript		後置部分
.\"WORD:	level of variable indirection	間接変数レベル
.\"WORD:	arithmetic expansion	算術式展開
.\"WORD:	naming open file	名前付きオープンファイル
.\"WORD:	collation weight	照合重さ
.\"WORD:	collating symbol	照合シンボル
.\"WORD:	collating sequence	照合順序
.\"WORD:	range expression	範囲表現
.\"WORD:	composite pattern	複合パターン
.\"WORD:	sub-pattern	サブパターン
.\"WORD:	history list	履歴リスト
.\"WORD:	basename	ベース名
.\"WORD:	file descriptor	ファイル・ディスクリプター
.\"WORD:	exit status		終了ステータス
.\"WORD:	return status		返却ステータス
.\"
.de }1
.ds ]X \&\\*(]B\\
.nr )E 0
.if !"\\$1"" .nr )I \\$1n
.}f
.ll \\n(LLu
.in \\n()Ru+\\n(INu+\\n()Iu
.ti \\n(INu
.ie !\\n()Iu+\\n()Ru-\w\\*(]Xu-3p \{\\*(]X
.br\}
.el \\*(]X\h|\\n()Iu+\\n()Ru\c
.}f
..
.\"
.\" File Name macro.  This used to be `.PN', for Path Name,
.\" but Sun doesn't seem to like that very much.
.\"
.de FN
\fI\|\\$1\|\fP
..
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
bash \- GNU Bourne-Again SHell
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B bash
[options]
[file]
.\"O .SH COPYRIGHT
.SH 著作権
.if n Bash is Copyright (C) 1989-2001 by the Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.if t Bash is Copyright \(co 1989-2001 by the Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O is an \fBsh\fR-compatible command language interpreter that
.\"O executes commands read from the standard input or from a file.
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O also incorporates useful features from the \fIKorn\fP and \fIC\fP
.\"O shells (\fBksh\fP and \fBcsh\fP).
.B bash
は、標準入力やファイルから読み込んだコマンドを実行する、
\fBsh\fR 互換のコマンド言語インタプリタです。
.B bash
には、\fIKorn\fP シェルや \fIC\fP シェル (\fBksh\fP や \fBcsh\fP)
の便利な機能も採り入れられています。
.PP
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O is intended to be a conformant implementation of the IEEE
.\"O POSIX Shell and Tools specification (IEEE Working Group 1003\.2).
.B bash
は IEEE POSIX Shell and Tools specification (IEEE Working Group 1003\.2)
に準拠する実装を目指しています。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O In addition to the single-character shell options documented in the
.\"O description of the \fBset\fR builtin command, \fBbash\fR
.\"O interprets the following options when it is invoked:
.B bash
は以下のオプションを起動時に解釈します
(組み込みコマンド \fBset\fR の説明で述べられている
1 文字のシェルオプションも使えます):
.PP
.PD 0
.TP 10
.BI \-c "\| string\^"
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O option is present, then commands are read from
.\"O .IR string .
.\"O If there are arguments after the
.\"O .IR string ,
.\"O they are assigned to the positional parameters, starting with
.\"O .BR $0 .
.B \-c
オプションが指定されると、コマンドが
.I string
から読み込まれます。
.I string
の後に引き数があれば、これらは
位置パラメータ (positional parameter:
.B $0
からはじまるパラメータ) に代入されます。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O option is present, the shell becomes
.\"O .I restricted
.\"O (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "RESTRICTED SHELL"
.\"O below).
.B \-r
オプションが指定されると、
.B bash
は
.I 制限された状態 (restricted)
となります (後述の
.SM
.B 制限付きのシェル
を参照)。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O option is present, the shell is
.\"O .IR interactive .
.B \-i
オプションが指定されると、
.B bash
は
.I 対話的 (interactive)
に動作します。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O option is present, or if no arguments remain after option
.\"O processing, then commands are read from the standard input.
.\"O This option allows the positional parameters to be set
.\"O when invoking an interactive shell.
.B \-s
オプションが指定された場合と、
オプションをすべて処理した後に引き数が残っていなかった場合には、
コマンドは標準入力から読み込まれます。
このオプションを使うと、
対話的シェルを起動するときに
位置パラメータを設定できます。
.TP
.B \-D
.\"O A list of all double-quoted strings preceded by \fB$\fP
.\"O is printed on the standard ouput.
.\"UNSOLVED: ouput は output の typo
.\"O These are the strings that
.\"O are subject to language translation when the current locale
.\"O is not \fBC\fP or \fBPOSIX\fP.
.\"O This implies the \fB\-n\fP option; no commands will be executed.
二重引用符によるクォート文字列 (double-quoted strings) に
\fB$\fP が前置されたものを、全てリストして標準出力に出力します。
これらは、カレントロケールが \fBC\fP または \fBPOSIX\fP 以外の時に、
翻訳の対象となるべき文字列です。
このオプションを指定すると、
自動的に \fB\-n\fP オプションも指定されたことになります。
つまりコマンドは全く実行されません。
.TP
.B \-\-
.\"O A
.\"O .B \-\-
.\"O signals the end of options and disables further option processing.
.\"O Any arguments after the
.\"O .B \-\-
.\"O are treated as filenames and arguments.  An argument of
.\"O .B \-
.\"O is equivalent to \fB\-\-\fP.
.B \-\-
はオプションの終わりを示し、それ以降のオプション処理を行いません。
.B \-\-
以降の引き数は全て、ファイル名や引き数として扱われます。
引き数
.B \-
は
\fB\-\-\fP
と同じです。
.PD
.PP
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O also interprets a number of multi-character options.
.\"O These options must appear on the command line before the
.\"O single-character options in order for them to be recognized.
.B bash
が解釈するオプションには複数の文字からなるものもたくさんあります。
このようなオプションを認識させるためには、
コマンドライン中で
1 文字のオプションよりも前に置かなければなりません。
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-po\-strings
.\"O Equivalent to \fB\-D\fP, but the output is in the GNU \fIgettext\fP
.\"O \fBpo\fP (portable object) file format.
\fB\-D\fP と同じですが、
出力は GNU \fIgettext\fP の
\fBpo\fP (ポータブルオブジェクト) ファイル形式で行われます。
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-strings
.\"O Equivalent to \fB\-D\fP.
\fB\-D\fP と同じです。
.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Display a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
使用方法についてのメッセージを標準出力に表示し、正常終了します。
.TP
.PD 0
\fB\-\-init\-file\fP \fIfile\fP
.TP
\fB\-\-rcfile\fP \fIfile\fP
.PD
.\"O Execute commands from
.\"O .I file
.\"O instead of the standard personal initialization file
.\"O .I ~/.bashrc
.\"O if the shell is interactive (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B INVOCATION
.\"O below).
対話的シェルとして起動された場合、
個人用の初期化ファイル
.I ~/.bashrc
の代わりに
.I file
からコマンドを実行します (後述の
.SM
.B 起動
セクションを参照)。
.TP
.B \-\-login
.\"O Make
.\"O .B bash
.\"O act as if it had been invoked as a login shell (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B INVOCATION
.\"O below).
ログインシェル (後述の
.SM
.B 起動
セクションを参照)
として起動されたかのように
.B bash
を動作させます。
.TP
.B \-\-noediting
.\"O Do not use the GNU
.\"O .B readline
.\"O library to read command lines when the shell is interactive.
シェルが対話的動作の場合、コマンドラインを読み込むときに GNU
.B readline
ライブラリを使用しません。
.TP
.B \-\-noprofile
.\"O Do not read either the system-wide startup file
.\"O .FN /etc/profile
.\"O or any of the personal initialization files
.\"O .IR ~/.bash_profile ,
.\"O .IR ~/.bash_login ,
.\"O or
.\"O .IR ~/.profile .
.\"O By default,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O reads these files when it is invoked as a login shell (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B INVOCATION
.\"O below).
システム全体用の起動ファイル
.FN /etc/profile
および個人用の初期化ファイル
.IR ~/.bash_profile ,
.IR ~/.bash_login ,
.I ~/.profile
のいずれも読み込みません。デフォルトでは、
.B bash
はログインシェルとして起動された時に
これらのファイルを読み込みます (後述の
.SM
.B 起動
セクションを参照)。
.TP
.B \-\-norc
.\"O Do not read and execute the personal initialization file
.\"O .I ~/.bashrc
.\"O if the shell is interactive.
.\"O This option is on by default if the shell is invoked as
.\"O .BR sh .
シェルが対話的動作を行う場合に、個人用初期化ファイル
.I ~/.bashrc
の読み込み・実行を行いません。シェルが
.BR sh
として起動された場合には、このオプションはデフォルトで有効になります。
.TP
.B \-\-posix
.\"O Change the behavior of \fBbash\fP where the default operation differs
.\"O from the POSIX 1003.2 standard to match the standard (\fIposix mode\fP).
\fBbash\fP の動作のうち、
デフォルトの振舞いが POSIX 1003.2 の標準と異なる部分を、
標準に適合するように変更します (\fIposix モード\fP)。
.TP
.B \-\-restricted
.\"O The shell becomes restricted (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "RESTRICTED SHELL"
.\"O below).
シェルの動作を制限します (後述の
.SM
.B 制限付きのシェル
セクションを参照)。
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
.\"O Equivalent to  \fB\-v\fP.
\fB\-v\fP と同じです。
.\"UNSOLVED -v の説明は前にあるべきだと思う。
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Show version information for this instance of
.\"O .B bash
.\"O on the standard output and exit successfully.
実行された
.B bash
のバージョン情報を標準出力に表示し、正常終了します。
.PD
.\"O .SH ARGUMENTS
.SH 引き数
.\"O If arguments remain after option processing, and neither the
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O nor the
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O option has been supplied, the first argument is assumed to
.\"O be the name of a file containing shell commands.
オプション処理の後に引き数が残っており、かつ
.B \-c
オプションと
.B \-s
オプションのいずれも指定されていない場合、
最初の引き数はファイル名とみなされ、
そのファイルにシェルコマンドが記述されているとみなされます。
.\"O If
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is invoked in this fashion, 
.\"O .B $0
.\"O is set to the name of the file, and the positional parameters
.\"O are set to the remaining arguments.
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O reads and executes commands from this file, then exits.
.\"O \fBBash\fP's exit status is the exit status of the last command
.\"O executed in the script.
.\"O If no commands are executed, the exit status is 0.
このように
.B bash
が起動された場合、
.B $0
にそのファイルの名前が設定されます
(残りの引き数は位置パラメータに設定されます)。
.B bash
はこのファイルからコマンドの読み込みと実行を行い、そして終了します。
\fBbash\fP の終了ステータスは、
このスクリプト中で実行された最後のコマンドの終了ステータスになります。
コマンドが全く実行されなければ、終了ステータスは 0 です。
.\"O .SH INVOCATION
.SH 起動
.\"O A \fIlogin shell\fP is one whose first character of argument zero is a
.\"O .BR \- ,
.\"O or one started with the 
.\"O .B \-\-login
.\"O option.
\fIログインシェル(login shell)\fPとは、0 番目の引き数の最初の文字が
.BR \-
であるシェル、または
.B \-\-login
オプション付きで起動されたシェルのことです。
.PP
.\"O An \fIinteractive\fP shell is one started without non-option arguments
.\"O and without the
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O option
.\"O whose standard input and output are
.\"O both connected to terminals (as determined by
.\"O .IR isatty (3)),
.\"O or one started with the
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O option.
\fI対話的な\fPシェルとは、
オプションでない引数がなく、
標準入力と標準出力がいずれも端末に接続されていて (これは
.IR isatty (3)
で調べられます)、
.B \-c
オプションが指定されていない状態で起動されたシェル、または
.B \-i
オプション付きで起動されたシェルのことです。
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PS1
.\"O is set and
.\"O .B $\-
.\"O includes
.\"O .B i
.\"O if
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is interactive,
.\"O allowing a shell script or a startup file to test this state.
.B bash
が対話的に動作している場合には、
.SM
.B PS1
が設定され、
.B $\-
に
.B i
が含まれます。
これを利用すると、対話的動作の状態であるかどうかを、
シェルスクリプトや起動ファイルの内部で調べられます。
.PP
.\"O The following paragraphs describe how
.\"O .B bash
.\"O executes its startup files.
.\"O If any of the files exist but cannot be read,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O reports an error.
.\"O Tildes are expanded in file names as described below under
.\"O .B "Tilde Expansion"
.\"O in the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EXPANSION
.\"O section.
以下の段落では、
.B bash
がどのように起動ファイルを実行するかを説明します。
以下のファイルのいずれかが、
「存在しているが読み込みできない」場合は、
.B bash
はエラーを報告します。ファイル名に含まれるチルダは、
後述の
.SM
.B 展開
セクションにおける
.B "チルダ展開"
の項目で述べるように展開されます。
.PP
.\"O When
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is invoked as an interactive login shell, or as a non-interactive shell
.\"O with the \fB\-\-login\fP option, it first reads and
.\"O executes commands from the file \fI/etc/profile\fP, if that
.\"O file exists.
.B bash
が対話的なログインシェルとして起動されるか、
\fB\-\-login\fP オプション付きの非対話的シェルとして起動されると、
\fI/etc/profile\fP ファイルが存在すれば、
.B bash
はまずここからコマンドを読み込んで実行します。
.\"O After reading that file, it looks for \fI~/.bash_profile\fP,
.\"O \fI~/.bash_login\fP, and \fI~/.profile\fP, in that order, and reads
.\"O and executes commands from the first one that exists and is readable.
このファイルを読んだ後、
.B bash
は \fI~/.bash_profile\fP, \fI~/.bash_login\fP, \fI~/.profile\fP をこの
順番で探します。
.B bash
は、この中で最初に見つかり、かつ読み込みが可能であるファイルから
コマンドを読み込んで実行します。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-\-noprofile
.\"O option may be used when the shell is started to inhibit this behavior.
.B \-\-noprofile
オプションを使ってシェルを起動すれば、
この動作を行わないようにできます。
.PP
.\"O When a login shell exits,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O reads and executes commands from the file \fI~/.bash_logout\fP, if it
.\"O exists.
ログインシェルが終了するときには、
\fI~/.bash_logout\fP ファイルがあれば、
.B bash
はこれを読み込んで実行します。
.PP
.\"O When an interactive shell that is not a login shell is started,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O reads and executes commands from \fI~/.bashrc\fP, if that file exists.
.\"O This may be inhibited by using the
.\"O .B \-\-norc
.\"O option.
.\"O The \fB\-\-rcfile\fP \fIfile\fP option will force
.\"O .B bash
.\"O to read and execute commands from \fIfile\fP instead of \fI~/.bashrc\fP.
ログインシェルでない対話的シェルとして起動されると、
\fI~/.bashrc\fP ファイルがあれば、
.B bash
はここからコマンドを読み込み、実行します。
この動作は
.B \-\-norc
オプションで行わないようにできます。
\fB\-\-rcfile\fP \fIfile\fP オプションを使うと、
コマンドの読み込みと実行を \fI~/.bashrc\fP からでなく
\fIfile\fP から行わせることができます。
.PP
.\"O When
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is started non-interactively, to run a shell script, for example, it
.\"O looks for the variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B BASH_ENV
.\"O in the environment, expands its value if it appears there, and uses the
.\"O expanded value as the name of a file to read and execute.
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O behaves as if the following command were executed:
(例えばシェルスクリプトを実行するために) 非対話的に起動されると、
.B bash
は環境変数
.SM
.B BASH_ENV
を調べ、この変数が定義されていればその値を展開し、
得られた値をファイル名とみなして、
そこからコマンドの読み込みと実行を行います。
つまり
.B bash
は以下のコマンドが実行されたのと同じように動作します:
.sp .5
.RS
.if t \f(CWif [ \-n "$BASH_ENV" ]; then . "$BASH_ENV"; fi\fP
.if n if [ \-n "$BASH_ENV" ]; then . "$BASH_ENV"; fi
.RE
.sp .5
.\"O but the value of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O variable is not used to search for the file name.
ただし、ファイル名を探すために
.SM
.B PATH
環境変数の値が使われることはありません。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is invoked with the name
.\"O .BR sh ,
.\"O it tries to mimic the startup behavior of historical versions of
.\"O .B sh
.\"O as closely as possible,
.\"O while conforming to the POSIX standard as well.
.BR sh
という名前で
.B bash
を起動すると、
.B bash
は古くからある
.B sh
の起動動作をできるだけ真似しようとします。
また POSIX 標準にもできるだけ従おうとします。
.\"O When invoked as an interactive login shell, or a non-interactive
.\"O shell with the \fB\-\-login\fP option, it first attempts to
.\"O read and execute commands from
.\"O .I /etc/profile
.\"O and
.\"O .IR ~/.profile ,
.\"O in that order.
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-\-noprofile
.\"O option may be used to inhibit this behavior.
対話的なログインシェルとして起動されると、
あるいは \fB\-\-login\fP オプション付きの非対話的シェルとして起動されると、
このシェルはまず
.I /etc/profile
と
.IR ~/.profile
の順でコマンドの読み込みと実行をしようとします。
.B \-\-noprofile
オプションを使うと、この動作を行わないようにできます。
.\"O When invoked as an interactive shell with the name
.\"O .BR sh ,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O looks for the variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR ENV ,
.\"O expands its value if it is defined, and uses the
.\"O expanded value as the name of a file to read and execute.
.BR sh
という名前の対話的シェルとして起動されると、
.B bash
は環境変数
.SM
.BR ENV
を調べ、この変数が定義されていればその値を展開し、
展開で得た値をコマンドの読み込みと実行を行うためのファイル名として使います。
.\"O Since a shell invoked as
.\"O .B sh
.\"O does not attempt to read and execute commands from any other startup
.\"O files, the
.\"O .B \-\-rcfile
.\"O option has no effect.
.B sh
という名前で起動されたシェルは、
他の起動ファイルからコマンドの読み込みと起動を行うことはないので、
.B \-\-rcfile
オプションは全く効果を持ちません。
.\"O A non-interactive shell invoked with the name
.\"O .B sh
.\"O does not attempt to read any other startup files. 
.\"O When invoked as
.\"O .BR sh ,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O enters
.\"O .I posix
.\"O mode after the startup files are read.
.B sh
という名前の非対話的シェルとして起動されると、
このシェルは他の起動ファイルを何も読み込みません。
.B sh
として起動された場合、
.B bash
は起動ファイルの読み込みを行った後に
.I POSIX
モードに入ります。
.PP
.\"O When
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is started in
.\"O .I posix
.\"O mode, as with the
.\"O .B \-\-posix
.\"O command line option, it follows the POSIX standard for startup files.
.\"O In this mode, interactive shells expand the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B ENV
.\"O variable and commands are read and executed from the file
.\"O whose name is the expanded value.
.\"O No other startup files are read.
.B \-\-posix
コマンドラインオプション等により
.B bash
が
.I POSIX
モードで起動されると、
.B bash
は起動ファイルに関して POSIX 標準に従います。
このモードでは、対話的シェルは
.SM
.B ENV
環境変数を展開し、
展開して得られた名前のファイルからコマンドの読み込みと実行を行います。
他の起動ファイルは全く読み込みません。
.PP
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O attempts to determine when it is being run by the remote shell
.\"O daemon, usually \fIrshd\fP.
.\"O If
.\"O .B bash
.\"O determines it is being run by \fIrshd\fP, it reads and executes
.\"O commands from \fI~/.bashrc\fP, if that file exists and is readable.
.\"O It will not do this if invoked as \fBsh\fP.
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-\-norc
.\"O option may be used to inhibit this behavior, and the
.\"O .B \-\-rcfile
.\"O option may be used to force another file to be read, but
.\"O \fIrshd\fP does not generally invoke the shell with those options
.\"O or allow them to be specified.
.B bash
は、自分を起動したのがリモートシェルデーモン (通常は \fIrshd\fP)
かどうかを調べます。
\fIrshd\fP によって実行されていると
.B bash
が判断した場合、
\fI~/.bashrc\fP が存在し、かつ読み込み可能であれば、
.B bash
はコマンドをこのファイルから読み込んで実行します。
\fBsh\fP として呼び出された場合には、この動作は行いません。
.B \-\-norc
オプションを使えばこの動作を禁止できますし、
.B \-\-rcfile
オプションを使えば他のファイルを読ませるようにもできます。
しかし一般的には \fIrshd\fP は
これらのオプションを付けてシェルを起動しませんし、
指定もできないようになっています。
.PP
.\"O If the shell is started with the effective user (group) id not equal to the
.\"O real user (group) id, and the \fB\-p\fP option is not supplied, no startup
.\"O files are read, shell functions are not inherited from the environment,
.\"O the \fBSHELLOPTS\fP variable, if it appears in the environment, is ignored,
.\"O and the effective user id is set to the real user id.
.\"O If the \fB\-p\fP option is supplied at invocation, the startup behavior is
.\"O the same, but the effective user id is not reset.
シェルが実ユーザ (グループ) ID と異なる実効ユーザ (グループ) ID で起動され、
かつ \fB\-p\fP オプションが与えられていない場合は、
起動ファイルは全く読み込まれず、シェル関数は環境から継承されず、
\fBSHELLOPTS\fP が環境変数に含まれていても無視され、
実効ユーザ ID には実ユーザ ID が設定されます。
\fB\-p\fP オプションが起動時に与えられた場合、
起動時の動作は同じですが、
実効ユーザ ID は再設定されません。
.\"O .SH DEFINITIONS
.SH 定義
.PP
.\"O The following definitions are used throughout the rest of this
.\"O document.
このドキュメントの残りの部分では、
以下の定義を使用します。
.PD 0
.TP
.\"O .B blank 
.\"O A space or tab.
.B ブランク (blank)
空白文字またはタブ文字
.TP
.\"O .B word
.B 単語 (word)
.\"O A sequence of characters considered as a single unit by the shell.
.\"O Also known as a
.\"O .BR token .
シェルが 1 単位とみなす文字並び。
.BR トークン(token)
とも言われます。
.TP
.\"O .B name
.B 名前 (name)
.\"O A 
.\"O .I word
.\"O consisting only of alphanumeric characters and underscores, and
.\"O beginning with an alphabetic character or an underscore.  Also
.\"O referred to as an
.\"O .BR identifier .
英数字とアンダースコア文字だけから構成され、
かつ最初の文字が英字かアンダースコア文字である
.IR 単語 。
.B 識別子 (identifier)
とも言われます。
.TP
.\"O .B metacharacter
.B メタ文字 (metacharacter)
.\"O A character that, when unquoted, separates words.  One of the following:
クォートされていない場合に、単語区切りとなる文字。
以下の文字のうちのいずれかです:
.br
.RS
.PP
.\"O .if t \fB|  &  ;  (  )  <  >  space  tab\fP
.\"O .if n \fB|  & ; ( ) < > space tab\fP
.if t \fB|  &  ;  (  )  <  >  スペース  タブ\fP
.if n \fB|  & ; ( ) < > スペース タブ\fP
.RE
.PP
.TP
.\"O .B control operator
.B 制御演算子
.\"O A \fItoken\fP that performs a control function.  It is one of the following
.\"O symbols:
制御機能を持つ\fIトークン\fP。
以下のシンボルのうちのいずれかです:
.RS
.PP
.if t \fB\(bv\(bv  &  &&  ;  ;;  (  )  |  <newline>\fP
.if n \fB|| & && ; ;; ( ) | <newline>\fP
.RE
.PD
.\"O .SH "RESERVED WORDS"
.SH 予約語
.\"O \fIReserved words\fP are words that have a special meaning to the shell.
.\"O The following words are recognized as reserved when unquoted and either
.\"O the first word of a simple command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL GRAMMAR
.\"O below) or the third word of a 
.\"O .B case 
.\"O or
.\"O .B for
.\"O command:
\fI予約語 (reserved word)\fP
とはシェルにとって特別な意味を持つ単語です。
以下の単語がクォートされておらず、
かつ単純なコマンド (simple command) の
先頭の単語 (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの文法
を参照) であるか、
.B case 
コマンドや
.B for
コマンドの 3 番目の単語である場合には、予約語として認識されます:
.if t .RS
.PP
.B
.if n ! case  do done elif else esac fi for function if in select then until while { } time [[ ]]
.if t !    case    do    done    elif    else    esac    fi    for    function    if    in    select    then    until    while    {    }    time    [[    ]]
.if t .RE
.RE
.\"O .SH "SHELL GRAMMAR"
.SH シェルの文法
.\"O .SS Simple Commands
.SS 単純なコマンド (Simple Commands)
.PP
.\"O A \fIsimple command\fP is a sequence of optional variable assignments
.\"O followed by \fBblank\fP-separated words and redirections, and
.\"O terminated by a \fIcontrol operator\fP.  The first word
.\"O specifies the command to be executed.  The remaining words are
.\"O passed as arguments to the invoked command.
単純なコマンド (\fIsimple command\fP) とは、
変数の代入を並べたもの (これは省略可能です) の後に、
ブランク区切りの単語とリダイレクションを記述し、
最後に制御演算子を置いたものです。
最初の単語は実行するコマンドを指定します。
残りの単語は起動されるコマンドに引き数として渡されます。
.PP
.\"O The return value of a \fIsimple command\fP is its exit status, or
.\"O 128+\fIn\^\fP if the command is terminated by signal
.\"O .IR n .
単純なコマンドの返り値はコマンドの終了コードですが、シグナル
.IR n
を受けてコマンドが終了した場合には 128+\fIn\^\fP となります。
.\"O .SS Pipelines
.SS パイプライン (Pipeline)
.PP
.\"O A \fIpipeline\fP is a sequence of one or more commands separated by
.\"O the character
.\"O .BR | .
.\"O The format for a pipeline is:
\fIパイプライン (pipeline)\fPは、記号
.BR |
で区切った 1 つ以上のコマンド列です。
パイプラインのフォーマットを以下に示します:
.RS
.PP
[\fBtime\fP [\fB\-p\fP]] [ ! ] \fIcommand\fP [ \fB|\fP \fIcommand2\fP ... ]
.RE
.PP
.\"O The standard output of
.\"O .I command
.\"O is connected to the standard input of
.\"O .IR command2 .
.\"O This connection is performed before any redirections specified by the
.\"O command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B REDIRECTION
.\"O below).
.I command
の標準出力は
.IR command2
の標準入力に接続されます。
この接続は、
コマンドで指定したどのリダイレクションよりも先に実行されます
(後述の
.SM
.B リダイレクション
を参照)。
.PP
.\"O If the reserved word
.\"O .B !
.\"O precedes a pipeline, the exit status of that
.\"O pipeline is the logical NOT of the exit status of the last command.
.\"O Otherwise, the status of the pipeline is the exit status of the last
.\"O command.
.\"O The shell waits for all commands in the pipeline to
.\"O terminate before returning a value.
パイプラインの前に、予約語である
.B !
がある場合、
そのパイプラインの終了ステータスは最後のコマンドの終了ステータスの論理値の
NOT を取ったものになります。
それ以外の場合には、
パイプラインのステータスは最後のコマンドの終了ステータスになります。
値を返す前に、シェルはパイプライン中の全てのコマンドが終了するのを待ちます。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B time
.\"O reserved word precedes a pipeline, the elapsed as well as user and
.\"O system time consumed by its execution are reported when the pipeline
.\"O terminates.
パイプラインの前に予約語
.B time
がある場合、コマンドの実行にかかった
経過時間・ユーザ時間・システム時間がパイプラインの終了時に報告されます。
.\"O The \fB\-p\fP option changes the output format to that specified by POSIX.
\fB\-p\fP オプションを指定すると、
出力フォーマットが POSIX 仕様に変わります。
.\"O The
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B TIMEFORMAT
.\"O variable may be set to a format string that specifies how the timing
.\"O information should be displayed; see the description of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B TIMEFORMAT
.\"O under
.\"O .B "Shell Variables"
.\"O below.
変数
.SM
.B TIMEFORMAT
には、経過時間情報の表示の仕方を指定するフォーマット文字列を
設定できます (後述の
.B シェル変数
の項の
.SM
.B TIMEFORMAT
に関する説明を参照)。
.PP
.\"O Each command in a pipeline is executed as a separate process (i.e., in a
.\"O subshell).
パイプライン中の各コマンドは、それぞれ別のプロセスとして
(つまりサブシェル内で) 実行されます。
.\"O .SS Lists
.SS リスト
.PP
.\"O A \fIlist\fP is a sequence of one or more pipelines separated by one
.\"O of the operators
.\"O .BR ; ,
.\"O .BR & ,
.\"O .BR && ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR \(bv\(bv ,
.\"O and optionally terminated by one of
.\"O .BR ; ,
.\"O .BR & ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR <newline> .
\fIリスト (list)\fP とは、1つ以上のパイプラインを演算子
.BR ; ,
.BR & ,
.BR && ,
.BR \(bv\(bv
のいずれかで区切って並べ、最後に
.BR ; ,
.BR & ,
.BR <newline> 
のいずれか (これは省略可能です) を置いたものです。
.PP
.\"O Of these list operators,
.\"O .B &&
.\"O and
.\"O .B \(bv\(bv
.\"O have equal precedence, followed by
.\"O .B ;
.\"O and
.\"O .BR &,
.\"O which have equal precedence.
リスト演算子のうち、
.B &&
と
.B \(bv\(bv
の優先順位は同じです。これらの次に、
.B ;
と
.BR &
が同じ優先順位で続きます。
.PP
.\"O If a command is terminated by the control operator
.\"O .BR & ,
.\"O the shell executes the command in the \fIbackground\fP
.\"O in a subshell.  The shell does not wait for the command to
.\"O finish, and the return status is 0.  Commands separated by a
.\"O .B ;
.\"O are executed sequentially; the shell waits for each
.\"O command to terminate in turn.  The return status is the
.\"O exit status of the last command executed.
コマンドが制御演算子
.BR &
で終わっている場合、シェルはコマンドをサブシェル内で
\fIバックグラウンド (background)\fP で実行します。
シェルはコマンドが終了するのを待たずに、返却ステータス 0 を返します。
コマンドを
.B ;
で区切った場合には、これらは順番に実行されます。
シェルはそれぞれのコマンドが終了するのを順番に待ちます。
返却ステータスは、最後に実行したコマンドの終了ステータスになります。
.PP
.\"O The control operators
.\"O .B &&
.\"O and
.\"O .B \(bv\(bv
.\"O denote AND lists and OR lists, respectively.
制御演算子
.B &&
は AND リストを示し、
.B \(bv\(bv
は OR リストを示します。
.\"O An AND list has the form
AND リストは
.RS
.PP
\fIcommand1\fP \fB&&\fP \fIcommand2\fP
.RE
.PP
という形式であり、
.\"O .I command2
.\"O is executed if, and only if,
.\"O .I command1
.\"O returns an exit status of zero.
.I command1
が終了ステータス 0 を返した場合に限り
.I command2
が実行されます。
.PP
.\"O An OR list has the form
OR リストは
.RS
.PP
\fIcommand1\fP \fB\(bv\(bv\fP \fIcommand2\fP
.PP
.RE
.PP
という形式であり、
.\"O .I command2
.\"O is executed if and only if
.\"O .I command1
.\"O returns a non-zero exit status.  The return status of
.\"O AND and OR lists is the exit status of the last command
.\"O executed in the list.
.I command1
が 0 以外の終了ステータスを返した場合に限り
.I command2
が実行されます。AND リストと OR リストの返却ステータスは、
リスト中で最後に実行されたコマンドの終了ステータスです。
.\"O .SS Compound Commands
.SS 複合コマンド(Compound Commands)
.PP
.\"O A \fIcompound command\fP is one of the following:
\fI複合コマンド (compound command)\fP を以下に示します:
.TP
(\fIlist\fP)
.\"O \fIlist\fP is executed in a subshell.  Variable assignments and builtin
.\"O commands that affect the shell's environment do not remain in effect
.\"O after the command completes.  The return status is the exit status of
.\"O \fIlist\fP.
\fIlist\fP はサブシェル内で実行されます。
シェルの環境に影響を与えるような変数の代入や組み込みコマンドは、
コマンドの終了後に影響を残しません。
返却ステータスは \fIlist\fP の終了ステータスです。
.TP
{ \fIlist\fP; }
.\"O \fIlist\fP is simply executed in the current shell environment.
.\"O \fIlist\fP must be terminated with a newline or semicolon.
.\"O This is known as a \fIgroup command\fP.
.\"O The return status is the exit status of
.\"O \fIlist\fP.
\fIlist\fP が単に現在のシェル環境で実行されます。
\fIlist\fP の最後は改行文字かセミコロンでなければなりません。これは
\fIグループコマンド(group command)\fP と呼ばれます。返却ステータスは
\fIlist\fP の終了ステータスです。
.TP
((\fIexpression\fP))
.\"O The \fIexpression\fP is evaluated according to the rules described
.\"O below under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "ARITHMETIC EVALUATION" .
\fIexpression\fP が後述の
.SM
.BR 算術式評価
で説明される規則に従って評価されます。
.\"O If the value of the expression is non-zero, the return status is 0;
.\"O otherwise the return status is 1.  This is exactly equivalent to
.\"O \fBlet "\fIexpression\fP"\fR.
式の値が 0 でない場合、返却ステータスは 0 になります。そうでない場合、
返されるステータスは 1 になります。これは \fBlet "\fIexpression\fP"\fR
と全く同じものです。
.TP
\fB[[\fP \fIexpression\fP \fB]]\fP
.\"O Return a status of 0 or 1 depending on the evaluation of
.\"O the conditional expression \fIexpression\fP.
.\"O Expressions are composed of the primaries described below under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "CONDITIONAL EXPRESSIONS" .
条件式 \fIexpression\fP の評価値に従って 0 または 1 を返します。
式は後述の
.SM
.BR 条件式
で説明する、プライマリによって構成されます。
.\"O Word splitting and pathname expansion are not performed on the words
.\"O between the \fB[[\fP and \fB]]\fP; tilde expansion, parameter and
.\"O variable expansion, arithmetic expansion, command substitution, process
.\"O substitution, and quote removal are performed.
単語分割とパス名展開は \fB[[\fP と \fB]]\fP
の間の単語に対しては行われません。
チルダ展開、パラメータと変数の展開、算術式展開、コマンド置換、
プロセス置換、クォート除去は実行されます。
.if t .sp 0.5
.if n .sp 1
.\"O When the \fB==\fP and \fB!=\fP operators are used, the string to the
.\"O right of the operator is considered a pattern and matched according
.\"O to the rules described below under \fBPattern Matching\fP.
.\"O The return value is 0 if the string matches or does not match
.\"O the pattern, respectively, and 1 otherwise.
.\"O Any part of the pattern may be quoted to force it to be matched as a
.\"O string.
\fB==\fP 演算子と \fB!=\fP 演算子が使われたとき、
演算子の右の文字列はパターンと解釈され、
後述の\fBパターンマッチング\fPで説明する規則に従ってマッチングが行われます。
文字列がパターンにマッチすれば返り値は 0 であり、
マッチしなければ返り値は 1 になります。
パターンの任意の部分をクォートして、文字列としてマッチさせることもできます。
.if t .sp 0.5
.if n .sp 1
.\"O Expressions may be combined using the following operators, listed
.\"O in decreasing order of precedence:
式は以下の演算子を使って繋げられます。
以下に演算子を優先度の順に示します:
.if t .sp 0.5
.if n .sp 1
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B ( \fIexpression\fP )
.\"O Returns the value of \fIexpression\fP.
.\"O This may be used to override the normal precedence of operators.
\fIexpression\fP の値を返します。これを用いて、
演算子の通常の優先度を変更できます。
.TP
.B ! \fIexpression\fP
.\"O True if
.\"O .I expression
.\"O is false.
.I expression
が偽ならば真になります。
.TP
\fIexpression1\fP \fB&&\fP \fIexpression2\fP
.\"O True if both
.\"O .I expression1
.\"O and
.\"O .I expression2
.\"O are true.
.I expression1
と
.I expression2
が両方とも真であれば真になります。
.TP
.if t \fIexpression1\fP \fB\(bv\(bv\fP \fIexpression2\fP
.if n \fIexpression1\fP \fB||\fP \fIexpression2\fP
.\"O True if either
.\"O .I expression1
.\"O or
.\"O .I expression2
.\"O is true.
.I expression1
と
.I expression2
のどちらかが真であれば真となります。
.PD
.RE
.LP
.\"O The \fB&&\fP and
.\"O .if t \fB\(bv\(bv\fP
.\"O .if n \fB||\fP
.\"O operators do not execute \fIexpression2\fP if the value of
.\"O \fIexpression1\fP is sufficient to determine the return value of
.\"O the entire conditional expression.
\fIexpression1\fP の値だけで条件式全体の返り値が決定できれば、
\fB&&\fP 演算子と
.if t \fB\(bv\(bv\fP
.if n \fB||\fP
演算子は \fIexpression2\fP を実行しません。
.TP
\fBfor\fP \fIname\fP [ \fBin\fP \fIword\fP ] ; \fBdo\fP \fIlist\fP ; \fBdone\fP
.\"O The list of words following \fBin\fP is expanded, generating a list
.\"O of items.
.\"O The variable \fIname\fP is set to each element of this list
.\"O in turn, and \fIlist\fP is executed each time.
.\"O If the \fBin\fP \fIword\fP is omitted, the \fBfor\fP command executes
.\"O \fIlist\fP once for each positional parameter that is set (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PARAMETERS
.\"O below).
\fBin\fP に続く単語のリストが展開され、要素のリストが生成されます。
変数 \fIname\fP には、このリストの各要素が順番にセットされ、その度に
\fIlist\fP が実行されます。「\fBin\fP \fIword\fP」が省略された場合、
\fBfor\fP コマンドは、設定されている位置パラメータそれぞれに対して
\fIlist\fP を一度ずつ実行します(後述の
.SM
.B パラメータ
を参照)。
.\"O The return status is the exit status of the last command that executes.
.\"O If the expansion of the items following \fBin\fP results in an empty
.\"O list, no commands are executed, and the return status is 0.
返却ステータスは実行された最後のコマンドの終了ステータスになります。
\fBin\fP に続く要素を展開した結果が空となった場合、
コマンドは全く実行されず、返却ステータス 0 が返されます。
.TP
\fBfor\fP (( \fIexpr1\fP ; \fIexpr2\fP ; \fIexpr3\fP )) ; \fBdo\fP \fIlist\fP ; \fBdone\fP
.\"O First, the arithmetic expression \fIexpr1\fP is evaluated according
.\"O to the rules described below under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "ARITHMETIC EVALUATION" .
.\"O The arithmetic expression \fIexpr2\fP is then evaluated repeatedly
.\"O until it evaluates to zero.
最初に、算術式\fIexpr1\fPが、後述の
.SM
.BR 算術式評価
で説明される規則に従って評価されます。
次に、算術式\fIexpr2\fPがゼロになるまで繰り返し評価されます。
.\"O Each time \fIexpr2\fP evaluates to a non-zero value, \fIlist\fP is
.\"O executed and the arithmetic expression \fIexpr3\fP is evaluated.
.\"O If any expression is omitted, it behaves as if it evaluates to 1.
.\"O The return value is the exit status of the last command in \fIlist\fP
.\"O that is executed, or false if any of the expressions is invalid.
算術式\fIexpr2\fPの評価結果がゼロでなければ、その度毎に\fIlist\fPが実行され、
算術式\fIexpr3\fPが評価されます。
どの算術式も省略された場合は、
評価結果が 1 とみなされた場合のように振る舞います。
返却ステータスは \fIlist\fP 中で実行された
最後のコマンドの終了ステータスとなりますが、
算術式のいずれかが無効である場合には不正な値となります。
.TP
\fBselect\fP \fIname\fP [ \fBin\fP \fIword\fP ] ; \fBdo\fP \fIlist\fP ; \fBdone\fP
.\"O The list of words following \fBin\fP is expanded, generating a list
.\"O of items.  The set of expanded words is printed on the standard
.\"O error, each preceded by a number.  If the \fBin\fP
.\"O \fIword\fP is omitted, the positional parameters are printed (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PARAMETERS
.\"O below).  The
.\"O .B PS3
.\"O prompt is then displayed and a line read from the standard input.
\fBin\fP に続く単語のリストが展開され、要素のリストが生成されます。
展開された単語の集合が番号付きで標準エラー出力に出力されます。
「\fBin\fP \fIword\fP」が省略された場合、
位置パラメータが出力されます (後述の
.SM
.B パラメータ
を参照)。続いて
.B PS3
が表示され、標準入力から 1 行の読み込みが行われます。
.\"O If the line consists of a number corresponding to one of
.\"O the displayed words, then the value of
.\"O .I name
.\"O is set to that word.  If the line is empty, the words and prompt
.\"O are displayed again.  If EOF is read, the command completes.  Any
.\"O other value read causes
.\"O .I name
.\"O to be set to null.  The line read is saved in the variable
.\"O .BR REPLY .
表示された単語のいずれかに対応する数字がこの行に含まれていれば、
.I name
の値としてその単語が設定されます。
行が空であれば、単語とプロンプトが再び表示されます。
EOF を読み込むとコマンドが終了します。
これ以外の値の場合には、
.I name
には空文字列が設定されます。読み込んだ行は変数
.BR REPLY
に格納されます。
.\"O The
.\"O .I list
.\"O is executed after each selection until a
.\"O .B break
.\"O or
.\"O .B return
.\"O command is executed.
.B break
または
.B return
コマンドが実行されるまで、選択を行うたびに
.I list
が実行されます。
.\"O The exit status of
.\"O .B select
.\"O is the exit status of the last command executed in
.\"O .IR list ,
.\"O or zero if no commands were executed.
.B select
の終了ステータスは、
.IR list
中で最後に実行したコマンドの終了ステータスですが、
コマンドが全く実行されなかった場合には 0 となります。
.TP
\fBcase\fP \fIword\fP \fBin\fP [ [(] \fIpattern\fP [ \fB|\fP \fIpattern\fP ] \
... ) \fIlist\fP ;; ] ... \fBesac\fP
.\"O A \fBcase\fP command first expands \fIword\fP, and tries to match
.\"O it against each \fIpattern\fP in turn, using the same matching rules
.\"O as for pathname expansion (see
.\"O .B Pathname Expansion
.\"O below).  When a match is found, the
.\"O corresponding \fIlist\fP is executed.  After the first match, no
.\"O subsequent matches are attempted.  The exit status is zero if no
.\"O pattern matches.  Otherwise, it is the exit status of the
.\"O last command executed in \fIlist\fP.
\fBcase\fP コマンドは最初に \fIword\fP を展開し、それぞれの
\fIpattern\fP に対して順にマッチングを試みます。
マッチングの際にはパス名展開 (後述の
.B パス名展開
を参照) と同じ規則が用いられます。
マッチするものが見つかると、これに対応する \fIlist\fP が実行されます。
マッチするものが見つかったら、それ以降のマッチングは行われません。
マッチするパターンが無ければ、終了ステータスは 0 になります。
マッチするものがあったら、終了ステータスは
\fIlist\fP 中で最後に実行されたコマンドの終了ステータスになります。
.TP
\fBif\fP \fIlist\fP; \fBthen\fP \fIlist;\fP \
[ \fBelif\fP \fIlist\fP; \fBthen\fP \fIlist\fP; ] ... \
[ \fBelse\fP \fIlist\fP; ] \fBfi\fP
.\"O The
.\"O .B if 
.\"O .I list
.\"O is executed.  If its exit status is zero, the
.\"O \fBthen\fP \fIlist\fP is executed.  Otherwise, each \fBelif\fP
.\"O \fIlist\fP is executed in turn, and if its exit status is zero,
.\"O the corresponding \fBthen\fP \fIlist\fP is executed and the
.\"O command completes.  Otherwise, the \fBelse\fP \fIlist\fP is
.\"O executed, if present.  The exit status is the exit status of the
.\"O last command executed, or zero if no condition tested true.
最初に
.B if 
.I list
が実行されます。この終了ステータスが 0 ならば、\fBthen\fP \fIlist\fP
が実行されます。
そうでなければ \fBelif\fP \fIlist\fP がそれぞれ順番に実行され、
この終了ステータスが 0 ならば、対応する \fBthen\fP \fIlist\fP
が実行され、コマンドが終了します。そうでなければ、\fBelse\fP \fIlist\fP
が (もし存在すれば) 実行されます。
終了ステータスは最後に実行されたコマンドの終了ステータスですが、
真と評価された条件が全く無い場合には 0 となります。
.TP
.PD 0
\fBwhile\fP \fIlist\fP; \fBdo\fP \fIlist\fP; \fBdone\fP
.TP
\fBuntil\fP \fIlist\fP; \fBdo\fP \fIlist\fP; \fBdone\fP
.PD
.\"O The \fBwhile\fP command continuously executes the \fBdo\fP
.\"O \fIlist\fP as long as the last command in \fIlist\fP returns
.\"O an exit status of zero.  The \fBuntil\fP command is identical
.\"O to the \fBwhile\fP command, except that the test is negated;
\fBwhile\fP コマンドは、\fIlist\fP 中の最後のコマンドが終了ステータス
0 を返すまで、繰り返して \fBdo\fP \fIlist\fP を実行します。\fBuntil\fP
コマンドは \fBwhile\fP コマンドとほぼ同じですが、
評価の条件が否定となる点が異なります。
.\"O the
.\"O .B do
.\"O .I list
.\"O is executed as long as the last command in
.\"O .I list
.\"O returns a non-zero exit status.
.B do
.I list
は、
.I list
中の最後のコマンドが
0 以外の終了ステータスを返す限りずっと実行されます。
.\"O The exit status of the \fBwhile\fP and \fBuntil\fP commands
.\"O is the exit status
.\"O of the last \fBdo\fP \fIlist\fP command executed, or zero if
.\"O none was executed.
\fBwhile\fP コマンドと \fBuntil\fP コマンドの終了ステータスは、
\fBdo\fP \fIlist\fP で実行された最後のコマンドの終了ステータスになりますが、
コマンドが全く実行されなかった場合には 0 になります。
.TP
[ \fBfunction\fP ] \fIname\fP () { \fIlist\fP; }
.\"O This defines a function named \fIname\fP.  The \fIbody\fP of the
.\"O function is the
.\"O .I list
.\"O of commands between { and }.  This list
.\"O is executed whenever \fIname\fP is specified as the
.\"O name of a simple command.  The exit status of a function is
.\"O the exit status of the last command executed in the body.  (See
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FUNCTIONS
.\"O below.)
\fIname\fP という名前の関数を定義します。関数の\fI本体(body)\fPは、
{ と } で囲まれたコマンドの
.I リスト
です。単純なコマンドの名前として \fIname\fP が指定されると、
必ずこのリストが実行されます。
関数の終了ステータスは、
関数本体で最後に実行されたコマンドの終了ステータスです (後述の
.SM
.B 関数
を参照)。
.\"O .SH COMMENTS
.SH コメント (COMMENTS)
.\"O In a non-interactive shell, or an interactive shell in which the
.\"O .B interactive_comments
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O builtin is enabled (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS"
.\"O below), a word beginning with
.\"O .B #
.\"O causes that word and all remaining characters on that line to
.\"O be ignored.  An interactive shell without the
.\"O .B interactive_comments
.\"O option enabled does not allow comments.  The
.\"O .B interactive_comments
.\"O option is on by default in interactive shells.
シェルが対話的でない場合、または対話的なシェルにおいて
組み込みコマンドの
.B shopt
に対する
.B interactive_comments
オプションが有効となっている (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照すること) 場合には、
.B #
で始まる単語があると、その単語とその行の残りの文字が全て無視されます。
対話シェルでは、
.B interactive_comments
オプションが有効でなければコメントは使えません。対話シェルでは、
.B interactive_comments
オプションはデフォルトで有効になっています。
.\"O .SH QUOTING
.SH クォート
.\"O \fIQuoting\fP is used to remove the special meaning of certain
.\"O characters or words to the shell.  Quoting can be used to 
.\"O disable special treatment for special characters, to prevent
.\"O reserved words from being recognized as such, and to prevent
.\"O parameter expansion.
\fIクォート (quoting)\fP を使うと、
特定の文字や単語のシェルに対する特別な意味を取り除けます。
クォートを用いると、特殊文字の特殊な扱いを無効にすることや、
予約語が予約語として識別されることを防いだり、
パラメータの展開を防げます。
.PP
.\"O Each of the \fImetacharacters\fP listed above under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B DEFINITIONS
.\"O has special meaning to the shell and must be quoted if it is to
.\"O represent itself.
前述の
.SM
.B 定義
で挙げた\fIメタ文字 (metacharacters)\fP にはそれぞれ特殊な意味があるので、
その文字自身を表すためにはクォートしなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O When the command history expansion facilities are being used, the
.\"O \fIhistory expansion\fP character, usually \fB!\fP, must be quoted
.\"O to prevent history expansion.
コマンド履歴展開機能が使われている場合、履歴の展開を防ぐためには、
履歴展開 (\fIhistory expansion\fP) 文字 (普通 \fB!\fP)
をクォートしなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O There are three quoting mechanisms: the
.\"O .IR "escape character" ,
.\"O single quotes, and double quotes.
クォートの方法には、
.IR "エスケープ文字(escape character)" ,
シングルクォート、ダブルクォートの 3 種類があります。
.PP
.\"O A non-quoted backslash (\fB\e\fP) is the
.\"O .IR "escape character" .
.\"O It preserves the literal value of the next character that follows,
.\"O with the exception of <newline>.  If a \fB\e\fP<newline> pair
.\"O appears, and the backslash is not itself quoted, the \fB\e\fP<newline>
.\"O is treated as a line continuation (that is, it is removed from the
.\"O input stream and effectively ignored).
クォートされていないバックスラッシュ (\fB\e\fP) は
.IR エスケープ文字
です。エスケープ文字は <newline> という例外を除き、
後に続く文字 1 つの文字としての値を保持させます。
\fB\e\fP<newline> という組合せが現われ、
かつバックスラッシュ自身がクォートされていない場合には、
\fB\e\fP<newline> は行を継続することを表します
(つまり、入力ストリームから改行文字が削除され、実質的に無視されます)。
.PP
.\"O Enclosing characters in single quotes preserves the literal value
.\"O of each character within the quotes.  A single quote may not occur
.\"O between single quotes, even when preceded by a backslash.
シングルクォートで文字を囲むと、
クォート内部のそれぞれの文字は文字としての値を保持します。
シングルクォートの間にシングルクォートを置くことはできません。
これはバックスラッシュを前に付けても同じです。
.PP
.\"O Enclosing characters in double quotes preserves the literal value
.\"O of all characters within the quotes, with the exception of
.\"O .BR $ ,
.\"O .BR ` ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR \e .
ダブルクォートで文字を囲むとクォート内部の全ての文字は文字としての値を
保持しますが、
.BR $ ,
.BR ` ,
.BR \e
は例外となります。
.\"O The characters
.\"O .B $
.\"O and
.\"O .B `
.\"O retain their special meaning within double quotes.  The backslash
.\"O retains its special meaning only when followed by one of the following
.\"O characters:
.\"O .BR $ ,
.\"O .BR ` ,
.\"O \^\fB"\fP\^,
.\"O .BR \e ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR <newline> .
.B $
と
.B `
はダブルクォートの内部でも特殊な意味を失いません。
バックスラッシュの場合は、次の文字が
.BR $ ,
.BR ` ,
\^\fB"\fP\^,
.BR \e ,
.BR <newline>
のいずれかである場合に限り特殊な意味を失いません。
.\"O A double quote may be quoted within double quotes by preceding it with
.\"O a backslash.
前にバックスラッシュを付ければ、
ダブルクォート文字をダブルクォートによるクォートの内部で
クォートできます。
.PP
.\"O The special parameters
.\"O .B *
.\"O and
.\"O .B @
.\"O have special meaning when in double
.\"O quotes (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PARAMETERS
.\"O below).
特殊なパラメータである
.B *
と
.B @
は、ダブルクォート内部でも特殊な意味を失いません (後述の
.SM
.B パラメータ
を参照)。
.PP
.\"O Words of the form \fB$\fP'\fIstring\fP' are treated specially.  The
.\"O word expands to \fIstring\fP, with backslash-escaped characters replaced
.\"O as specifed by the ANSI C standard.  Backslash escape sequences, if
.\"O present, are decoded as follows:
\fB$\fP'\fIstring\fP' の形式を持つ単語は特殊な扱いを受けます。
この単語は \fIstring\fP に展開され、
それから ANSI C 標準で仕様が決められている、
バックスラッシュでエスケープされている文字に置き換えられます。
バックスラッシュエスケープシーケンスは、
(もし存在すれば) 以下のようにデコードされます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \ea
.\"O alert (bell)
警告 (ベル)
.TP
.B \eb
.\"O backspace
バックスペース
.TP
.B \ee
.\"O an escape character
エスケープ文字
.TP   
.B \ef
.\"O form feed
フォームフィード文字
.TP  
.B \en
.\"O new line
改行文字
.TP     
.B \er
.\"O carriage return
復帰文字
.TP
.B \et
.\"O horizontal tab
水平タブ文字
.TP   
.B \ev
.\"O vertical tab
垂直タブ文字
.TP
.B \e\e
.\"O backslash
バックスラッシュ
.TP
.B \e'
.\"O single quote
シングルクォート
.TP   
.B \e\fInnn\fP
.\"O the character whose ASCII code is the octal value \fInnn\fP
.\"O (one to three digits)
ASCII コードの 8 進値が \fInnn\fP である文字 (1 文字につき数字 3 桁)。
.TP
.B \ex\fInnn\fP
.\"O the character whose ASCII code is the hexadecimal value \fInnn\fP
.\"O (one to three digits)
ASCII コードの 16 進値が \fInnn\fP である文字 (1 文字につき数字 3 桁)。
.PD
.RE
.LP
.\"O The expanded result is single-quoted, as if the dollar sign had
.\"O not been present.
展開された結果はシングルクォートされているのと同じ状態で、
ドル記号は存在しなかったかのように扱われます。
.PP
.\"O A double-quoted string preceded by a dollar sign (\fB$\fP) will cause
.\"O the string to be translated according to the current locale.
.\"O If the current locale is \fBC\fP or \fBPOSIX\fP, the dollar sign
.\"O is ignored.
.\"O If the string is translated and replaced, the replacement is
.\"O double-quoted.
ダブルクォートされた文字列の前にドル記号(\fB$\fP)があると、
文字列は現在のロケールに従って変換されます。
現在のロケールが \fBC\fP または \fBPOSIX\fP ならば、
ドル記号は無視されます。文字列が変換されたり置換された場合には、
その結果はダブルクォートされているのと同じ状態になります。
.\"O .SH PARAMETERS
.SH パラメータ
.\"O A
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is an entity that stores values.
.\"O It can be a
.\"O .IR name ,
.\"O a number, or one of the special characters listed below under
.\"O .BR "Special Parameters" .
.\"O For the shell's purposes, a
.\"O .I variable
.\"O is a parameter denoted by a
.\"O .IR name .
.I パラメータ (parameter)
は値を保持するためのものです。パラメータは
.IR 名前 、
数字、後述の
.BR 特殊なパラメータ
で挙げる特殊文字のいずれかで表現されます。シェルでの用法においては、
.I 変数(variable)
とは
.I 名前
で表現されたパラメータです。
.PP
.\"O A parameter is set if it has been assigned a value.  The null string is
.\"O a valid value.  Once a variable is set, it may be unset only by using
.\"O the
.\"O .B unset
.\"O builtin command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).
パラメータに値が代入されていれば、
そのパラメータは設定 (set) されていると言われます。
空文字列も有効な値です。一度値を設定すると、組み込みコマンドの
.B unset
を使わなければ設定を取り消す (unset する) ことはできません
(後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照)。
.PP
.\"O A
.\"O .I variable
.\"O may be assigned to by a statement of the form
.I 変数
には、以下の構文で代入できます:
.RS
.PP
\fIname\fP=[\fIvalue\fP]
.RE
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I value
.\"O is not given, the variable is assigned the null string.  All
.\"O .I values
.\"O undergo tilde expansion, parameter and variable expansion,
.\"O command substitution, arithmetic expansion, and quote
.\"O removal (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EXPANSION
.\"O below).  If the variable has its
.\"O .B integer
.\"O attribute set (see
.\"O .B declare
.\"O below in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS" )
.\"O then
.\"O .I value
.\"O is subject to arithmetic expansion even if the $((...)) expansion is
.\"O not used (see
.\"O .B "Arithmetic Expansion"
.\"O below).
.I value
が与えられなかった場合、変数には空文字列が代入されます。全ての
.I value
に対して、チルダ展開、パラメータと変数の展開、コマンド置換、
算術式展開、クォート除去が行われます (後述の
.B 展開
を参照)。変数の
.B 整数
属性が設定されている場合 (後述の
.BR シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照)、$((...)) の展開を使っていなくても
.I value
に対しての算術展開が行われます (後述の
.B 算術式展開
を参照)。
.\"O Word splitting is not performed, with the exception
.\"O of \fB"$@"\fP as explained below under
.\"O .BR "Special Parameters" .
.\"O Pathname expansion is not performed.
.BR 特殊パラメータ
で後述する \fB"$@"\fP という例外を除いて、単語の分割は行われません。
パス名展開も実行されません。
.\"O .SS Positional Parameters
.SS 位置パラメータ(Positional Parameters)
.PP
.\"O A
.\"O .I positional parameter
.\"O is a parameter denoted by one or more
.\"O digits, other than the single digit 0.  Positional parameters are
.\"O assigned from the shell's arguments when it is invoked,
.\"O and may be reassigned using the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command.  Positional parameters may not be assigned to
.\"O with assignment statements.  The positional parameters are
.\"O temporarily replaced when a shell function is executed (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FUNCTIONS
.\"O below).
.I 位置パラメータ (positional parameter)
は、1 桁以上の数値で表されるパラメータです。ただし 0 は含みません。
位置パラメータは、シェルが起動されたときにシェルの引き数が代入されますが、
組み込みコマンドの
.B set
を使って代入し直すこともできます。
代入文を使って位置パラメータへの代入を行うことはできません。
シェル関数が実行されると、
位置パラメータは一時的に置き換えられます (後述の
.SM
.B 関数
を参照)。
.PP
.\"O When a positional parameter consisting of more than a single
.\"O digit is expanded, it must be enclosed in braces (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EXPANSION
.\"O below).
2 桁以上の数値を含む位置パラメータを展開するときには、ブレース ({})
で囲まなければなりません (後述の
.SM
.B 展開
を参照)。
.\"O .SS Special Parameters
.SS 特殊パラメータ
.PP
.\"O The shell treats several parameters specially.  These parameters may
.\"O only be referenced; assignment to them is not allowed.
シェルはいくつかのパラメータを特別扱いします。
このようなパラメータは参照されるだけであり、
値を代入することは許されません。
.PD 0
.TP
.B *
.\"O Expands to the positional parameters, starting from one.  When the
.\"O expansion occurs within double quotes, it expands to a single word
.\"O with the value of each parameter separated by the first character
.\"O of the 
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O special variable.  That is, "\fB$*\fP" is equivalent
.\"O to "\fB$1\fP\fIc\fP\fB$2\fP\fIc\fP\fB...\fP", where
.\"O .I c
.\"O is the first character of the value of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O variable.  If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O is unset, the parameters are separated by spaces.
(1 から始まる) 全ての位置パラメータに展開されます。
ダブルクォートの内部で展開が行われたときは、
それぞれのパラメータを特別な変数である
.SM
.B IFS
の最初の文字で区切って並べた 1 つの単語に展開されます。つまり、
"\fB$*\fP" は "\fB$1\fP\fIc\fP\fB$2\fP\fIc\fP\fB...\fP" と同じです。
ここで
.I c
は変数
.SM
.B IFS
の値の最初の文字です。
.SM
.B IFS
が設定されていなければ、パラメータは空白で区切られます。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O is null, the parameters are joined without intervening separators.
.SM
.B IFS
が空文字列の場合、パラメータの間には区切り文字は入らず、
全てのパラメータは繋げられます。
.TP
.B @
.\"O Expands to the positional parameters, starting from one.  When the
.\"O expansion occurs within double quotes, each parameter expands to a
.\"O separate word.  That is, "\fB$@\fP" is equivalent to
.\"O "\fB$1\fP" "\fB$2\fP" ...
.\"O When there are no positional parameters, "\fB$@\fP" and 
.\"O .B $@
.\"O expand to nothing (i.e., they are removed).
(1 から始まる) 全ての位置パラメータに展開されます。
ダブルクォートの内部で展開が行われたときは、
それぞれのパラメータは別々の単語に展開されます。
つまり "\fB$@\fP" は "\fB$1\fP" "\fB$2\fP" ... と同じです。
位置パラメータが無い場合には、"\fB$@\fP" と
.B $@
を展開しても空文字列になります (つまり取り除かれます)。
.TP
.B #
.\"O Expands to the number of positional parameters in decimal.
位置パラメータの個数を示す 10 進値に展開されます。
.TP
.B ?
.\"O Expands to the status of the most recently executed foreground
.\"O pipeline.
最後に実行されたフォアグラウンドのパイプラインの
終了ステータスに展開されます。
.TP
.B \-
.\"O Expands to the current option flags as specified upon invocation, 
.\"O by the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command, or those set by the shell itself
.\"O (such as the
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O option).
現在のオプションフラグに展開されます。
これは起動の時に指定したり、組み込みコマンド
.B set
で設定したり、(
.B \-i
オプション等で) シェル自身が設定したりします。
.TP
.B $
.\"O Expands to the process ID of the shell.  In a () subshell, it
.\"O expands to the process ID of the current shell, not the
.\"O subshell.
シェルのプロセス ID に展開されます。
() を使ったサブシェルの内部では、$ はサブシェルではなく、
現在のシェルのプロセス ID に展開されます。
.TP
.B !
.\"O Expands to the process ID of the most recently executed background
.\"O (asynchronous) command.
最後に実行されたバックグラウンド (非同期) コマンドの
プロセス ID に展開されます。
.TP
.B 0
.\"O Expands to the name of the shell or shell script.  This is set at
.\"O shell initialization.  If
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is invoked with a file of commands,
.\"O .B $0
.\"O is set to the name of that file.  If
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is started with the
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O option, then
.\"O .B $0
.\"O is set to the first argument after the string to be
.\"O executed, if one is present.  Otherwise, it is set
.\"O to the file name used to invoke
.\"O .BR bash ,
.\"O as given by argument zero.
シェルまたはシェルスクリプトの名前に展開されます。
これはシェルの初期化時に設定されます。
コマンドを記述したファイルを指定して
.B bash
を起動した場合、
.B $0
にはそのファイルの名前が設定されます。
.B \-c
オプションを付けて
.B bash
を起動した場合、実行する文字列の後に引き数があれば、その最初の値が
.B $0
に設定されます。このオプションを指定していない場合には、
.BR bash
を起動する時に使用した名前が引き数 0 として与えられ 
.B $0
に設定されます。
.TP
.B _
.\"O At shell startup, set to the absolute file name of the shell or shell
.\"O script being executed as passed in the argument list.
.\"O Subsequently, expands to the last argument to the previous command,
.\"O after expansion.
.\"O Also set to the full file name of each command executed and placed in
.\"O the environment exported to that command.
.\"O When checking mail, this parameter holds the name of the mail file
.\"O currently being checked.
シェルの起動時には、引き数リストで渡された、
実行するシェルまたはシェルスクリプトの絶対ファイル名が設定されます。
その後は、前のコマンドに対する最後の引き数 (展開後のもの) に展開されます。
また、実行する各コマンドの完全なファイル名が設定され、
そのコマンドの環境にエクスポートされます。
メールをチェックするときには、
このパラメータは現在チェックしているメールのファイル名を保持します。
.PD
.\"O .SS Shell Variables
.SS シェル変数
.PP
.\"O The following variables are set by the shell:
以下の変数はシェルが設定します:
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B PPID
.\"O The process ID of the shell's parent.  This variable is readonly.
そのシェルの親のプロセス ID。この変数は読み込み専用です。
.TP
.B PWD
.\"O The current working directory as set by the
.\"O .B cd
.\"O command.
.B cd
コマンドで設定された現在の作業ディレクトリ。
.TP
.B OLDPWD
.\"O The previous working directory as set by the
.\"O .B cd
.\"O command.
.B cd
コマンドで設定された、1 つ前の作業ディレクトリ。
.TP
.B REPLY
.\"O Set to the line of input read by the
.\"O .B read
.\"O builtin command when no arguments are supplied.
組み込みコマンド
.B read
に引き数が与えられなかった時に読み込まれた行が設定されます。
.TP
.B UID
.\"O Expands to the user ID of the current user, initialized at shell startup.
.\"O This variable is readonly.
現在のユーザのユーザ ID に展開されます。
初期化はシェルの起動時に行われます。
この変数は読み込み専用です。
.TP
.B EUID
.\"O Expands to the effective user ID of the current user, initialized at
.\"O shell startup.  This variable is readonly.
現在のユーザの実効ユーザ ID に展開されます。
初期化はシェルの起動時に行われます。
この変数は読み込み専用です。
.TP
.B GROUPS
.\"O An array variable containing the list of groups of which the current
.\"O user is a member.
現在のユーザがメンバになっているグループのリストを含んだ配列変数です。
.\"O Assignments to    
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B GROUPS
.\"O have no effect and return an error status.
.SM
.B GROUPS
への代入は効果がなく、エラーステータスを返します。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B GROUPS
.\"O is unset, it loses its special properties, even if it is
.\"O subsequently reset.
.SM
.B GROUPS
が unset された場合はこの変数の特殊な性質はなくなります。
その後に再設定されたとしても元に戻りません。
.TP
.B BASH
.\"O Expands to the full file name used to invoke this instance of
.\"O .BR bash .
現在実行している
.BR bash
を起動したときに使われた、完全なファイル名に展開されます。
.TP
.B BASH_VERSION
.\"O Expands to a string describing the version of this instance of
.\"O .BR bash .
現在実行している
.BR bash
のバージョンを示す文字列に展開されます。
.TP
.B BASH_VERSINFO
.\"O A readonly array variable whose members hold version information for
.\"O this instance of
.\"O .BR bash .
.\"O The values assigned to the array members are as follows:
読み込み専用の配列変数で、配列の各要素は現在実行されている
.BR bash
のバージョン情報を持っています。
配列変数の要素に代入される内容を以下に示します:
.sp .5
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 24
.B BASH_VERSINFO[\fR0\fP]
.\"O The major version number (the \fIrelease\fP).
メジャーバージョン番号 (\fIリリース\fP)。
.TP
.B BASH_VERSINFO[\fR1\fP]
.\"O The minor version number (the \fIversion\fP).
マイナーバージョン番号 (\fIバージョン\fP)。
.TP
.B BASH_VERSINFO[\fR2\fP]
.\"O The patch level.
パッチレベル。
.TP
.B BASH_VERSINFO[\fR3\fP]
.\"O The build version.
ビルドバージョン。
.TP
.B BASH_VERSINFO[\fR4\fP]
.\"O The release status (e.g., \fIbeta1\fP).
リリースステータス (\fIbeta1\fP など)。
.TP
.B BASH_VERSINFO[\fR5\fP]
.\"O The value of \fBMACHTYPE\fP.
\fBMACHTYPE\fP の値。
.PD
.RE
.TP
.B SHLVL
.\"O Incremented by one each time an instance of
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is started.
.B bash
の実体が起動されるたびに 1 ずつ増えます。
.TP
.B RANDOM
.\"O Each time this parameter is referenced, a random integer between
.\"O 0 and 32767 is
.\"O generated.  The sequence of random numbers may be initialized by assigning
.\"O a value to
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR RANDOM .
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B RANDOM
.\"O is unset, it loses its special properties, even if it is
.\"O subsequently reset.
このパラメータが参照される度に、
0 から 32767 までのランダムな整数が生成されます。
.SM
.BR RANDOM
に値を代入すると、乱数の列を初期化できます。
.SM
.B RANDOM
を
.B unset
すると、この変数の特殊な性質は無くなります。後で再び
.B set
しても元には戻りません。
.TP
.B SECONDS
.\"O Each time this parameter is
.\"O referenced, the number of seconds since shell invocation is returned.  If a
.\"O value is assigned to 
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SECONDS ,
.\"O the value returned upon subsequent
.\"O references is
.\"O the number of seconds since the assignment plus the value assigned.
このパラメータを参照すると、シェルが起動されてからの秒数が返されます。
.SM
.BR SECONDS
に値を代入した場合、それ以降の参照において返される値は、
代入された値と代入以降の秒数を足した値になります。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SECONDS
.\"O is unset, it loses its special properties, even if it is
.\"O subsequently reset.
.SM
.B SECONDS
を
.B unset
すると、この変数の特殊な性質は無くなります。後で再び
.B set
しても元には戻りません。
.TP
.B LINENO
.\"O Each time this parameter is referenced, the shell substitutes
.\"O a decimal number representing the current sequential line number
.\"O (starting with 1) within a script or function.  When not in a
.\"O script or function, the value substituted is not guaranteed to
.\"O be meaningful.
この変数が参照されると、
シェルはスクリプトや関数における現在の行番号 (1から始まります) を表す
10 進値を代入します。スクリプトや関数の内部でない場合には、
意味のある値が代入されることは保証されません。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B LINENO
.\"O is unset, it loses its special properties, even if it is
.\"O subsequently reset.
.SM
.B LINENO
を
.B unset
すると、この変数の特殊な性質は無くなります。後で再び
.B set
しても元には戻りません。
.TP
.B HISTCMD
.\"O The history number, or index in the history list, of the current
.\"O command.
現在のコマンドの履歴番号 (履歴リストにおけるインデックス) です。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTCMD
.\"O is unset, it loses its special properties, even if it is
.\"O subsequently reset.
.SM
.B HISTCMD
を
.B unset
すると、この変数の特殊な性質は無くなります。後で再び
.B set
しても元には戻りません。
.TP
.B FUNCNAME
.\"O The name of any currently-executing shell function.
.\"O This variable exists only when a shell function is executing.
現在実行中のシェル関数の名前です。
この変数はシェル関数を実行している間のみ存在します。
.\"O Assignments to
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FUNCNAME
.\"O have no effect and return an error status.
.SM
.B FUNCNAME
への代入は効果がなく、エラーステータスを返します。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FUNCNAME
.\"O is unset, it loses its special properties, even if it is
.\"O subsequently reset.
.SM
.B FUNCNAME
を
.B unset
すると、この変数の特殊な性質は無くなります。後で再び
.B set
しても元には戻りません。
.TP
.B DIRSTACK
.\"O An array variable (see
.\"O .B Arrays
.\"O below) containing the current contents of the directory stack.
.\"O Directories appear in the stack in the order they are displayed by the
.\"O .B dirs
.\"O builtin.
現在のディレクトリスタックの内容を持つ配列変数 (後述の
.B 配列
を参照) です。組み込みコマンド
.B dirs
を使うと、スタック中のディレクトリがスタック順に表示されます。
.\"O Assigning to members of this array variable may be used to modify
.\"O directories already in the stack, but the
.\"O .B pushd
.\"O and
.\"O .B popd
.\"O builtins must be used to add and remove directories.
配列変数の要素に代入を行うと、
既にスタックに入っているディレクトリを変更できますが、
ディレクトリの追加と削除を行うためには、組み込みコマンドの
.B pushd
と
.B popd
を使わなければなりません。
.\"O Assignment to this variable will not change the current directory.
この変数に代入を行っても現在の作業ディレクトリは変わりません。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B DIRSTACK
.\"O is unset, it loses its special properties, even if it is
.\"O subsequently reset.
.SM
.B DIRSTACK
を
.B unset
すると、この変数の特殊な性質は無くなります。後で再び
.B set
しても元には戻りません。
.TP
.B PIPESTATUS
.\"O An array variable (see
.\"O .B Arrays
.\"O below) containing a list of exit status values from the processes
.\"O in the most-recently-executed foreground pipeline (which may
.\"O contain only a single command).
フォアグラウンドのパイプラインで最後に実行されたプロセスの
終了ステータスのリストを含む配列変数です (後述の
.B 配列
を参照)。
.TP
.B OPTARG
.\"O The value of the last option argument processed by the
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O builtin command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).
組み込みコマンド
.B getopts
で処理した最後のオプション引き数の値です (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照)。
.TP
.B OPTIND
.\"O The index of the next argument to be processed by the
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O builtin command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).
組み込みコマンド
.B getopts
で次に処理されるオプション引き数のインデックスです (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照)。
.TP
.B HOSTNAME
.\"O Automatically set to the name of the current host.
現在のホスト名が自動的に設定されます。
.TP
.B HOSTTYPE
.\"O Automatically set to a string that uniquely
.\"O describes the type of machine on which
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is executing.
.\"O The default is system-dependent.
.B bash
を実行するマシンの種類をユニークに記述する文字列が自動的に設定されます。
デフォルト値はシステム依存です。
.TP
.B OSTYPE
.\"O Automatically set to a string that
.\"O describes the operating system on which
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is executing.
.\"O The default is system-dependent.
.B bash
を実行するオペレーティングシステムを記述する文字列が自動的に設定されます。
デフォルト値はシステム依存です。
.TP
.B MACHTYPE
.\"O Automatically set to a string that fully describes the system
.\"O type on which
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is executing, in the standard GNU \fIcpu-company-system\fP format.
.\"O The default is system-dependent.
.B bash
を実行するシステムの種類を完全に指定する文字列が、
GNU 標準の \fIcpu-company-system\fP の形式で設定されます。
デフォルト値はシステム依存です。
.TP
.B SHELLOPTS
.\"O A colon-separated list of enabled shell options.  Each word in
.\"O the list is a valid argument for the
.\"O .B \-o
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS"
.\"O below).  The options appearing in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELLOPTS
.\"O are those reported as
.\"O .I on
.\"O by \fBset \-o\fP.
コロン区切りのリストで、有効になっているシェルのオプションを示します。
リスト中のそれぞれの単語は、組み込みコマンド
.B set
の
.B \-o
オプション (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照) に対する有効な引き数になっています。
.SM
.B SHELLOPTS
に入っているオプションは、\fBset \-o\fP を実行した場合にも
.I on
であると報告されます。
.\"O If this variable is in the environment when
.\"O .B bash
.\"O starts up, each shell option in the list will be enabled before
.\"O reading any startup files.
.\"O This variable is read-only.
この変数が
.B bash
の起動時に環境変数に入っていた場合、
どの起動ファイルを読むよりも前にリスト中のシェルオプションが有効になります。
この変数は読み込み専用です。
.TP
.B COMP_WORDS
.\"O An array variable (see \fBArrays\fP below) consisting of the individual
.\"O words in the current command line.
.\"O This variable is available only in shell functions invoked by the
.\"O programmable completion facilities (see \fBProgrammable Completion\fP
.\"O below).
現在のコマンドラインの各単語からなる配列変数
(後述の \fB配列\fP 参照) です。
この変数はプログラム補完機能 (後述の \fBプログラム補完\fP を参照)
から呼ばれたシェル関数においてのみ有効です。
.TP
.B COMP_CWORD
.\"O An index into \fB${COMP_WORDS}\fP of the word containing the current
.\"O cursor position.
.\"O This variable is available only in shell functions invoked by the
.\"O programmable completion facilities (see \fBProgrammable Completion\fP
.\"O below).
現在カーソル位置が置かれている単語の
\fB${COMP_WORDS}\fP におけるインデックスです。
この変数はプログラム補完機能 (後述の \fBプログラム補完\fP を参照)
から呼ばれたシェル関数においてのみ有効です。
.TP
.B COMP_LINE
.\"O The current command line.
.\"O This variable is available only in shell functions and external
.\"O commands invoked by the
.\"O programmable completion facilities (see \fBProgrammable Completion\fP
.\"O below).
現在のコマンドラインです。
この変数はプログラム補完機能 (後述の \fBプログラム補完\fP を参照)
から呼ばれたシェル関数においてのみ有効です。
.TP
.B COMP_POINT
.\"O The index of the current cursor position relative to the beginning of
.\"O the current command.
.\"O If the current cursor position is at the end of the current command,
.\"O the value of this variable is equal to \fB${#COMP_LINE}\fP.
.\"O This variable is available only in shell functions and external
.\"O commands invoked by the
.\"O programmable completion facilities (see \fBProgrammable Completion\fP
.\"O below).
現在のコマンドの先頭からの相対値として与えられた
カーソル位置のインデックスです。
現在のカーソル位置が現在の現在のコマンドの最後にある場合、
この変数の値は \fB${#COMP_LINE}\fP と等しくなります。
この変数はプログラム補完機能 (後述の \fBプログラム補完\fP を参照)
から呼ばれたシェル関数においてのみ有効です。
.PD
.PP
.\"O The following variables are used by the shell.  In some cases,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O assigns a default value to a variable; these cases are noted
.\"O below.
以下の変数はシェルが使用します。場合によっては、
.B bash
がデフォルト値を変数に代入します。このような場合については後述します。
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B IFS
.\"O The
.\"O .I Internal Field Separator
.\"O that is used
.\"O for word splitting after expansion and to
.\"O split lines into words with the
.\"O .B read
.\"O builtin command.  The default value is
.\"O ``<space><tab><newline>''.
.I 内部フィールド区切り文字 (Internal Field Separator)
です。展開を行った後に単語を分割する場合や、組み込みコマンドの
.B read
を使った時に行を単語に分割する場合に使われます。
デフォルト値は ``<空白><タブ><改行>'' です。
.TP
.B PATH
.\"O The search path for commands.  It
.\"O is a colon-separated list of directories in which
.\"O the shell looks for commands (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B COMMAND EXECUTION
.\"O below).  The default path is system-dependent,
.\"O and is set by the administrator who installs
.\"O .BR bash .
.\"O A common value is
.\"O .if t \f(CW/usr/gnu/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/ucb:/bin:/usr/bin:.\fP.
.\"O .if n ``/usr/gnu/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/ucb:/bin:/usr/bin:.''.
コマンドの検索パスです。
シェルがコマンドを検索するディレクトリをコロンで区切って並べたリストです
(後述の
.SM
.B コマンドの実行
を参照)。デフォルトのパスはシステム依存で、
.BR bash
をインストールしたシステム管理者が設定します。
一般的な値は
.if t \f(CW/usr/gnu/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/ucb:/bin:/usr/bin:.\fP
.if n ``/usr/gnu/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/ucb:/bin:/usr/bin:.''
です。
.TP
.B HOME
.\"O The home directory of the current user; the default argument for the
.\"O \fBcd\fP builtin command.
.\"O The value of this variable is also used when performing tilde expansion.
現在のユーザのホームディレクトリです。
組み込みコマンド \fBcd\fP のデフォルトの引き数になります。
この変数の値は、チルダ展開を実行するときにも使われます。
.TP
.B CDPATH
.\"O The search path for the
.\"O .B cd
.\"O command.
.\"O This is a colon-separated list of directories in which the shell looks
.\"O for destination directories specified by the
.\"O .B cd
.\"O command.
.\"O A sample value is ``.:~:/usr''.
.B cd
コマンドの検索パスです。これは、
.B cd
コマンドで指定した対象ディレクトリを探すディレクトリを
コロンで区切って並べたリストです。
例えば、``.:~:/usr'' といった値になります。
.TP
.B BASH_ENV
.\"O If this parameter is set when \fBbash\fP is executing a shell script,
.\"O its value is interpreted as a filename containing commands to
.\"O initialize the shell, as in
.\"O .IR ~/.bashrc .
.\"O The value of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B BASH_ENV
.\"O is subjected to parameter expansion, command substitution, and arithmetic
.\"O expansion before being interpreted as a file name.
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O is not used to search for the resultant file name.
\fBbash\fP がシェルスクリプトを実行する時にこの値が設定されている場合、
この値は
.RI ( ~/.bashrc
のように)
シェルを初期化するコマンドが書かれているファイル名と解釈されます。
.SM
.B BASH_ENV
の値をファイル名として処理する前には、パラメータ展開、コマンド置換、
算術的展開が行われます。
.SM
この結果のファイルを検索する際には
.B PATH
は使用されません。
.TP
.B MAIL
.\"O If this parameter is set to a file name and the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B MAILPATH
.\"O variable is not set,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O informs the user of the arrival of mail in the specified file.
このパラメータにファイル名が設定されており、かつ変数
.SM
.B MAILPATH
が設定されていなければ、
.B bash
は指定されたファイルへのメールの到着をユーザに通知します。
.TP
.B MAILCHECK
.\"O Specifies how
.\"O often (in seconds)
.\"O .B bash
.\"O checks for mail.  The default is 60 seconds.  When it is time to check
.\"O for mail, the shell does so before displaying the primary prompt.
.\"O If this variable is unset, or set to a value that is not a number
.\"O greater than or equal to zero, the shell disables mail checking.
.B bash
がメールをチェックする頻度を (秒数で) 指定します。
デフォルト値は 60 秒です。
メールをチェックする時間になると、
シェルはプライマリのプロンプトを表示する前にチェックを行います。
この変数が unset された場合、
あるいはこの変数に 0 より大きい数値以外が代入された場合は、
シェルはメールのチェックを行いません。
.TP
.B MAILPATH
.\"O A colon-separated list of file names to be checked for mail. 
.\"O The message to be printed when mail arrives in a particular file
.\"O may be specified by separating the file name from the message with a `?'.
.\"O When used in the text of the message, \fB$_\fP expands to the name of
.\"O the current mailfile. 
メールのチェックに使うファイル名をコロンで区切って並べたリストです。
特定のファイルにメールが到着したときに出力される
メッセージは、`?' を使ってファイル名をメッセージから区切ることによって
指定できます。メッセージのテキスト中で使われたときは、
\fB$_\fP は現在のメールファイルの名前に展開されます。
.\"O Example:
設定例:
.RS
.PP
\fBMAILPATH\fP='/var/mail/bfox?"You have mail":~/shell\-mail?"$_ has mail!"'
.PP
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O supplies a default value for this variable, but the location of the user
.\"O mail files that it uses is system dependent (e.g., /var/mail/\fB$USER\fP).
この変数のデフォルト値は
.B bash
が与えますが、
.B bash
が使うユーザのメールファイルの位置はシステム依存です
(/var/mail/\fB$USER\fP 等)。
.RE
.TP
.B PS1
.\"O The value of this parameter is expanded (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PROMPTING
.\"O below) and used as the primary prompt string.  The default value is
.\"O ``\fB\es\-\ev\e$ \fP''.
このパラメータの値は展開されてプライマリのプロンプト文字列として使われます。
(後述の
.SM
.B プロンプト
を参照)、
デフォルト値は ``\fB\es\-\ev\e$ \fP'' です。
.TP
.B PS2
.\"O The value of this parameter is expanded as with
.\"O .B PS1
.\"O and used as the secondary prompt string.  The default is
.\"O ``\fB> \fP''.
このパラメータの値は
.B PS1
と同じように展開され、セカンダリのプロンプト文字列として使われます。
デフォルト値は ``\fB> \fP'' です。
.TP
.B PS3
.\"O The value of this parameter is used as the prompt for the
.\"O .B select
.\"O command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL GRAMMAR
.\"O above).
このパラメータの値は
.B select
コマンド (前述の
.SM
.B シェルの文法
を参照) のプロンプトとして使われます。
.TP
.B PS4
.\"O The value of this parameter is expanded as with
.\"O .B PS1
.\"O and the value is printed before each command
.\"O .B bash
.\"O displays during an execution trace.  The first character of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PS4
.\"O is replicated multiple times, as necessary, to indicate multiple
.\"O levels of indirection.  The default is ``\fB+ \fP''.
このパラメータは
.B PS1
と同じように展開されます。この値は実行トレース中に
.B bash
が表示する各コマンド前に出力されます。
複数段の間接レベル (levels of indirection) を示すときは、
.SM
.B PS4
の最初の文字が必要に応じて複数回表示されます。
デフォルト値は ``\fB+ \fP'' です。
.TP
.B TIMEFORMAT
.\"O The value of this parameter is used as a format string specifying
.\"O how the timing information for pipelines prefixed with the
.\"O .B time
.\"O reserved word should be displayed.
.\"O The \fB%\fP character introduces an escape sequence that is
.\"O expanded to a time value or other information.
.\"O The escape sequences and their meanings are as follows; the
.\"O braces denote optional portions.
このパラメータの値は、予約語である
.B time
が先頭に付いているパイプラインに対して、
時間情報の表示の仕方を指定するフォーマット文字列として使われます。
\fB%\fP は、時間の値などに展開される
エスケープシーケンスを示すための文字です。
エスケープシーケンスとその意味を以下に示します。
ただし、ブレース ([]) は省略可能であることを表しま
す。
.sp .5
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B %%
.\"O A literal \fB%\fP.
\fB%\fP 文字そのもの。
.TP
.B %[\fIp\fP][l]R
.\"O The elapsed time in seconds.
経過した秒数。
.TP
.B %[\fIp\fP][l]U
.\"O The number of CPU seconds spent in user mode.
ユーザモードで使われた CPU の秒数。
.TP
.B %[\fIp\fP][l]S
.\"O The number of CPU seconds spent in system mode.
システムモードで使われた CPU の秒数。
.TP
.B %P
.\"O The CPU percentage, computed as (%U + %S) / %R.
CPU のパーセンテージ。(%U + %S) / %R で算出されます。
.PD
.RE
.IP
.\"O The optional \fIp\fP is a digit specifying the \fIprecision\fP,
.\"O the number of fractional digits after a decimal point.
.\"O A value of 0 causes no decimal point or fraction to be output.
.\"O At most three places after the decimal point may be specified;
.\"O values of \fIp\fP greater than 3 are changed to 3.
.\"O If \fIp\fP is not specified, the value 3 is used.
\fIp\fP 省略可能で、\fI精度 (precision)\fP が何桁であるかを指定します。
つまり小数点以下の桁数を指定します。この値が 0 ならば、
小数点や小数の部分は出力されません。
また、小数点以下で指定できるのは 3 桁までです。
つまり、\fIp\fP の値が 3 より大きければ 3 に変更されます。
\fIp\fP を指定しなければ、この値は 3 となります。
.IP
.\"O The optional \fBl\fP specifies a longer format, including
.\"O minutes, of the form \fIMM\fPm\fISS\fP.\fIFF\fPs.
.\"O The value of \fIp\fP determines whether or not the fraction is
.\"O included.
\fBl\fP は省略可能ですが、指定すると、分を含み、
\fIMM\fPm\fISS\fP.\fIFF\fP という形式の長いフォーマットになります。
小数を含むかどうかは \fIp\fP の値によって決まります。
.IP
.\"O If this variable is not set, \fBbash\fP acts as if it had the
.\"O value \fB$'\enreal\et%3lR\enuser\et%3lU\ensys\t%3lS'\fP.
.\"O If the value is null, no timing information is displayed.
.\"O A trailing newline is added when the format string is displayed.
この変数が設定されていなければ、 \fBbash\fP は
\fB$'\enreal\et%3lR\enuser\et%3lU\ensys\t%3lS'\fP
という値が指定されているかのように動作します。
この値が空文字列ならば、時間の情報は表示されません。
フォーマット文字列の表示の際には、末尾に改行文字が追加されます。
.TP
.B HISTSIZE
.\"O The number of commands to remember in the command history (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTORY
.\"O below).  The default value is 500.
コマンド履歴に記憶するコマンドの数 (後述の
.SM
.B HISTORY
を参照)。
.TP
.B HISTFILE
.\"O The name of the file in which command history is saved (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTORY
.\"O below).  The default value is \fI~/.bash_history\fP.  If unset, the
.\"O command history is not saved when an interactive shell exits.
コマンド履歴が保存されるファイルの名前 (後述の
.SM
.B 履歴
を参照)。デフォルト値は \fI~/.bash_history\fP です。
設定されていない場合、
対話シェルが終了する時に履歴の保存が行われません。
.TP
.B HISTFILESIZE
.\"O The maximum number of lines contained in the history file.  When this
.\"O variable is assigned a value, the history file is truncated, if
.\"O necessary, to contain no more than that number of lines.  The default
.\"O value is 500.  The history file is also truncated to this size after
.\"O writing it when an interactive shell exits.
履歴ファイルに保持する履歴の最大数です。この変数に値が代入された場合、
その行数を越えないように、必要に応じて履歴ファイルが切り詰められます。
デフォルト値は 500 です。対話シェルが終了する時にも、
履歴ファイルのサイズはファイル書き込みの後にこのサイズに切り詰められます。
.TP
.B OPTERR
.\"O If set to the value 1,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O displays error messages generated by the
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O builtin command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B OPTERR
.\"O is initialized to 1 each time the shell is invoked or a shell
.\"O script is executed.
値として 1 が設定されている場合、
.B bash
は組み込みコマンド
.B getopts
(後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照) を使って生成したエラーメッセージを表示します。
シェルが起動されたり、シェルスクリプトが実行される度に、
.SM
.B OPTERR
は 1 に初期化されます。
.TP
.B LANG
.\"O Used to determine the locale category for any category not specifically
.\"O selected with a variable starting with \fBLC_\fP.
\fBLC_\fP で始まる変数で特に選択されない任意のカテゴリに対して、
ロケールのカテゴリを決めるために使います。
.TP
.B LC_ALL
.\"O This variable overrides the value of \fBLANG\fP and any other
.\"O \fBLC_\fP variable specifying a locale category.
この変数はロケールのカテゴリを指定する \fBLC_\fP 変数と \fBLANG\fP の
値を全て上書きします。
.TP
.B LC_COLLATE
.\"O This variable determines the collation order used when sorting the
.\"O results of pathname expansion, and determines the behavior of range
.\"O expressions, equivalence classes, and collating sequences within
.\"O pathname expansion and pattern matching.
.\"O 要チェック
この変数はパス名展開の結果をソートするときに使用される照合順序と、
パス名展開とパターンマッチングにおける
範囲展開、同値クラス、照合シーケンスの動作決定します。
.TP
.B LC_CTYPE
.\"O This variable determines the interpretation of characters and the
.\"O behavior of character classes within pathname expansion and pattern
.\"O matching.
この変数は、パス名展開とパターンマッチングにおける
文字の解釈と文字クラスの挙動を決めます。
.TP
.B LC_MESSAGES
.\"O This variable determines the locale used to translate double-quoted
.\"O strings preceded by a \fB$\fP.
この変数は、\fB$\fP の後に続くダブルクォートされた文字列の
翻訳に使うロケールを決めます。
.TP
.B LC_NUMERIC
.\"O This variable determines the locale category used for number formatting.
この変数は数字のフォーマットに使用するロケールカテゴリを決定します。
.TP
.B LINES
.\"O Used by the \fBselect\fP builtin command to determine the column length
.\"O for printing selection lists.  Automatically set upon receipt of a SIGWINCH.
組み込みコマンド
.B select
によって、選択されたリストを表示する際の行数の決定に用いられます。
SIGWINCH を受信すると自動的に設定されます。
.\"nakano 原文は column length.
.TP
.B COLUMNS
.\"O Used by the \fBselect\fP builtin command to determine the terminal width
.\"O when printing selection lists.  Automatically set upon receipt of a SIGWINCH.
組み込みコマンド
.B select
によって、選択されたリストを表示する際の端末幅の決定に用いられます。
SIGWINCH を受信すると自動的に設定されます。
.B PROMPT_COMMAND
.\"O If set, the value is executed as a command prior to issuing each primary
.\"O prompt.
設定されていると、プライマリプロンプトを出す前に毎回、
この値がコマンドとして実行されます。
.TP
.B IGNOREEOF
.\"O Controls the
.\"O action of an interactive shell on receipt of an
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EOF
.\"O character as the sole input.  If set, the value is the number of
.\"O consecutive
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EOF
.\"O characters which must be
.\"O typed as the first characters on an input line before
.\"O .B bash
.\"O exits.  If the variable exists but does not have a numeric value, or
.\"O has no value, the default value is 10.  If it does not exist,
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EOF
.\"O signifies the end of input to the shell.
単独で入力された
.SM
.B EOF
文字を受け取ったときの対話シェルの動作を制御します。
この変数が設定されていれば、指定されている値の数だけの
.SM
.B EOF
文字を連続して行頭の文字として入力しなければ
.B bash
は終了しません。この変数に数値以外の値が設定されている場合や、
値が設定されていない場合には、デフォルト値として 10 が使われます。
この変数が存在しなければ、
.SM
.B EOF
文字はシェルへの入力の終わりを示します。
.TP
.B TMOUT
.\"O If set to a value greater than zero, the value is interpreted as the
.\"O number of seconds to wait for input after issuing the primary prompt.
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O terminates after waiting for that number of seconds if input does
.\"O not arrive.
0 より大きい値が設定されていると、
この値はプライマリプロンプトを出した後に入力を待つ秒数として解釈されます。
この秒数だけ待った時点で入力が無ければ
.B bash
は終了します。
.TP
.B FCEDIT
.\"O The default editor for the
.\"O .B fc
.\"O builtin command.
組み込みコマンド
.B fc
が使うデフォルトのエディタです。
.TP
.B FIGNORE
.\"O A colon-separated list of suffixes to ignore when performing
.\"O filename completion (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B READLINE
.\"O below).
.\"O A filename whose suffix matches one of the entries in 
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FIGNORE
.\"O is excluded from the list of matched filenames.
.\"O A sample value is ``.o:~''.
ファイル名補完 (後述の
.SM
.B READLINE
を参照) を行う際に無視するサフィックスを
コロンで区切って並べたリストです。
.SM
.B FIGNORE
のエントリのいずれかにサフィックスがマッチするファイル名は、
ファイル名補完にマッチするファイルのリストから除外されます。
例えば値として 
``.o:~'' を設定します。
.TP
.B GLOBIGNORE
.\"O A colon-separated list of patterns defining the set of filenames to
.\"O be ignored by pathname expansion.
.\"O If a filename matched by a pathname expansion pattern also matches one
.\"O of the patterns in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR GLOBIGNORE ,
.\"O it is removed from the list of matches.
パス名展開で無視するファイル名の集合を定義するパターンを
コロンで区切って並べたリストです。
パス名展開パターンにマッチするファイル名が
.SM
.BR GLOBIGNORE
内のパターンのどれかにもマッチする場合、
これはマッチしたもののリストから削除されます。
.TP
.B INPUTRC
.\"O The filename for the
.\"O .B readline
.\"O startup file, overriding the default of
.\"O .FN ~/.inputrc
.\"O (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B READLINE
.\"O below).
.B readline
の起動ファイルのファイル名です。これはデフォルト値の
.FN ~/.inputrc
(後述の
.SM
.B READLINE
を参照) を上書きします。
.TP
.B HISTCONTROL
.\"O If set to a value of
.\"O .IR ignorespace ,
.\"O lines which begin with a
.\"O .B space
.\"O character are not entered on the history list.
.\"O If set to a value of
.\"O .IR ignoredups ,
.\"O lines matching the last history line are not entered.
.IR ignorespace
の値が設定されていると、
.B 空白
文字で始まる行は履歴リストに入りません。
.IR ignoredups
の値が設定されていると、
履歴の最後の行にマッチする行は履歴リストに入りません。
.\"O A value of
.\"O .I ignoreboth
.\"O combines the two options.
.I ignoreboth
の値はこれらの 2 つのオプションを同時に実現します。
.\"O If unset, or if set to any other value than those above,
.\"O all lines read
.\"O by the parser are saved on the history list, subject to the value
.\"O of
.\"O .BR HISTIGNORE .
設定されていないか上記のいずれの値でもない場合には、
パーザが読み込んだ全ての行は
.BR HISTIGNORE
の値が示す条件の下で履歴リストに保存されます。
.\"O This variable's function is superseded by
.\"O .BR HISTIGNORE .
この変数は既に古くなっており、この機能は
.BR HISTIGNORE
変数で用いることになっています。
.\"O The second and subsequent lines of a multi-line compound command are
.\"O not tested, and are added to the history regardless of the value of
.\"O .BR HISTCONTROL .
複数行にまたがる複雑なコマンドの場合は
2 番目以降の行が調べられることはありません。よって、これらは
.BR HISTCONTROL
の値に関わらず履歴に追加されます。
.TP
.B HISTIGNORE
.\"O A colon-separated list of patterns used to decide which command lines
.\"O should be saved on the history list.  Each pattern is anchored at the
.\"O beginning of the line and must match the complete line (no implicit
.\"O `\fB*\fP' is appended).  Each pattern is tested against the line
.\"O after the checks specified by
.\"O .B HISTCONTROL
.\"O are applied.
どのコマンド行を履歴リストに保存するかを決めるために使うパターンを
コロンで区切って並べたリストです。
それぞれのパターンは行の先頭と比較され、
行全体が完全に一致しなければなりません
(`\fB*\fP' が暗黙的に追加されるこ
とはありません)。各パターンの評価は
.B HISTCONTROL
で指定したチェックが行われた後の行に対して実行されます。
.\"O In addition to the normal shell pattern matching characters, `\fB&\fP'
.\"O matches the previous history line.  `\fB&\fP' may be escaped using a
.\"O backslash; the backslash is removed before attempting a match.
.\"O The second and subsequent lines of a multi-line compound command are
.\"O not tested, and are added to the history regardless of the value of
.\"O .BR HISTIGNORE .
通常のシェルのパターンマッチング文字以外に、
`\fB&\fP' が履歴の前の行にマッチします。
バックスラッシュを使って `\fB&\fP' をエスケープできます。
マッチングを試みる前にバックスラッシュは取り除かれます。
複数行にまたがる複雑なコマンドの場合、2 番目以降の行は調べられません。
よって、これらは
.BR HISTIGNORE
の値に関わらず履歴に追加されます。
.TP
.B histchars
.\"O The two or three characters which control history expansion
.\"O and tokenization (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTORY EXPANSION
.\"O below).  The first character is the \fIhistory expansion\fP character,
.\"O the character which signals the start of a history
.\"O expansion, normally `\fB!\fP'.
2 文字または 3 文字で、
履歴の展開とトークン分割 (後述の
.SM
.B 履歴展開
を参照) を制御します。
最初の文字は \fI履歴展開 (history expansion)\fP 文字であり、
履歴展開の先頭を示す文字です。通常、これは `\fB!\fP' です。
.\"O The second character is the \fIquick substitution\fP
.\"O character, which is used as shorthand for re-running the previous
.\"O command entered, substituting one string for another in the command.
.\"O The default is `\fB^\fP'.
2 番目の文字は \fI簡易置換 (quick substitution)\fP
文字であり、前に入力したコマンドの文字列を
別の文字列に置き換えて再実行を行うための省略表現として使います。
デフォルト値は `\fB^\fP' です。
.\"O The optional third character is the character
.\"O which indicates that the remainder of the line is a comment when found
.\"O as the first character of a word, normally `\fB#\fP'.  The history
.\"O comment character causes history substitution to be skipped for the
.\"O remaining words on the line.  It does not necessarily cause the shell
.\"O parser to treat the rest of the line as a comment.
3 番目の文字は省略可能です。単語の先頭でこの文字が見つかると、
行の残りの部分がコメントとなるような文字を指定します。
これは通常は `\fB#\fP' です。
履歴コメント文字があると、
その行の残りの単語に対する履歴置換はスキップされます。
この文字があるからといって、
必ずしもシェルのパーザが行の残りの部分をコメントとして扱うわけではありません。
.TP
.B HOSTFILE
.\"O Contains the name of a file in the same format as
.\"O .FN /etc/hosts
.\"O that should be read when the shell needs to complete a
.\"O hostname.
.FN /etc/hosts
と同じフォーマットであり、
シェルがホスト名を補完する必要があるときに読み込むファイルの名前を示します。
.\"O The list of possible hostname completions may be changed while the
.\"O shell is running;
シェルの実行中でも補完するホスト名のリストを変更できます。
.\"O the next time hostname completion is attempted after the
.\"O value is changed,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O adds the contents of the new file to the existing list.
この変数が変更された次の機会にホスト名の補完を試みるとき、
.B bash
は新しいファイルの内容を既存のデータベースに追加します。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HOSTFILE
.\"O is set, but has no value, \fBbash\fP attempts to read
.\"O .FN /etc/hosts
.\"O to obtain the list of possible hostname completions.
.SM
.B HOSTFILE
が設定されているがその値が空文字列の場合、
\fBbash\fP は補完可能なホスト名のリストを取得するために
.FN /etc/hosts
を使用します。
.\"O When
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HOSTFILE
.\"O is unset, the hostname list is cleared.
.SM
.B HOSTFILE
が unset された場合は、ホスト名のリストはクリアされます。
.TP
.B auto_resume
.\"O This variable controls how the shell interacts with the user and
.\"O job control.  If this variable is set, single word simple
.\"O commands without redirections are treated as candidates for resumption
.\"O of an existing stopped job.  There is no ambiguity allowed; if there is
.\"O more than one job beginning with the string typed, the job most recently
.\"O accessed is selected.  The
.\"O .I name
.\"O of a stopped job, in this context, is the command line used to
.\"O start it.
この変数はシェルがユーザとジョブ制御の相互作用をどのように扱うかを決めます。
この変数を設定した場合、1 語からなるリダイレクト無しの単純なコマンドが、
停止中ジョブの実行再開候補として扱われます。
曖昧な指定は許されません。
入力された文字列で始まるジョブが複数ある場合には、
最後にアクセスされたものが選ばれます。
ここでの
.I 名前
とは、コマンドを起動する際に使ったコマンドラインのことです。
.\"O If set to the value
.\"O .IR exact ,
.\"O the string supplied must match the name of a stopped job exactly;
.\"O if set to
.\"O .IR substring ,
.\"O the string supplied needs to match a substring of the name of a
.\"O stopped job.  The
.\"O .I substring
.\"O value provides functionality analogous to the
.\"O .B %?
.\"O job identifier (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B JOB CONTROL
.\"O below).  If set to any other value, the supplied string must
.\"O be a prefix of a stopped job's name; this provides functionality
.\"O analogous to the
.\"O .B %
.\"O job identifier.
この値に
.IR exact
が設定されている場合、
与えられた文字列は停止しているジョブの名前に
正確にマッチしなければなりません。
.IR substring
が設定されている場合は、
与えられた文字列は停止しているジョブの名前の部分文字列に
マッチする必要があります。
.I substring
という値は、ジョブ識別子の
.B %?
に似た機能を持っています (後述の
.SM
.B ジョブ制御
を参照)。これ以外の値が設定されている場合、
与えられた文字列は停止しているジョブの名前の
プレフィックスでなければなりません。これはジョブ識別子の
.B %
と似た機能を持っています。
.TP
.B COMPREPLY
.\"O An array variable from which \fBbash\fP reads the possible completions
.\"O generated by a shell function invoked by the programmable completion
.\"O facility (see \fBProgrammable Completion\fP below).
\fBbash\fP が可能な補完候補を読み込む配列変数です。
この値はプログラム補完機能 (後述の \fBプログラム補完\fP を参照)
によって呼び出されたシェル関数によって生成されます。
.PD
.\"O .SS Arrays
.SS 配列
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O provides one-dimensional array variables.  Any variable may be used as
.\"O an array; the
.\"O .B declare
.\"O builtin will explicitly declare an array.  There is no maximum
.\"O limit on the size of an array, nor any requirement that members
.\"O be indexed or assigned contiguously.  Arrays are indexed using
.\"O integers and are zero-based.
.B bash
は 1 次元の配列変数を扱うことができます。
全ての変数は配列として使用できます。
.B declare
組み込みコマンドを使えば、明示的に配列を宣言できます。
配列のサイズの上限はありませんし、
メンバのインデックス付けや代入を
連続的にしなければならないという条件もありません。
配列のインデックス付けは 0 から始まる整数を用いて行います。
.PP
.\"O An array is created automatically if any variable is assigned to using
.\"O the syntax \fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]=\fIvalue\fP.  The
.\"O .I subscript
.\"O is treated as an arithmetic expression that must evaluate to a number
.\"O greater than or equal to zero.  To explicitly declare an array, use
.\"O .B declare \-a \fIname\fP
.\"O (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).
変数の代入の際に \fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]=\fIvalue\fP
という記法が使われた場合、配列は自動的に生成されます。
.I subscript
は算術式として扱われますが、この式は評価すると
0 以上の数値になるものでなければなりません。
明示的に配列を宣言するには、
.B declare \-a \fIname\fP
を使います (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照)。
.\"O .B declare \-a \fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]
.\"O is also accepted; the \fIsubscript\fP is ignored.  Attributes may be
.\"O specified for an array variable using the
.\"O .B declare
.\"O and
.\"O .B readonly
.\"O builtins.  Each attribute applies to all members of an array.
.B declare \-a \fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]
も許されます。\fIsubscript\fP は無視されます。
組み込みコマンドの
.B declare
と
.B readonly
を使うと、配列変数に対して属性を設定できます。
どちらの属性も配列のメンバ全てに対して適用されます。
.PP
.\"O Arrays are assigned to using compound assignments of the form
.\"O \fIname\fP=\fB(\fPvalue\fI1\fP ... value\fIn\fP\fB)\fP, where each
.\"O \fIvalue\fP is of the form [\fIsubscript\fP]=\fIstring\fP.  Only
.\"O \fIstring\fP is required.  If
.\"O the optional brackets and subscript are supplied, that index is assigned to;
.\"O otherwise the index of the element assigned is the last index assigned
.\"O to by the statement plus one.  Indexing starts at zero.
配列の代入は
\fIname\fP=\fB(\fPvalue\fI1\fP ... value\fIn\fP\fB)\fP
という形式の複合代入 (compound assignment) を用いて行います。
ここでそれぞれの
\fIvalue\fP の形式は [\fIsubscript\fP]=\fIstring\fP です。
必要なのは \fIstring\fP だけです。
ブラケット([])と添字を省略しなかった場合、
そのインデックスに対して代入が行われます。
省略した場合には、代入される要素のインデックスは、
その文の中で直前に代入されたインデックスに 1 を加えたものになります。
インデックスは 0 から始まります。
.\"O This syntax is also accepted by the
.\"O .B declare
.\"O builtin.  Individual array elements may be assigned to using the
.\"O \fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]=\fIvalue\fP syntax introduced above.
この記法は組み込みコマンド
.B declare
でも使えます。個別の配列要素に対する代入は、先に説明した
\fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]=\fIvalue\fP の記法を使って行います。
.PP
.\"O Any element of an array may be referenced using
.\"O ${\fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]}.  The braces are required to avoid
.\"O conflicts with pathname expansion.  If
.\"O \fIsubscript\fP is \fB@\fP or \fB*\fP, the word expands to
.\"O all members of \fIname\fP.  These subscripts differ only when the
.\"O word appears within double quotes.  If the word is double-quoted,
.\"O ${\fIname\fP[*]} expands to a single
.\"O word with the value of each array member separated by the first
.\"O character of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O special variable, and ${\fIname\fP[@]} expands each element of
.\"O \fIname\fP to a separate word.  When there are no array members,
.\"O ${\fIname\fP[@]} expands to nothing.  This is analogous to the expansion
.\"O of the special parameters \fB*\fP and \fB@\fP (see
.\"O .B Special Parameters
.\"O above).  ${#\fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]} expands to the length of
.\"O ${\fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]}.  If \fIsubscript\fP is \fB*\fP or
.\"O \fB@\fP, the expansion is the number of elements in the array.
.\"O Referencing an array variable without a subscript is equivalent to
.\"O referencing element zero.
配列の任意の要素は、${\fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]}
を使って参照できます。
パス名展開との衝突を避けるためにブレースが必要です。
\fI添字(subscript)\fPが \fB@\fP か \fB*\fP ならば、その単語は
\fIname\fP の全ての要素に展開されます。これらの添字が異なるのは、
単語がダブルクォートの内部にある場合だけです。
単語がダブルクォートされていれば、${\fIname\fP[*]} は
1 つの単語に展開されます。
この単語は、配列の各メンバの値を特殊変数
.SM
.B IFS
の値で区切って並べたものです。${\fIname\fP[@]}は、
\fIname\fP の各要素を別々の単語に展開します。
配列のメンバが全く無いときは、${\fIname\fP[@]}
は空の単語に展開されます。
これは特殊パラメータ \fB*\fP や \fB@\fP に似ています (前述の
.B 特殊パラメータ
を参照)。${#\fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]} は
${\fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]} の長さに展開されます。
\fIsubscript\fP が \fB*\fP または \fB@\fP の場合は、
配列中の要素数に展開されます。添字無しで配列変数を参照すると、
要素 0 を参照したことになります。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B unset
.\"O builtin is used to destroy arrays.  \fBunset\fP \fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]
.\"O destroys the array element at index \fIsubscript\fP.
.\"O \fBunset\fP \fIname\fP, where \fIname\fP is an array, or
.\"O \fBunset\fP \fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP], where
.\"O \fIsubscript\fP is \fB*\fP or \fB@\fP, removes the entire array.
組み込みコマンドの
.B unset
は配列の破棄に使われます。\fBunset\fP \fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]
とすると、インデックスが \fIsubscript\fP である配列の要素が破棄されます。
\fBunset\fP \fIname\fP (\fIname\fP は配列) または
\fBunset\fP \fIname\fP[\fIsubscript\fP]
(\fIsubscript\fP が \fB*\fP または \fB@\fP) とすると、
配列全体が破棄されます。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .BR declare ,
.\"O .BR local ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B readonly
.\"O builtins each accept a
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option to specify an array.  The
.\"O .B read
.\"O builtin accepts a
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option to assign a list of words read from the standard input
.\"O to an array.  The
.\"O .B set
.\"O and
.\"O .B declare
.\"O builtins display array values in a way that allows them to be
.\"O reused as assignments.
組み込みコマンドの
.BR declare ,
.BR local ,
.B readonly
いずれにおいても、
.B \-a
オプションで配列を指定できます。組み込みコマンド
.B read
では、
.B \-a
オプションを使えば標準入力から読み込んだ単語のリストを
配列に代入できます。組み込みコマンド
.B set
と
.B declare
では、別の変数への代入に再利用できるような形で配列の値を表示します。
.\"O .SH EXPANSION
.SH 展開
.\"O Expansion is performed on the command line after it has been split into
.\"O words.  There are seven kinds of expansion performed:
.\"O .IR "brace expansion" ,
.\"O .IR "tilde expansion" ,
.\"O .IR "parameter and variable expansion" ,
.\"O .IR "command substitution" ,
.\"O .IR "arithmetic expansion" ,
.\"O .IR "word splitting" ,
.\"O and
.\"O .IR "pathname expansion" .
展開はコマンドラインが単語へ分割された後に
(コマンドライン上で) 行われます。行われる展開は
7 種類あります:
.IR "ブレースの展開 (brace expansion)" ,
.IR "チルダの展開 (tilde expansion)" ,
.IR "パラメータと変数の展開 (parameter and variable expansion)" ,
.IR "コマンド置換 (command substitution)" ,
.IR "算術式展開 (arithmetic expansion)" ,
.IR "単語の分割 (word splitting)" ,
.IR "パス名の展開 (pathname expansion)" 。
.PP
.\"O The order of expansions is: brace expansion, tilde expansion,
.\"O parameter, variable and arithmetic expansion and
.\"O command substitution
.\"O (done in a left-to-right fashion), word splitting, and pathname
.\"O expansion.
展開の順序は次のようになります: ブレース展開、チルダ展開、パラメータ・
変数・算術式展開、コマンド置換 (左から右へ)、単語分割、パス名展開。
.PP
.\"O On systems that can support it, there is an additional expansion
.\"O available: \fIprocess substitution\fP.
これらに加えて \fIプロセス置換 (process substitution)\fP
をサポートできるシステムもあります。
.PP
.\"O Only brace expansion, word splitting, and pathname expansion
.\"O can change the number of words of the expansion; other expansions
.\"O expand a single word to a single word.
.\"O The only exceptions to this are the expansions of
.\"O "\fB$@\fP" and "\fB${\fP\fIname\fP\fB[@]}\fP"
.\"O as explained above (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR PARAMETERS ).
展開した部分の単語の数が変化することがあるのは、ブレース展開、
単語の分割、パス名展開だけです。他の展開では、
1 つの単語は 1 つの単語に展開されます。
この規則の唯一の例外は先に説明した
 "\fB$@\fP" と "\fB${\fP\fIname\fP\fB[@]}\fP" の展開 (
.SM
.B パラメータ
を参照) だけです。
.\"O .SS Brace Expansion
.SS ブレース展開
.PP
.\"O .I "Brace expansion"
.\"O is a mechanism by which arbitrary strings
.\"O may be generated.  This mechanism is similar to
.\"O \fIpathname expansion\fP, but the filenames generated
.\"O need not exist.  Patterns to be brace expanded take
.\"O the form of an optional
.\"O .IR preamble ,
.\"O followed by a series of comma-separated strings
.\"O between a pair of braces, followed by an optional
.\"O .IR postscript .
.\"O The preamble is prefixed to each string contained
.\"O within the braces, and the postscript is then appended
.\"O to each resulting string, expanding left to right.
.I "ブレース展開 (brace expansion)"
を使うと、任意の文字列を生成できます。この機構は
\fIパス名展開\fPに似ていますが、
生成されたファイル名が実在する必要はありません。
ブレース展開されるパターンは、
.IR "前置部分 (preamble: 省略可能)" 、
対になるブレースの間にコンマで区切って並べた文字列、
.I 後置部分 (postscript: 省略可能)
を順に並べたものです。
前置部分はブレース内にある文字列それぞれの先頭部分に追加され、
後置部分は左から右に順に展開されて得られた
それぞれの文字列の末尾に追加されます。
.PP
.\"O Brace expansions may be nested.  The results of each expanded
.\"O string are not sorted; left to right order is preserved.
.\"O For example, a\fB{\fPd,c,b\fB}\fPe expands into `ade ace abe'.
ブレースの展開は入れ子にできます。
展開して得られた文字列はソートされず、
左から右への順番がそのまま残ります。
例えば a\fB{\fPd,c,b\fB}\fPe は `ade ace abe' と展開されます。
.PP
.\"O Brace expansion is performed before any other expansions,
.\"O and any characters special to other expansions are preserved
.\"O in the result.  It is strictly textual.
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O does not apply any syntactic interpretation to the context of the
.\"O expansion or the text between the braces.
ブレースの展開は他のどの展開よりも前に実行されます。
また、他の展開において特殊な意味を持つ文字もそのまま結果に残ります。
つまり、厳密にテキスト操作だけを行います。
.B bash
は、展開の文脈やブレースの間のテキストに対して
文法的な解釈を適用することは一切ありません。
.PP
.\"O A correctly-formed brace expansion must contain unquoted opening
.\"O and closing braces, and at least one unquoted comma.
.\"O Any incorrectly formed brace expansion is left unchanged.
.\"O A \fB{\fP or \fB,\fP may be quoted with a backslash to prevent its
.\"O being considered part of a brace expression.
正しい形のブレース展開には、クォートされていない開きブレースと
閉じブレース、また少なくとも 1 つのクォートされていないコンマが
含まれていなければなりません。正しい形でないブレース展開は全て、
変更されないでそのまま残ります。
\fB{\fP や \fB,\fP をバックスラッシュでクォートすれば、
ブレース展開の一部と解釈されないようにできます。
.\"O To avoid conflicts with parameter expansion, the string \fB${\fP
.\"O is not considered eligible for brace expansion.
パラメータ展開との衝突を避けるため、文字列 \fB${\fP
はブレース展開の対象とは解釈されません。
.PP
.\"O This construct is typically used as shorthand when the common
.\"O prefix of the strings to be generated is longer than in the
.\"O above example:
この仕組みは、
生成される文字列の共通先頭部分が上記の例より長い場合に、
短縮表現としてよく使用されます:
.RS
.PP
mkdir /usr/local/src/bash/{old,new,dist,bugs}
.RE
.\"O or
あるいは
.RS
chown root /usr/{ucb/{ex,edit},lib/{ex?.?*,how_ex}}
.RE
.PP
.\"O Brace expansion introduces a slight incompatibility with
.\"O historical versions of
.\"O .BR sh .
.\"O .B sh
.\"O does not treat opening or closing braces specially when they
.\"O appear as part of a word, and preserves them in the output.
ブレース展開の導入によって、伝統的な
.B sh
とは少し非互換になった部分があります。
.B sh
は単語の一部として開きブレースや閉じブレースが現われても特別扱いはせず、
そのまま出力に残します。
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O removes braces from words as a consequence of brace
.\"O expansion.  For example, a word entered to
.\"O .B sh
.\"O as \fIfile{1,2}\fP
.\"O appears identically in the output.  The same word is
.\"O output as
.\"O .I file1 file2
.\"O after expansion by
.\"O .BR bash .
.B bash
はブレース展開の結果として単語からブレースを取り除きます。例えば
.B sh
に \fIfile{1,2}\fP のように入力された単語はそのままの形で出力されますが、
.B bash
ではこの同じ単語は展開されて
.I file1 file2
のように出力されます。
.\"O If strict compatibility with
.\"O .B sh
.\"O is desired, start
.\"O .B bash
.\"O with the
.\"O .B +B 
.\"O option or disable brace expansion with the
.\"O .B +B
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).
厳密に
.B sh
と互換にしたければ、
.B bash
を
.B +B 
オプションを付けて起動するか、
.B set
コマンドに
.B +B
オプションを与えてブレース展開を無効にしてください
(後述する
.SM
.B シェル組み込みコマンド
を参照)。
.\"O .SS Tilde Expansion
.SS チルダ展開
.PP
.\"O If a word begins with an unquoted tilde character (`\fB~\fP'), all of
.\"O the characters preceding the first unquoted slash (or all characters,
.\"O if there is no unquoted slash) are considered a \fItilde-prefix\fP.
クォートされていないチルダ (`\fB~\fP') で単語が始まった場合、
クォートされていないスラッシュよりも前にある文字すべて
(クォートされていないスラッシュが無ければすべての文字)
はチルダプレフィックス (\fItilde-prefix\fP) と解釈されます。
.\"O If none of the characters in the tilde-prefix are quoted, the
.\"O characters in the tilde-prefix following the tilde are treated as a
.\"O possible \fIlogin name\fP.
.\"O If this login name is the null string, the tilde is replaced with the
.\"O value of the shell parameter
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR HOME .
クォートされている文字がチルダプレフィックス中に無ければ、
チルダプレフィックス中のチルダ以降の文字は、
\fIログイン名 (login name)\fP になる可能性がある文字列として扱われます。
このログイン名が空文字列ならば、チルダはシェルパラメータ
.SM
.B HOME
の値に置き換えられます。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HOME
.\"O is unset, the home directory of the user executing the shell is
.\"O substituted instead.
.\"O Otherwise, the tilde-prefix is replaced with the home directory
.\"O associated with the specified login name.
.SM
.B HOME
が設定されていない場合は、代わりにシェルを実行しているユーザの
ホームディレクトリに置き換えられます。
ログイン名が空でなければ、
チルダプレフィックスは指定されたログイン名に対応する
ホームディレクトリに置き換えられます。
.PP
.\"O If the tilde-prefix is a `~+', the value of the shell variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PWD
.\"O replaces the tilde-prefix.
チルダプレフィックスが `~+' ならば、チルダプレフィックスはシェル変数
.SM
.B PWD
の値に置き換えられます。
.\"O If the tilde-prefix is a `~\-', the value of the shell variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR OLDPWD ,
.\"O if it is set, is substituted.
チルダプレフィックスが `~\-' ならば、シェル変数
.SM
.B OLDPWD
の値に置き換えられます (値が設定されていれば)。
.\"O If the characters following the tilde in the tilde-prefix consist
.\"O of a number \fIN\fP, optionally prefixed
.\"O by a `+' or a `\-', the tilde-prefix is replaced with the corresponding
.\"O element from the directory stack, as it would be displayed by the
.\"O .B dirs
.\"O builtin invoked with the tilde-prefix as an argument.
.\"O If the characters following the tilde in the tilde-prefix consist of a
.\"O number without a leading `+' or `\-', `+' is assumed.
チルダプレフィックス中のチルダより後の文字が数値 \fIN\fP であれば
(数値の前に `+' や `\-' を置くこともできます)、
チルダプレフィックスはディレクトリスタック内の対応する要素に置換されます。
置換される要素は、チルダプレフィックスを引き数として組み込みコマンド
.B dirs
を実行したときに表示されるものです。
チルダプレフィックスにおけるチルダ以降の文字が、
先行する `+' や `-' のない数値である場合は、`+' であるとみなされます。
.PP
.\"O If the login name is invalid, or the tilde expansion fails, the word
.\"O is unchanged.
ログイン名が有効でない場合や、チルダ展開が失敗した場合には、
単語は置き換えられません。
.PP
.\"O Each variable assignment is checked for unquoted tilde-prefixes immediately
.\"O following a
.\"O .B :
.\"O or
.\"O .BR = .
.\"O In these cases, tilde expansion is also performed.
全ての変数代入において、
.B :
や
.B =
の直後にクォートされていないチルダプレフィックスがないかチェックが行われます。
もし見つかった場合にはこれらもチルダ展開されます。
.\"O Consequently, one may use file names with tildes in assignments to
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR PATH ,
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR MAILPATH ,
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR CDPATH ,
.\"O and the shell assigns the expanded value.
したがって、
.SM
.BR PATH ,
.SM
.BR MAILPATH ,
.SM
.BR CDPATH
への代入にチルダを含むファイル名を使えば、
シェルは展開された値を代入します。
.\"O .SS Parameter Expansion
.SS パラメータの展開
.PP
.\"O The `\fB$\fP' character introduces parameter expansion,
.\"O command substitution, or arithmetic expansion.  The parameter name
.\"O or symbol to be expanded may be enclosed in braces, which
.\"O are optional but serve to protect the variable to be expanded from
.\"O characters immediately following it which could be
.\"O interpreted as part of the name.
`\fB$\fP' 文字があると、パラメータ展開、コマンド置換、
算術式展開が行われます。展開されるパラメータ名やシンボルは、
ブレースで括ることもできます。
ブレースは省略可能ですが、
変数の直後に変数名の一部と解釈できる文字が置かれた場合に、
その文字と共に変数が展開されてしまうのを防ぐために用意されています。
.PP
.\"O When braces are used, the matching ending brace is the first `\fB}\fP'
.\"O not escaped by a backslash or within a quoted string, and not within an
.\"O embedded arithmetic expansion, command substitution, or paramter
.\"O expansion.
ブレースを使った場合、マッチングを終えるブレースは最初の `\fB}\fP' です。
ただしバックスラッシュでエスケープされているものや
クォートされている文字列中のものは含まれませんし、
算術式展開やコマンド置換、パラメータ展開に入っているものも含まれません。
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
${\fIparameter\fP}
.\"O The value of \fIparameter\fP is substituted.  The braces are required
.\"O when
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is a positional parameter with more than one digit,
.\"O or when
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is followed by a character which is not to be
.\"O interpreted as part of its name.
\fIparameter\fP の値が置換されます。ブレースが必要になるのは、
.I parameter
が 2 桁以上の数字を持つ位置パラメータの場合や、
.I parameter
の直後の文字を名前の一部として解釈させたくない場合です。
.PD
.PP
.\"O If the first character of \fIparameter\fP is an exclamation point,
.\"O a level of variable indirection is introduced.
.\"O \fBBash\fP uses the value of the variable formed from the rest of
.\"O \fIparameter\fP as the name of the variable; this variable is then
.\"O expanded and that value is used in the rest of the substitution, rather
.\"O than the value of \fIparameter\fP itself.
.\"O This is known as \fIindirect expansion\fP.
\fIparameter\fP の最初の文字が感嘆符である場合、間接変数レベル
(level of variable indirection) という概念が導入されます。
\fBbash\fP は、展開に \fIparameter\fP  そのものの値を使用するのでなく、
\fIparameter\fP の感嘆符を除いた残りの文字を変数名として扱い、
その変数の値をその後の展開に使用します。
これが\fI間接展開 (indirect expansion)\fP と呼ばれるものです。
.\"O The exception to this is the expansion of ${!\fIprefix\fP*}
.\"O described below.
ただし ${!\fIprefix\fP*} の展開は例外です。これは以下で説明します。
.PP
.\"O In each of the cases below, \fIword\fP is subject to tilde expansion,
.\"O parameter expansion, command substitution, and arithmetic expansion.
.\"O When not performing substring expansion, \fBbash\fP tests for a parameter
.\"O that is unset or null; omitting the colon results in a test only for a
.\"O parameter that is unset.
以下に示すそれぞれの場合、\fIword\fP に対してチルダ展開、
パラメータ展開、コマンド置換、算術式展開が行われます。
部分文字列展開以外の場合、
\fBbash\fP はパラメータが設定されているか、空ではないかを調べます。
コロンを省略した場合には設定されているかどうかのみを調べます。
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
${\fIparameter\fP\fB:\-\fP\fIword\fP}
.\"O \fBUse Default Values\fP.  If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is unset or null, the expansion of
.\"O .I word
.\"O is substituted.  Otherwise, the value of
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is substituted.
\fBデフォルトの値を使います\fP。
.I parameter
が設定されていないか空文字列であれば、
.I word
を展開したものに置換されます。そうでなければ、
.I parameter
の値に置換されます。
.TP
${\fIparameter\fP\fB:=\fP\fIword\fP}
.\"O \fBAssign Default Values\fP.
\fBデフォルトの値を代入します\fP。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is unset or null, the expansion of
.\"O .I word
.\"O is assigned to
.\"O .IR parameter .
.\"O The value of
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is then substituted.  Positional parameters and special parameters may
.\"O not be assigned to in this way.
.I parameter
が設定されていないか空文字列であれば、
.I word
を展開したものが
.I parameter
に代入されます。それから
.I parameter
の値への置換が行われます。
位置パラメータや特殊パラメータへの代入をこのように行うことはできません。
.TP
${\fIparameter\fP\fB:?\fP\fIword\fP}
.\"O \fBDisplay Error if Null or Unset\fP.
\fB空文字列または設定されていない場合にエラーを表示します\fP。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is null or unset, the expansion of \fIword\fP (or a message to that effect
.\"O if
.\"O .I word
.\"O is not present) is written to the standard error and the shell, if it
.\"O is not interactive, exits.  Otherwise, the value of \fIparameter\fP is
.\"O substituted.
.I parameter
が空文字列または設定されていない場合、\fIword\fP を展開したもの
.RI ( word
がなければ
パラメータが空文字列または設定されていないことを示すメッセージ)
が標準エラー出力に出力されます。シェルが対話的でなければ、
シェルは終了します。パラメータに空文字列以外が設定されていれば、
\fIparameter\fP の値への置換が行われます。
.TP
${\fIparameter\fP\fB:+\fP\fIword\fP}
.\"O \fBUse Alternate Value\fP.
\fB別の値を使用します\fP。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is null or unset, nothing is substituted, otherwise the expansion of
.\"O .I word
.\"O is substituted.
.I parameter
が空文字列または設定されていなければ、空文字列に置換されます。
そうでなければ
.I word
を展開したものに置換されます。
.TP
.PD 0
${\fIparameter\fP\fB:\fP\fIoffset\fP}
.TP
${\fIparameter\fP\fB:\fP\fIoffset\fP\fB:\fP\fIlength\fP}
.PD
.\"O \fBSubstring Expansion.\fP
\fB部分文字列展開\fP。
.\"O Expands to up to \fIlength\fP characters of \fIparameter\fP
.\"O starting at the character specified by \fIoffset\fP.
.\"O If \fIlength\fP is omitted, expands to the substring of
.\"O \fIparameter\fP, starting at the character specified by \fIoffset\fP.
.\"O \fIlength\fP and \fIoffset\fP are arithmetic expressions (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B
.\"O ARITHMETIC EVALUATION
.\"O below).
\fIparameter\fP を展開したものから最大 \fIlength\fP 文字を取り出します。
先頭の文字は \fIoffset\fP で指定します。\fIlength\fP を省略すると、
\fIoffset\fP で指定した文字を先頭にして、
\fIparameter\fP の残り全部が含まれる部分文字列に展開します。
\fIlength\fP と \fIoffset\fP は算術式です (後述の
.SM
.B 算術式評価
を参照)。
.\"O \fIlength\fP must evaluate to a number greater than or equal to zero.
.\"O If \fIoffset\fP evaluates to a number less than zero, the value
.\"O is used as an offset from the end of the value of \fIparameter\fP.
\fIlength\fP の評価結果は 0 以上の数でなければなりません。
\fIoffset\fP を評価すると 0 未満の数になる場合、この値は
\fIparameter\fP の値の末尾からのオフセットとして使われます。
.\"O If \fIparameter\fP is \fB@\fP, the result is \fIlength\fP positional
.\"O parameters beginning at \fIoffset\fP.
.\"O If \fIparameter\fP is an array name indexed by @ or *,
.\"O the result is the \fIlength\fP
.\"O members of the array beginning with ${\fIparameter\fP[\fIoffset\fP]}.
.\"O Substring indexing is zero-based unless the positional parameters 
.\"O are used, in which case the indexing starts at 1.
\fIparameter\fP が \fB@\fP ならば、結果は \fIoffset\fP から始まる
\fIlength\fP 個の位置パラメータになります。
\fIparameter\fP が @ または * のインデックスが付いている配列名ならば、
結果は配列の ${\fIparameter\fP[\fIoffset\fP]} を先頭とする要素
\fIlength\fP 個となります。位置パラメータを使う場合以外は、
部分文字列のインデックスは 0 から始まります。位置パラメータの場合には、
インデックスは 1 から始まります。
.TP
${\fB!\fP\fIprefix\fP\fB*\fP}
.\"O Expands to the names of variables whose names begin with \fIprefix\fP,
.\"O separated by the first character of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O special variable.
\fIprefix\fP で始まるすべての変数の名前に展開して、
.SM
.B IFS
特殊変数の最初の文字によって区切ります。
.TP
${\fB#\fP\fIparameter\fP}
.\"O The length in characters of the value of \fIparameter\fP is substituted.
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is
.\"O .B *
.\"O or 
.\"O .BR @ ,
.\"O the value substituted is the number of positional parameters.
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is an array name subscripted by
.\"O .B *
.\"O or
.\"O .BR @ ,
.\"O the value substituted is the number of elements in the array.
\fIparameter\fP の値に含まれる文字数に置換されます。
.I parameter
が
.B *
または
.B @
ならば、位置パラメータの数に置換されます。
.I parameter
が
.B *
または
.B @
が添字になっている配列名ならば、配列中の要素数に置換されます。
.TP
.PD 0
${\fIparameter\fP\fB#\fP\fIword\fP}
.TP
${\fIparameter\fP\fB##\fP\fIword\fP}
.PD
.\"O The 
.\"O .I word
.\"O is expanded to produce a pattern just as in pathname
.\"O expansion.  If the pattern matches the beginning of
.\"O the value of
.\"O .IR parameter ,
.\"O then the result of the expansion is the expanded value of
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O with the shortest matching pattern (the ``\fB#\fP'' case) or the
.\"O longest matching pattern (the ``\fB##\fP'' case) deleted.
.I word
が展開され、パス名展開の場合と同じようなパターンを作ります。
このパターンが
.I parameter
の値の先頭部分とマッチする場合、展開して得られる値は
.I parameter
を展開した値から最短一致パターン (``\fB#\fP''の場合)
または最長一致パターン (``\fB##\fP'' の場合)
を取り除いたものになります。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is
.\"O .B @
.\"O or
.\"O .BR * ,
.\"O the pattern removal operation is applied to each positional
.\"O parameter in turn, and the expansion is the resultant list.
.I parameter
が
.B @
または
.BR *
である場合、
パターンを削除する操作は全ての位置パラメータに順番に適用され、
展開結果はリストとして得られます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is an array variable subscripted with
.\"O .B @
.\"O or
.\"O .BR * ,
.\"O the pattern removal operation is applied to each member of the
.\"O array in turn, and the expansion is the resultant list.
.I parameter
が
.B @
または
.B *
が添字になっている配列変数である場合、
パターンを削除する操作は配列の全ての要素に順番に適用され、
展開結果はリストとして得られます。
.TP
.PD 0
${\fIparameter\fP\fB%\fP\fIword\fP}
.TP
${\fIparameter\fP\fB%%\fP\fIword\fP}
.PD
.\"O The \fIword\fP is expanded to produce a pattern just as in
.\"O pathname expansion.
.\"O If the pattern matches a trailing portion of the expanded value of
.\"O .IR parameter ,
.\"O then the result of the expansion is the expanded value of
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O with the shortest matching pattern (the ``\fB%\fP'' case) or the
.\"O longest matching pattern (the ``\fB%%\fP'' case) deleted.
.I word
が展開され、パス名展開の場合と同じようなパターンを作ります。
このパターンが
.I parameter
を展開した値の末尾の部分とマッチする場合、展開結果は
.I parameter
を展開した値から最短一致パターン (``\fB%\fP'' の場合)
または最長一致パターン (``\fB%%\fP'' の場合)
を取り除いたものになります。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is
.\"O .B @
.\"O or
.\"O .BR * ,
.\"O the pattern removal operation is applied to each positional
.\"O parameter in turn, and the expansion is the resultant list.
.I parameter
が
.B @
または
.B *
である場合、
パターンを削除する操作は全ての位置パラメータに順番に適用され、
展開結果はリストとして得られます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is an array variable subscripted with
.\"O .B @
.\"O or
.\"O .BR * ,
.\"O the pattern removal operation is applied to each member of the
.\"O array in turn, and the expansion is the resultant list.
.I parameter
が
.B @
または
.B *
が添字になっている配列変数である場合、
パターンを削除する操作は配列の全ての要素に順番に適用され、
展開結果はリストとして得られます。
.TP
.PD 0
${\fIparameter\fP\fB/\fP\fIpattern\fP\fB/\fP\fIstring\fP}
.TP
${\fIparameter\fP\fB//\fP\fIpattern\fP\fB/\fP\fIstring\fP}
.PD
.\"O The \fIpattern\fP is expanded to produce a pattern just as in
.\"O pathname expansion.
\fIpattern\fP が展開され、
パス名展開の場合と同じようなパターンを作ります。
.\"O \fIParameter\fP is expanded and the longest match of \fIpattern\fP
.\"O against its value is replaced with \fIstring\fP.
\fIparameter\fP の展開が行われ、
その値のうち \fIpattern\fP に最長一致する部分が
\fIstring\fP に置換されます。
.\"O In the first form, only the first match is replaced.
前者の形式の場合には、最初にマッチした部分だけが置換されます。
.\"O The second form causes all matches of \fIpattern\fP to be
.\"O replaced with \fIstring\fP.
後者の形式の場合には、マッチした部分は全て \fIstring\fP に置換されます。
.\"O If \fIpattern\fP begins with \fB#\fP, it must match at the beginning
.\"O of the expanded value of \fIparameter\fP.
\fIpattern\fP が \fB#\fP で始まる場合には、パターンは \fIparameter\fP 
を展開した値の先頭にマッチしなければなりません。
.\"O If \fIpattern\fP begins with \fB%\fP, it must match at the end
.\"O of the expanded value of \fIparameter\fP.
\fIpattern\fP が \fB%\fP で始まる場合には、パターンは \fIparameter\fP 
を展開した値の末尾にマッチしなければなりません。
.\"O If \fIstring\fP is null, matches of \fIpattern\fP are deleted
.\"O and the \fB/\fP following \fIpattern\fP may be omitted.
\fIstring\fP が空の場合には \fIpattern\fP にマッチした部分は削除されます。
またこの場合には、\fIpattern\fP の後に続く \fB/\fP は省略可能です。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is
.\"O .B @
.\"O or
.\"O .BR * ,
.\"O the substitution operation is applied to each positional
.\"O parameter in turn, and the expansion is the resultant list.
.I parameter
が
.B @
または
.B *
である場合、置換操作は全ての位置パラメータに順番に適用され、
展開結果はリストとして得られます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I parameter
.\"O is an array variable subscripted with
.\"O .B @
.\"O or
.\"O .BR * ,
.\"O the substitution operation is applied to each member of the
.\"O array in turn, and the expansion is the resultant list.
.I parameter
が
.B @
または
.B *
が添字になっている配列変数である場合、
置換操作は配列の全ての要素に順番に適用され、
展開結果はリストとして得られます。
.\"O .SS Command Substitution
.SS コマンド置換
.PP
.\"O \fICommand substitution\fP allows the output of a command to replace
.\"O the command name.  There are two forms:
\fIコマンド置換 (command substitution)\fP を用いると、
コマンド名をコマンドの出力で置き換えできます。
コマンド置換には以下の 2 つの形式があります:
.PP
.RS
.PP
\fB$(\fP\fIcommand\fP\|\fB)\fP
.RE
.\"O or
または
.RS
\fB`\fP\fIcommand\fP\fB`\fP
.RE
.PP
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O performs the expansion by executing \fIcommand\fP and
.\"O replacing the command substitution with the standard output of the
.\"O command, with any trailing newlines deleted.
.\"O Embedded newlines are not deleted, but they may be removed during
.\"O word splitting.
.\"O The command substitution \fB$(cat \fIfile\fP)\fR can be replaced by
.\"O the equivalent but faster \fB$(< \fIfile\fP)\fR.
.B bash
による展開は、\fIcommand\fP の実行およびコマンド置換の部分を
コマンドの標準出力と置換することにより実行されます。
この際、末尾の改行文字は削除されます。
文字列の途中にある改行文字は削除されませんが、
単語分割の際に削除されることがあります。
コマンド置換 \fB$(cat \fIfile\fP)\fR は、同じ意味を持ち、
しかも高速な \fB$(< \fIfile\fP)\fR に置き換え可能です。
.PP
.\"O When the old-style backquote form of substitution is used,
.\"O backslash retains its literal meaning except when followed by
.\"O .BR $ ,
.\"O .BR ` ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR \e .
.\"O The first backquote not preceded by a backslash terminates the
.\"O command substitution.
.\"O When using the $(\^\fIcommand\fP\|) form, all characters between the
.\"O parentheses make up the command; none are treated specially.
バッククォートを使う古い形式の置換を用いたとき、
バックスラッシュは文字通りの意味を保ちますが、
.BR $ ,
.BR ` ,
.B \e
の前にある場合は例外となります。
バックスラッシュが前置されていないバッククォートがあると、
そこでコマンド置換は閉じられます。
$(\^\fIcommand\fP\|) という形式を用いたときは、
括弧の間にある全ての文字がコマンドとなります。
特別扱いされる文字はありません。
.PP
.\"O Command substitutions may be nested.  To nest when using the backquoted form,
.\"O escape the inner backquotes with backslashes.
コマンド置換は入れ子にできます。
バッククォート形式の時に入れ子を行うには、
内側のバッククォートをバックスラッシュでエスケープします。
.PP
.\"O If the substitution appears within double quotes, word splitting and
.\"O pathname expansion are not performed on the results.
置換がダブルクォート内部にある場合には、
置換の結果に対する単語分割とパス名展開は行われません。
.\"O .SS Arithmetic Expansion
.SS 算術式展開
.PP
.\"O Arithmetic expansion allows the evaluation of an arithmetic expression
.\"O and the substitution of the result.  The format for arithmetic expansion is:
算術式展開を使うと、算術式を評価して、その結果に置換できます。
算術式展開のフォーマットを次に示します:
.RS
.PP
\fB$((\fP\fIexpression\fP\fB))\fP
.RE
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I expression
.\"O is treated as if it were within double quotes, but a double quote
.\"O inside the parentheses is not treated specially.
.\"O All tokens in the expression undergo parameter expansion, string
.\"O expansion, command substitution, and quote removal.
.\"O Arithmetic substitutions may be nested.
.I expression
はダブルクォート内部にある場合と同様に扱われますが、
括弧の内側のダブルクォートが特別扱いされることはありません。
式に含まれる全てのトークンに対して、
パラメータ展開・文字列展開・コマンド置換・クォートの削除が行われます。
算術式置換は入れ子にできます。
.PP
.\"O The evaluation is performed according to the rules listed below under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "ARITHMETIC EVALUATION" .
.\"O If
.\"O .I expression
.\"O is invalid,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O prints a message indicating failure and no substitution occurs.
評価は後述の
.SM
.B "算術式評価"
で示す規則に基づいて行われます。
.I expression
が不正であれば、
.B bash
は評価の失敗を示すメッセージを出力し、置換を全く行いません。
.\"O .SS Process Substitution
.SS プロセス置換
.PP
.\"O \fIProcess substitution\fP is supported on systems that support named
.\"O pipes (\fIFIFOs\fP) or the \fB/dev/fd\fP method of naming open files.
.\"O It takes the form of
.\"O \fB<(\fP\fIlist\^\fP\fB)\fP
.\"O or
.\"O \fB>(\fP\fIlist\^\fP\fB)\fP.
\fIプロセス置換 (process substitution)\fP がサポートされるのは、
名前付きパイプ (\fIFIFO\fP) または名前付きオープンファイルの
\fB/dev/fd\fP メソッドをサポートしているシステムです。これは
\fB<(\fP\fIlist\^\fP\fB)\fP
または
\fB>(\fP\fIlist\^\fP\fB)\fP
の形になります。
.\"O The process \fIlist\fP is run with its input or output connected to a
.\"O \fIFIFO\fP or some file in \fB/dev/fd\fP.  The name of this file is
.\"O passed as an argument to the current command as the result of the
.\"O expansion.  If the \fB>(\fP\fIlist\^\fP\fB)\fP form is used, writing to
.\"O the file will provide input for \fIlist\fP.  If the
.\"O \fB<(\fP\fIlist\^\fP\fB)\fP form is used, the file passed as an
.\"O argument should be read to obtain the output of \fIlist\fP.
プロセス \fIlist\fP は、その入力や出力が
\fIFIFO\fP または \fB/dev/fd\fP 中の
何らかのファイルに接続された状態で実行されます。
このファイルの名前は、展開の結果として、
引き数のかたちで現在のコマンドに渡されます。
\fB>(\fP\fIlist\^\fP\fB)\fP の形式を使った場合、
ファイルへの書き込みは \fIlist\fP への入力となります。
\fB<(\fP\fIlist\^\fP\fB)\fP の形式を使った場合、
引き数として渡されたファイルは
\fIlist\fP の出力を得るために読み込まれます。
.PP
.\"O When available, process substitution is performed
.\"O simultaneously with parameter and variable expansion, 
.\"O command substitution,
.\"O and arithmetic expansion.
利用可能であれば、プロセス置換 (process substitution) は、
パラメータ展開・変数展開・コマンド置換・算術式展開と同時に行われます。
.\"O .SS Word Splitting
.SS 単語の分割
.PP
.\"O The shell scans the results of
.\"O parameter expansion,
.\"O command substitution,
.\"O and
.\"O arithmetic expansion
.\"O that did not occur within double quotes for
.\"O .IR "word splitting" .
シェルはパラメータ展開・コマンド置換・算術式展開
(ダブルクォートの内部ではこれらの展開は行われません)
の結果をスキャンし、
.I "単語分割"
を行います。
.\"O The shell treats each character of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O as a delimiter, and splits the results of the other
.\"O expansions into words on these characters.  If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O is unset, or its
.\"O value is exactly
.\"O .BR <space><tab><newline> ,
.\"O the default, then
.\"O any sequence of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O characters serves to delimit words.  If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O has a value other than the default, then sequences of
.\"O the whitespace characters
.\"O .B space
.\"O and
.\"O .B tab
.\"O are ignored at the beginning and end of the
.\"O word, as long as the whitespace character is in the
.\"O value of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR IFS
.\"O (an
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O whitespace character).
シェルは
.SM
.B IFS
のそれぞれの文字を区切り文字として扱い、
他の展開の結果をこれらの文字によって単語に分割します。
.SM
.B IFS
が設定されていないか、その値が正確にデフォルト値の
.BR <スペース><タブ><改行>
ならば、
.SM
.B IFS
文字の任意の列で単語が区切られます。
.SM
.B IFS
がデフォルト以外の値を持っていれば、空白文字
.RB ( スペース
および
.BR タブ )
の列は単語の先頭と末尾では無視されます。これは空白文字が
.SM
.BR IFS
の値 (
.SM
.B IFS
空白文字) に含まれる限り成り立ちます。
.\"O Any character in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O that is not
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O whitespace, along with any adjacent
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O whitespace characters, delimits a field.
.SM
.B IFS
に含まれ、
.SM
.B IFS
空白文字ではない文字は全て、隣接する任意の
.SM
.B IFS
空白文字と一緒になってフィールドの区切りとなります。
.\"O A sequence of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O whitespace characters is also treated as a delimiter.
.\"O If the value of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O is null, no word splitting occurs.
.SM
.B IFS
空白文字の列も区切り文字として扱われます。
.SM
.B IFS
の値が空文字列であれば、単語分割は全く行われません。
.PP
.\"O Explicit null arguments (\^\f3"\^"\fP or \^\f3'\^'\fP\^) are retained.
.\"O Unquoted implicit null arguments, resulting from the expansion of
.\"O parameters that have no values, are removed.
.\"O If a parameter with no value is expanded within double quotes, a
.\"O null argument results and is retained.
明示的に指定した空の引き数(\^\f3"\^"\fP
または \^\f3'\^'\fP\^)は削除されずに残ります。
クォートされていない暗黙的な空の引き数が、
値を持たないパラメータを展開した結果として得られますが、
これらは削除されます。
値を持たないパラメータがダブルクォート内部で展開されると、
これは空である引き数となり、消されずに残ります。
.PP
.\"O Note that if no expansion occurs, no splitting
.\"O is performed.
展開が行われなければ単語分割も行われない点に注意してください。
.\"O .SS Pathname Expansion
.SS パス名展開
.PP
.\"O After word splitting,
.\"O unless the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option has been set,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O scans each word for the characters
.\"O .BR * ,
.\"O .BR ? ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR [ .
.B \-f
オプションが指定されていなければ、単語分割を行った後に
.B bash
はそれぞれの単語が
.BR * ,
.BR ? ,
.B [
を含んでいるかどうか調べます。
.\"O If one of these characters appears, then the word is
.\"O regarded as a
.\"O .IR pattern ,
.\"O and replaced with an alphabetically sorted list of
.\"O file names matching the pattern.
これらの文字のいずれかが見つかると、その単語は
.I パターン
と見なされ、
パターンにマッチするファイル名を
アルファベット順にソートしたリストに置換されます。
.\"O If no matching file names are found,
.\"O and the shell option
.\"O .B nullglob
.\"O is disabled, the word is left unchanged.
マッチするファイル名が見つからず、かつシェルのオプション
.B nullglob
が無効ならば、その単語は変更されずにそのまま残ります。
.\"O If the 
.\"O .B nullglob
.\"O option is set, and no matches are found,
.\"O the word is removed.
.B nullglob
オプションが設定されていて、かつマッチするファイル名が見つからなければ、
その単語は削除されます。
.\"O If the shell option
.\"O .B nocaseglob
.\"O is enabled, the match is performed without regard to the case
.\"O of alphabetic characters.
シェルのオプション
.B nocaseglob
が有効ならば、マッチングにおいてアルファベットの大文字と小文字は区別さ
れません。
.\"O When a pattern is used for pathname expansion,
.\"O the character
.\"O .B ``.''
.\"O at the start of a name or immediately following a slash
.\"O must be matched explicitly, unless the shell option
.\"O .B dotglob
.\"O is set.
パターンをパス名展開に使うとき、名前の先頭やスラッシュの直後の
.B ``.''
は明示的にマッチさせなければなりません。ただしシェルのオプション
.B dotglob
が設定されている場合は例外です。
.\"O When matching a pathname, the slash character must always be
.\"O matched explicitly.
.\"O In other cases, the
.\"O .B ``.''
.\"O character is not treated specially.
パス名のマッチングを行うとき、
スラッシュ文字は必ず明示的にマッチさせなければなりません。
これ以外の場合には、
.B ``.''
が特別扱いされることはありません。
.\"O See the description of
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O below under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O for a description of the
.\"O .BR nocaseglob ,
.\"O .BR nullglob ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B dotglob
.\"O shell options.
シェルのオプション
.BR nocaseglob ,
.BR nullglob ,
.B dotglob
の詳しい説明については、後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
に書かれている
.B shopt
の説明を参照してください。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B GLOBIGNORE
.\"O shell variable may be used to restrict the set of file names matching a
.\"O .IR pattern .
シェル変数
.SM
.B GLOBIGNORE
を使って、
.I パターン
にマッチするファイル名の集合を制限できます。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B GLOBIGNORE
.\"O is set, each matching file name that also matches one of the patterns in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B GLOBIGNORE
.\"O is removed from the list of matches.
.SM
.B GLOBIGNORE
が設定されていれば、マッチするファイル名のうち
.SM
.B GLOBIGNORE
中のパターンにもマッチしたものは、
マッチしたもののリストから取り除かれます。
.\"O The file names
.\"O .B ``.''
.\"O and
.\"O .B ``..''
.\"O are always ignored, even when
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B GLOBIGNORE
.\"O is set.  However, setting
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B GLOBIGNORE
.\"O has the effect of enabling the
.\"O .B dotglob
.\"O shell option, so all other file names beginning with a
.\"O .B ``.''
.\"O will match.
ファイル名
.B ``.''
と
.B ``..''
は必ず無視されます。これは
.SM
.B GLOBIGNORE
が設定されていても同じです。しかし、
.SM
.B GLOBIGNORE
を設定するとシェルオプションの
.B dotglob
が有効になるので、
.B ``.''
で始まる他のファイル名は全てマッチします。
.\"O To get the old behavior of ignoring file names beginning with a
.\"O .BR ``.'' ,
.\"O make
.\"O .B ``.*''
.\"O one of the patterns in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR GLOBIGNORE .
.B ``.''
で始めるファイル名を無視する古い動作をさせるには、
.B ``.*''
を
.SM
.B GLOBIGNORE
のパターンに含めてください。
.\"O The
.\"O .B dotglob
.\"O option is disabled when
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B GLOBIGNORE
.\"O is unset.
.SM
.B GLOBIGNORE
が設定されていなければ、
.B dotglob
オプションは無効になります。
.PP
.\"O \fBPattern Matching\fP
\fBパターンマッチング\fP
.PP
.\"O Any character that appears in a pattern, other than the special pattern
.\"O characters described below, matches itself.  The NUL character may not
.\"O occur in a pattern.  The special pattern characters must be quoted if
.\"O they are to be matched literally.
パターンに含まれる文字のうち、後述する特殊パターン文字以外の文字は、
自分自身にマッチします。NUL 文字がパターン中に現われてはいけません。
特殊パターン文字をその文字そのものにマッチさせるためには、
クォートしなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O The special pattern characters have the following meanings:
特殊パターン文字は以下の意味を持っています:
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B *
.\"O Matches any string, including the null string.
空文字列を含む、任意の文字列にマッチします。
.TP
.B ?
.\"O Matches any single character.
任意の 1 文字にマッチします。
.TP
.B [...]
.\"O Matches any one of the enclosed characters.  A pair of characters
.\"O separated by a hyphen denotes a
.\"O \fIrange expression\fP;
.\"O any character that sorts between those two characters, inclusive,
.\"O using the current locale's collating sequence and character set,
.\"O is matched.  If the first character following the
.\"O .B [
.\"O is a
.\"O .B !
.\"O or a
.\"O .B ^
.\"O then any character not enclosed is matched.
括られた文字のうち任意の 1 文字にマッチします。
2 つの文字の間にハイフンを入れたものは、
.I 範囲表現 (range expresion)
を表します。ソート順で 2 つの文字の間にある任意の文字と、
両端の 2 文字がマッチします。
ソートには現在のロケールの照合順序 (collating sequance)
と文字セットが用いられます。
.B [
の次の文字が
.B !
または
.B ^
ならば、括られた文字に含まれない任意の文字がマッチします。
.\"O The sorting order of characters in range expressions is determined by
.\"O the current locale and the value of the \fBLC_COLLATE\fP shell variable,
.\"O if set.
範囲表現における文字のソート順は、
現在のロケール (およびシェル変数
.B LC_COLLATE
が指定されていればその値)
によって決定されます。
.\"O A 
.\"O .B \-
.\"O may be matched by including it as the first or last character
.\"O in the set.
.B \-
は、文字集合の最初または最後の文字として含めると
マッチングの対象にできます。
.\"O A
.\"O .B ]
.\"O may be matched by including it as the first character
.\"O in the set.
.B ]
は、文字集合の最初の文字として含めるとマッチングの対象にできます。
.br
.if t .sp 0.5
.if n .sp 1
.\"O Within
.\"O .B [
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ] ,
.\"O \fIcharacter classes\fP can be specified using the syntax
.\"O \fB[:\fP\fIclass\fP\fB:]\fP, where \fIclass\fP is one of the
.\"O following classes defined in the POSIX.2 standard:
.B [
と
.B ]
の間では、\fI文字クラス (character classes)\fP を指定できます。
指定には \fB[:\fP\fIclass\fP\fB:]\fP という記法を使います。ここで
\fIclass\fP は POSIX.2 標準で定義されている以下のクラスのいずれかです:
.PP
.RS
.B
.if n alnum alpha ascii blank cntrl digit graph lower print punct space upper xdigit
.if t alnum   alpha   ascii   blank   cntrl   digit   graph   lower   print   punct   space   upper   xdigit
.br
.\"O A character class matches any character belonging to that class.
文字クラスは、そのクラスの属する任意の文字にマッチします。
.br
.if t .sp 0.5
.if n .sp 1
.\"O Within
.\"O .B [
.\"O and 
.\"O .BR ] ,
.\"O an \fIequivalence class\fP can be specified using the syntax
.\"O \fB[=\fP\fIc\fP\fB=]\fP, which matches all characters with the
.\"O same collation weight (as defined by the current locale) as
.\"O the character \fIc\fP.
.B [
と
.B ]
の間では、\fI同値クラス (equivalence class)\fP を指定できます。
指定には \fB[=\fP\fIc\fP\fB=]\fP という記法を使います。
これは現在のロケールにおける定義において \fIc\fP と同じ 
照合重さ (collation weight) を持つ全ての文字にマッチします。
.br
.if t .sp 0.5
.if n .sp 1
.\"O Within
.\"O .B [
.\"O and 
.\"O .BR ] ,
.\"O the syntax \fB[.\fP\fIsymbol\fP\fB.]\fP matches the collating symbol
.\"O \fIsymbol\fP.
.B [
と
.B ]
の間では、\fB[.\fP\fIsymbol\fP\fB.]\fP という記述は照合シンボル
\fIsymbol\fP にマッチします。
.RE
.PD
.PP
.\"O If the \fBextglob\fP shell option is enabled using the \fBshopt\fP
.\"O builtin, several extended pattern matching operators are recognized.
.\"O In the following description, a \fIpattern-list\fP is a list of one
.\"O or more patterns separated by a \fB|\fP.
.\"O Composite patterns may be formed using one or more of the following
.\"O sub-patterns:
組み込みコマンドの \fBshopt\fP を使ってシェルのオプション
\fBextglob\fP が有効にされていると、
拡張パターンマッチング演算子がいくつか認識されるようになります。
以下の説明では、\fIpattern-list\fP は
\fB|\fP で区切られた 1 つ以上のパターンのリストであるものとします。
以下のサブパターンを 1 つあるいは複数使うことにより、
複合パターンを作れます。
.sp 1
.PD 0
.RS
.TP
\fB?(\fP\^\fIpattern-list\^\fP\fB)\fP
.\"O Matches zero or one occurrence of the given patterns
与えられたパターンが 0 回または 1 回現われるとマッチします。
.TP
\fB*(\fP\^\fIpattern-list\^\fP\fB)\fP
.\"O Matches zero or more occurrences of the given patterns
与えられたパターンが 0 回以上現われるとマッチします。
.TP
\fB+(\fP\^\fIpattern-list\^\fP\fB)\fP
.\"O Matches one or more occurrences of the given patterns
与えられたパターンが 1 回以上現われるとマッチします。
.TP
\fB@(\fP\^\fIpattern-list\^\fP\fB)\fP
.\"O Matches exactly one of the given patterns
与えられたパターンのうち 1 つだけにマッチします。
.TP
\fB!(\fP\^\fIpattern-list\^\fP\fB)\fP
.\"O Matches anything except one of the given patterns
与えられたパターンいずれにも含まれないもの全てにマッチします。
.RE
.PD
.\"O .SS Quote Removal
.SS クォートの削除
.PP
.\"O After the preceding expansions, all unquoted occurrences of the
.\"O characters
.\"O .BR \e ,
.\"O .BR ' ,
.\"O and \^\f3"\fP\^ that did not result from one of the above
.\"O expansions are removed.
先に処理される展開の後、クォートされていない
.BR \e ,
.BR ' ,
\^\f3"\fP\^ 
のうち、先の展開の結果でないものは全て削除されます。
.\"O .SH REDIRECTION
.SH リダイレクト
.\"O Before a command is executed, its input and output
.\"O may be
.\"O .I redirected
.\"O using a special notation interpreted by the shell.
.\"O Redirection may also be used to open and close files for the
.\"O current shell execution environment.  The following redirection
.\"O operators may precede or appear anywhere within a
.\"O .I simple command
.\"O or may follow a
.\"O .IR command .
.\"O Redirections are processed in the order they appear, from
.\"O left to right.
シェルが解釈する特別な記法を用いると、コマンドの実行前に入出力を
.I リダイレクト
できます。またリダイレクトを使うと、
現在のシェル実行環境に対してファイルをオープンしたり
クローズしたりできます。以下に示すリダイレクト演算子は、
.I 単純なコマンド
の前や途中に置くことができ、また
.I コマンド
の後に置けます。
リダイレクトは左から右へと、現われた順に処理されます。
.PP
.\"O In the following descriptions, if the file descriptor number is
.\"O omitted, and the first character of the redirection operator is
.\"O .BR < ,
.\"O the redirection refers to the standard input (file descriptor
.\"O 0).  If the first character of the redirection operator is
.\"O .BR > ,
.\"O the redirection refers to the standard output (file descriptor
.\"O 1).
以下の説明においては、ファイル・ディスクリプター番号が省略され、
かつリダイレクト演算子の最初の文字が
.B <
ならば、リダイレクトは標準入力 (ファイル・ディスクリプター 0) を参照します。
リダイレクト演算子の最初の文字が
.BR >
ならば、リダイレクトは標準出力 (ファイル・ディスクリプター 1) を参照します。
.PP
.\"O The word following the redirection operator in the following
.\"O descriptions, unless otherwise noted, is subjected to brace expansion,
.\"O tilde expansion, parameter expansion, command substitution, arithmetic
.\"O expansion, quote removal, pathname expansion, and word splitting.
.\"O If it expands to more than one word,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O reports an error.
以下の説明では、リダイレクト演算子の次の単語に対しては、
特に説明しない限り、
ブレース展開・チルダ展開・パラメータ展開・コマンド置換・
算術式展開・クォート削除・パス名展開・単語分割が行われます。
ある単語が複数の単語に展開された場合はエラーになります。
.PP
.\"O Note that the order of redirections is significant.  For example, 
.\"O the command
リダイレクトの順番には意味がある点に注意してください。
例えば、次のコマンド
.RS
.PP
ls \fB>\fP dirlist 2\fB>&\fP1
.RE
.PP
.\"O directs both standard output and standard error to the file 
.\"O .IR dirlist ,
.\"O while the command
は標準出力と標準エラー出力を両方ともファイル
.IR dirlist
に書き込みますが、次のコマンド
.RS
.PP
ls 2\fB>&\fP1 \fB>\fP dirlist
.RE
.PP
.\"O directs only the standard output to file
.\"O .IR dirlist ,
.\"O because the standard error was duplicated as standard output
.\"O before the standard output was redirected to
.\"O .IR dirlist .
では標準出力だけがファイル
.IR dirlist
に書き込まれます。なぜなら後者の場合には、標準エラー出力は
.IR dirlist
にリダイレクトされる前の標準出力の複製となるからです。
.PP
.\"O \fBBash\fP handles several filenames specially when they are used in
.\"O redirections, as described in the following table:
\fBbash\fP は、
以下の表にあるようなファイル名がリダイレクトに使用されると、
それらを特別に扱います。
.RS
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B /dev/fd/\fIfd\fP
.\"O If \fIfd\fP is a valid integer, file descriptor \fIfd\fP is duplicated.
\fIfd\fP が有効な整数ならばファイル・ディスクリプター \fIfd\fP が複製されます。
.TP
.B /dev/stdin
.\"O File descriptor 0 is duplicated.
ファイル・ディスクリプター 0 が複製されます。
.TP
.B /dev/stdout
.\"O File descriptor 1 is duplicated.
ファイル・ディスクリプター 1 が複製されます。
.TP
.B /dev/stderr
.\"O File descriptor 2 is duplicated.
ファイル・ディスクリプター 2 が複製されます。
.TP
.B /dev/tcp/\fIhost\fP/\fIport\fP
.\"O If \fIhost\fP is a valid hostname or Internet address, and \fIport\fP
.\"O is an integer port number, \fBbash\fP attempts to open a TCP connection
.\"O to the corresponding socket.
\fIhost\fP が有効なホスト名またはインターネットアドレスで
\fIport\fP が整数のポート番号ならば、
\fBbash\fP は対応するソケットに対して TCP 接続のオープンを試みます。
.TP
.B /dev/udp/\fIhost\fP/\fIport\fP
.\"O If \fIhost\fP is a valid hostname or Internet address, and \fIport\fP
.\"O is an integer port number, \fBbash\fP attempts to open a UDP connection
.\"O to the corresponding socket.
\fIhost\fP が有効なホスト名またはインターネットアドレスで
\fIport\fP が整数のポート番号ならば、
\fBbash\fP は対応するソケットに対して UDP 接続のオープンを試みます。
\" 訳注 UDP connection というのはナンセンス?!?
.PD
.RE
.PP
.\"O A failure to open or create a file causes the redirection to fail.
ファイルのオープンや作成に失敗すると、リダイレクトも失敗します。
.\"O .SS Redirecting Input
.SS 入力のリダイレクト
.PP
.\"O Redirection of input causes the file whose name results from
.\"O the expansion of
.\"O .I word
.\"O to be opened for reading on file descriptor
.\"O .IR n ,
.\"O or the standard input (file descriptor 0) if
.\"O .I n
.\"O is not specified.
入力をリダイレクトすると、
.I word
を展開した結果の名前を持つファイルがオープンされ、ファイル・ディスクリプター
.IR n
で読み込めるようになります。
.I n
が指定されていなければ、読み込みは標準入力
(ファイル・ディスクリプター 0) で行われます。
.PP
.\"O The general format for redirecting input is:
入力のリダイレクトは、一般的には以下の形式です:
.RS
.PP
[\fIn\fP]\fB<\fP\fIword\fP
.RE
.\"O .SS Redirecting Output
.SS 出力のリダイレクト
.PP
.\"O Redirection of output causes the file whose name results from
.\"O the expansion of
.\"O .I word
.\"O to be opened for writing on file descriptor
.\"O .IR n ,
.\"O or the standard output (file descriptor 1) if
.\"O .I n
.\"O is not specified.  If the file does not exist it is created;
.\"O if it does exist it is truncated to zero size.
出力をリダイレクトすると、
.I word
の展開した結果の名前を持つファイルがオープンされ、ファイル・ディスクリプター
.IR n
で書き込めるようになります。
.I n
が指定されていなければ、書きこみは標準出力
(ファイル・ディスクリプター 1) に行われます。
ファイルが存在しなかった場合は作成されます。
ファイルが存在した場合はサイズ 0 に切り詰められます。
.PP
.\"O The general format for redirecting output is:
出力のリダイレクトは、一般的には以下の形式です:
.RS
.PP
[\fIn\fP]\fB>\fP\fIword\fP
.RE
.PP
.\"O If the redirection operator is
.\"O .BR > ,
.\"O and the
.\"O .B noclobber
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin has been enabled, the redirection will fail if the file
.\"O whose name results from the expansion of \fIword\fP exists and is
.\"O a regular file.
リダイレクト演算子が
.BR >
であり、かつ
.B noclobber
オプションが組み込みコマンド
.B set
に対して設定されている場合、\fIword\fP の展開で得たファイルが存在し、
かつそれが通常ファイルならば、リダイレクトは失敗します。
.\"O If the redirection operator is
.\"O .BR >| ,
.\"O or the redirection operator is
.\"O .B >
.\"O and the
.\"O .B noclobber
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command is not enabled, the redirection is attempted even
.\"O if the file named by \fIword\fP exists.
リダイレクト演算子が
.BR >|
の場合や、
リダイレクト演算子が
.B >
で組み込みコマンド
.B set
に対する
.B noclobber
オプションが設定されていない場合、
\fIword\fP という名前のファイルが存在していてもリダイレクトが試みられます。
.\"O .SS Appending Redirected Output
.SS リダイレクトによる追加出力
.PP
.\"O Redirection of output in this fashion
.\"O causes the file whose name results from
.\"O the expansion of
.\"O .I word
.\"O to be opened for appending on file descriptor
.\"O .IR n ,
.\"O or the standard output (file descriptor 1) if
.\"O .I n
.\"O is not specified.  If the file does not exist it is created.
この形式を使って出力のリダイレクトを行うと、
.I word
を展開した結果の名前を持つファイルがオープンされ、ファイル・ディスクリプター
.IR n
に対する出力がこのファイルに追加されるようになります。
.I n
を指定しなければ、標準出力 (ファイル・ディスクリプター 1) で追加されます。
ファイルが存在しなければ、新しく作られます。
.PP
.\"O The general format for appending output is:
追加出力は一般的には以下の形式です:
.RS
.PP
[\fIn\fP]\fB>>\fP\fIword\fP
.RE
.PP
.\"O .SS Redirecting Standard Output and Standard Error
.SS 標準出力と標準エラー出力のリダイレクト
.PP
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O allows both the
.\"O standard output (file descriptor 1) and
.\"O the standard error output (file descriptor 2)
.\"O to be redirected to the file whose name is the
.\"O expansion of
.\"O .I word
.\"O with this construct.
この構造を使うと、
標準出力 (ファイル・ディスクリプター 1) と標準エラー出力
(ファイル・ディスクリプター 2) の両方を、
.I word
を展開した結果の名前を持つファイルにリダイレクトできます。
.PP
.\"O There are two formats for redirecting standard output and
.\"O standard error:
標準出力と標準エラー出力に対する形式は 2 つあります:
.RS
.PP
\fB&>\fP\fIword\fP
.RE
.\"O and
および
.RS
\fB>&\fP\fIword\fP
.RE
.PP
.\"O Of the two forms, the first is preferred.
.\"O This is semantically equivalent to
両者のうち望ましいのは前者の方です。これは次のものと同じ意味です:
.RS
.PP
\fB>\fP\fIword\fP 2\fB>&\fP1
.RE
.\"O .SS Here Documents
.SS ヒアドキュメント(Here Documents)
.PP
.\"O This type of redirection instructs the shell to read input from the
.\"O current source until a line containing only
.\"O .I word
.\"O (with no trailing blanks)
.\"O is seen.  All of
.\"O the lines read up to that point are then used as the standard
.\"O input for a command.
この形式のリダイレクトを用いると、
シェルは現在のソースから入力を読み込みます。
この読み込みは
.I word
を単独で含む行 (末尾にブランク文字があってはいけません)
が現われるまで続きます。
その行までに読み込んだ行は、
コマンドの標準入力として扱われます。
.PP
.\"O The format of here-documents is as follows:
ヒアドキュメントの形式を以下に示します:
.RS
.PP
.nf
\fB<<\fP[\fB\-\fP]\fIword\fP
        \fIhere\-document\fP
\fIdelimiter\fP
.fi
.RE
.PP
.\"O No parameter expansion, command substitution, arithmetic expansion,
.\"O or pathname expansion is performed on
.\"O .IR word .
.I word
に対するパラメータ展開・コマンド置換・算術式展開・
パス名展開は全く行われません。
.\"O If any characters in
.\"O .I word
.\"O are quoted, the
.\"O .I delimiter
.\"O is the result of quote removal on
.\"O .IR word ,
.\"O and the lines in the here-document are not expanded.
.I word
が一部でもクォートされている場合は、
.I delimiter
は
.I word
のクォートをほどいた結果 (クォート文字を削除した結果) となり、
ヒアドキュメントに含まれる行では展開が行われなくなります。
.\"O If \fIword\fP is unquoted,
.\"O all lines of the here-document are subjected to parameter expansion,
.\"O command substitution, and arithmetic expansion.  In the latter
.\"O case, the character sequence
.\"O .B \e<newline>
.\"O is ignored, and
.\"O .B \e
.\"O must be used to quote the characters
.\"O .BR \e ,
.\"O .BR $ ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ` .
\fIword\fP がクォートされていなければ、
ヒアドキュメント中の全ての行に対して
パラメータ展開・コマンド置換・算術式展開が行われます。
後者の場合には
.B \e<newline>
という文字列は無視されます (出力から取り除かれます)。
また
.BR \e ,
.BR $ ,
.B `
といった文字は
.B \e
を用いてクォートしなければなりません。
.PP
.\"O If the redirection operator is
.\"O .BR <<\- ,
.\"O then all leading tab characters are stripped from input lines and the
.\"O line containing
.\"O .IR delimiter .
リダイレクト演算子が
.BR <<\-
ならば、行頭にあるタブ文字は全て入力行および
.IR delimiter
を含む行から取り除かれます。
.\"O This allows
.\"O here-documents within shell scripts to be indented in a
.\"O natural fashion.
これにより、シェルスクリプト中のヒアドキュメントを
自然な形でインデントさせることができます。
.\"O .SS "Duplicating File Descriptors"
.SS ファイル・ディスクリプターの複製
.PP
.\"O The redirection operator
リダイレクト演算子
.RS
.PP
[\fIn\fP]\fB<&\fP\fIword\fP
.RE
.PP
.\"O is used to duplicate input file descriptors.
を使うと入力ファイル・ディスクリプターを複製できます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I word
.\"O expands to one or more digits, the file descriptor denoted by
.\"O .I n
.\"O is made to be a copy of that file descriptor.
.I word
が 1 桁以上の数値に展開された場合、
.I n
で示されるファイル・ディスクリプターが生成され、
そのファイル・ディスクリプターのコピーとなります。
.\"O If the digits in
.\"O .I word
.\"O do not specify a file descriptor open for input, a redirection error occurs.
.I word
に含まれる数値が入力のためにオープンされたファイル・ディスクリプターを
指していない場合、リダイレクト・エラーが起きます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I word
.\"O evaluates to
.\"O .BR \- ,
.\"O file descriptor
.\"O .I n
.\"O is closed.  If
.\"O .I n
.\"O is not specified, the standard input (file descriptor 0) is used.
.I word
を評価した結果が
.BR \-
となった場合、ファイル・ディスクリプター
.I n
はクローズされます。
.I n
が指定されていない場合、標準入力
(ファイル・ディスクリプター 0) が使われます。
.PP
.\"O The operator
同様に、演算子
.RS
.PP
[\fIn\fP]\fB>&\fP\fIword\fP
.RE
.PP
.\"O is used similarly to duplicate output file descriptors.  If
.\"O .I n
.\"O is not specified, the standard output (file descriptor 1) is used.
を使って出力ファイル・ディスクリプターを複製できます。
.I n
が指定されていない場合は、標準出力
(ファイル・ディスクリプター 1) が使われます。
.\"O If the digits in
.\"O .I word
.\"O do not specify a file descriptor open for output, a redirection error occurs.
.\"O As a special case, if \fIn\fP is omitted, and \fIword\fP does not
.\"O expand to one or more digits, the standard output and standard
.\"O error are redirected as described previously.
.I word
に含まれる数値が、出力のためにオープンされた
ファイル・ディスクリプターを指していない場合、
リダイレクト・エラーが起きます。特別な場合ですが、
\fIn\fP が省略され、かつ \fIword\fP が
1 桁以上の数字には展開されなかった場合、
前に説明したように標準出力と標準エラー出力がリダイレクトされます。
.\"O .SS "Opening File Descriptors for Reading and Writing"
.SS 読み書きのためのファイル・ディスクリプターのオープン
.PP
.\"O The redirection operator
リダイレクト演算子が
.RS
.PP
[\fIn\fP]\fB<>\fP\fIword\fP
.RE
.PP
.\"O causes the file whose name is the expansion of
.\"O .I word
.\"O to be opened for both reading and writing on file descriptor
.\"O .IR n ,
.\"O or on file descriptor 0 if
.\"O .I n
.\"O is not specified.  If the file does not exist, it is created.
ならば、
.I word
を展開した結果の名前を持つファイルがファイル・ディスクリプター
.IR n
での読み書きのためにオープンされます。
.I n
が指定されていなければ、
ファイル・ディスクリプター 0 で読み書きが行われます。
ファイルが存在しなければ、新しく生成されます。
.\"O .SH ALIASES
.SH エイリアス
.\"O \fIAliases\fP allow a string to be substituted for a word when it is used
.\"O as the first word of a simple command.
\fIエイリアス(alias)\fP を使うと、
ある単語が単純なコマンドの先頭の単語として使われた場合に、
この文字列を別の単語に置換できます。
.\"O The shell maintains a list of aliases that may be set and unset with the
.\"O .B alias
.\"O and
.\"O .B unalias
.\"O builtin commands (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).
シェルはエイリアスのリストを管理しています。
このリストは組み込みコマンドの
.B alias
と
.B unalias
を使って設定および設定の取り消しできます (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照)。
.\"O The first word of each command, if unquoted,
.\"O is checked to see if it has an
.\"O alias.  If so, that word is replaced by the text of the alias.
各コマンドの最初の単語がクォートされていない場合、
エイリアスかどうかが確認され、
エイリアスならばその単語はそのエイリアスのテキストと置換されます。
.\"O The alias name and the replacement text may contain any valid
.\"O shell input, including the
.\"O .I metacharacters
.\"O listed above, with the exception that the alias name may not
.\"O contain \fI=\fP.  The first word of the replacement text is tested
.\"O for aliases, but a word that is identical to an alias being expanded
.\"O is not expanded a second time.  This means that one may alias
.\"O .B ls
.\"O to
.\"O .BR "ls \-F" ,
.\"O for instance, and
.\"O .B bash
.\"O does not try to recursively expand the replacement text.
エイリアス名と置換されるテキストには、
シェルの入力として有効なものは何でも含めることができます。
これには先に挙げた
.I メタ文字
も含まれますが、
例外としてエイリアス名に \fI=\fP を含めることはできません。
置換されるテキストの最初の単語に対しても
エイリアスかどうかの評価がされますが、
最初の単語が展開されるエイリアスと同じ場合には
展開は 1度しか行われません。つまり
.B ls
が
.BR "ls \-F"
のエイリアスとなっているような場合には、
.B bash
は置換される文字列を再帰的に展開することはありません。
.\"O If the last character of the alias value is a
.\"O .IR blank ,
.\"O then the next command
.\"O word following the alias is also checked for alias expansion.
エイリアスの値の最後の文字が
.I ブランク文字
の場合、エイリアスに続く次のコマンドの単語に対しても
エイリアス展開が試みられます。
.PP
.\"O Aliases are created and listed with the
.\"O .B alias
.\"O command, and removed with the
.\"O .B unalias
.\"O command.
エイリアスは
.B alias
コマンドで作成とリスト表示を行い、
.B unalias
コマンドで削除します。
.PP
.\"O There is no mechanism for using arguments in the replacement text.
.\"O If arguments are needed, a shell function should be used (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FUNCTIONS
.\"O below).
置換されるテキストに引き数を入れる仕組みはありません。
引き数が必要ならば、シェル関数を使わなければなりません (後述の
.SM
.B 関数
を参照)
.PP
.\"O Aliases are not expanded when the shell is not interactive, unless
.\"O the
.\"O .B expand_aliases
.\"O shell option is set using
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O (see the description of
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O under
.\"O .SM
.\"O \fBSHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS\fP
.\"O below).
シェルが対話的でない時には、
.B shopt
コマンドによって
.B expand_aliases
オプションが設定されていない場合に限り、
エイリアスの展開は行われません (後述の
.SM
\fBシェルの組み込みコマンド\fP
における
.B shopt
の説明を参照)。
.PP
.\"O The rules concerning the definition and use of aliases are
.\"O somewhat confusing.
エイリアスの定義や利用に関係する規則には、紛らわしい点があります。
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O always reads at least one complete line
.\"O of input before executing any
.\"O of the commands on that line.  Aliases are expanded when a
.\"O command is read, not when it is executed.  Therefore, an
.\"O alias definition appearing on the same line as another
.\"O command does not take effect until the next line of input is read.
.B bash
は、ある行に書かれているコマンドを実行する前に必ず、
少なくとも 1 回は行全体を読み込みます。
エイリアスが展開されるのはコマンドを読み込んだ時であり、
実行する時ではありません。
したがって、別のコマンドと同じ行でエイリアス定義を行った場合には、
次の入力行が読み込まれるまではエイリアスの効果は現われません。
.\"O The commands following the alias definition
.\"O on that line are not affected by the new alias.
同じ行にあるエイリアス定義の後のコマンドは、
新しいエイリアスの影響を受けません。
.\"O This behavior is also an issue when functions are executed.
この動作は関数を実行する場合にも問題になります。
.\"O Aliases are expanded when a function definition is read,
.\"O not when the function is executed, because a function definition
.\"O is itself a compound command.  As a consequence, aliases
.\"O defined in a function are not available until after that
.\"O function is executed.  To be safe, always put
.\"O alias definitions on a separate line, and do not use
.\"O .B alias
.\"O in compound commands.
エイリアスが展開されるのは関数定義が読み込まれる時であり、
関数が実行される時ではありません。
なぜなら、関数定義自身も複合コマンドだからです。
その結果として、関数内で定義されたエイリアスは、
その関数が実行されるまでは利用できません。
安全のため、エイリアス定義は独立した行で行うべきです。
複合コマンド内で
.B alias
を使ってはいけません。
.PP
.\"O For almost every purpose, aliases are superseded by
.\"O shell functions.
ほとんど全ての用途において、
シェル関数でエイリアスを代用できます。
.\"O .SH FUNCTIONS
.SH 関数
.\"O A shell function, defined as described above under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "SHELL GRAMMAR" ,
.\"O stores a series of commands for later execution.
シェル関数は、後で使うために一連のコマンドを保存するものです。
シェル関数の定義は既に
.SM
.BR シェルの文法
で説明しています。
.\"O When the name of a shell function is used as a simple command name,
.\"O the list of commands associated with that function name is executed.
シェル関数名が単純なコマンド名として使われた場合、
関数名に対応するコマンド群が実行されます。
.\"O Functions are executed in the context of the
.\"O current shell; no new process is created to interpret
.\"O them (contrast this with the execution of a shell script).
関数は現在のシェルのコンテキスト内で実行されます。
つまり、新しいプロセスを生成して関数を処理することはありません
(これはシェルスクリプトと対照的な点です)。
.\"O When a function is executed, the arguments to the
.\"O function become the positional parameters
.\"O during its execution.
関数の実行中には、関数に与えた引き数が位置パラメータとなります。
.\"O The special parameter
.\"O .B #
.\"O is updated to reflect the change.  Positional parameter 0
.\"O is unchanged.
特殊パラメータ
.B #
は更新され、この変更が反映されます。
位置パラメータ 0 は変わりません。
.\"O The
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FUNCNAME
.\"O variable is set to the name of the function while the function
.\"O is executing.
関数の実行中は
.SM
.B FUNCNAME
変数に関数の名前が設定されます。
.\"O All other aspects of the shell execution
.\"O environment are identical between a function and its caller
.\"O with the exception that the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B DEBUG
.\"O trap (see the description of the
.\"O .B trap
.\"O builtin under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below) is not inherited.
シェル実行環境の状態は全て、関数とその呼び出し側で同じになりますが、
例外として
.SM
.B DEBUG
トラップ (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
の項で、組み込みコマンド
.B trap
の説明を参照) は継承されません。
.PP
.\"O Variables local to the function may be declared with the
.\"O .B local
.\"O builtin command.  Ordinarily, variables and their values
.\"O are shared between the function and its caller.
関数ローカルの変数は、組み込みコマンド
.B local
で宣言できます。
普通は、変数とその値は関数とその呼び出し側で共有されます。
.PP
.\"O If the builtin command
.\"O .B return
.\"O is executed in a function, the function completes and
.\"O execution resumes with the next command after the function
.\"O call.  When a function completes, the values of the
.\"O positional parameters and the special parameter
.\"O .B #
.\"O are restored to the values they had prior to the function's
.\"O execution.
組み込みコマンド
.B return
が関数中で実行された場合、関数は終了し、
関数呼び出しの次のコマンドから実行が再開されます。
関数の終了時には、位置パラメータの値と特殊パラメータ
.B #
の値は、関数の実行前の値に戻ります。
.PP
.\"O Function names and definitions may be listed with the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B declare
.\"O or
.\"O .B typeset
.\"O builtin commands.  The
.\"O .B \-F
.\"O option to
.\"O .B declare
.\"O or
.\"O .B typeset
.\"O will list the function names only.
関数の名前と定義をリスト表示するには、組み込みコマンドの
.B declare
や
.B typeset
を、オプション
.B \-f
を付けて実行します。
.B declare
や
.B typeset
をオプション
.B \-F
で実行すると、関数名だけがリスト表示されます。
.\"O Functions may be exported so that subshells
.\"O automatically have them defined with the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option to the 
.\"O .B export
.\"O builtin.
関数をエクスポートして、
サブシェルでその関数が自動的に定義されている状態にできます。
これを行うには、組み込みコマンドの
.B export
に
.B \-f
オプションを付けて実行します。
.PP
.\"O Functions may be recursive.  No limit is imposed on the number
.\"O of recursive calls.
関数は再帰させることができます。
再帰呼び出しの回数には制限はありません。
.\"O .SH "ARITHMETIC EVALUATION"
.SH 算術式評価
.\"O The shell allows arithmetic expressions to be evaluated, under
.\"O certain circumstances (see the \fBlet\fP builtin command and
.\"O \fBArithmetic Expansion\fP).
.\"O Evaluation is done in long integers with no check for overflow,
.\"O though division by 0 is trapped and flagged as an error.
.\"O The operators and their precedence and associativity are the same
.\"O as in the C language.
.\"O The following list of operators is grouped into levels of
.\"O equal-precedence operators.
.\"O The levels are listed in order of decreasing precedence.
シェルにおいては、特定の状況下で算術式を評価させることができます
(組み込みコマンドの \fBlet\fP と \fB算術式展開\fP を参照)。
評価は long 型の整数として行われ、
オーバーフローのチェックは行われません。
ただし、0 での除算はトラップされ、エラーとしてのフラグが立てられます。
演算子とその優先度、結合規則は C 言語と同じです。
以下のリストは、
同じ優先度を持つ演算子をグループとしてまとめて列挙したものです。
優先度の高いものから順に列挙しています。
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B \fIid\fP++ \fIid\fP\-\-
.\"O variable post-increment and post-decrement
変数を評価し、その後 increment (加算)/ decrement (減算) する。
.TP
.B ++\fIid\fP \-\-\fIid\fP
.\"O variable pre-increment and pre-decrement
変数を increment (加算) / decrement (減算) してから評価する。
.TP
.B \- +
.\"O unary minus and plus
単項式の負と正
.TP
.B ! ~
.\"O logical and bitwise negation
論理的否定とビット単位の否定
.TP
.B **
.\"O exponentiation
指数 (累乗)
.TP
.B * / %
.\"O multiplication, division, remainder
乗算、除算、剰余
.TP
.B + \-
.\"O addition, subtraction
加算と減算
.TP
.B << >>
.\"O left and right bitwise shifts
左ビットシフトと右ビットシフト
.TP
.B <= >= < >
.\"O comparison
比較
.TP
.B == !=
.\"O equality and inequality
等値と非等値
.TP
.B &
.\"O bitwise AND
ビット単位の AND
.TP
.B ^
.\"O bitwise exclusive OR
ビット単位の排他的 OR
.TP
.B |
.\"O bitwise OR
ビット単位の OR
.TP
.B &&
.\"O logical AND
論理的 AND
.TP
.B ||
.\"O logical OR
論理的 OR
.TP
.B \fIexpr\fP?\fIexpr\fP:\fIexpr\fP
.\"O conditional evaluation
条件付き実行
.TP
.B = *= /= %= += \-= <<= >>= &= ^= |=
.\"O assignment
代入
.TP
.B \fIexpr1\fP , \fIexpr2\fP
.\"O comma
コンマ
.PD
.PP
.\"O Shell variables are allowed as operands; parameter expansion is
.\"O performed before the expression is evaluated.
.\"O The value of a parameter is coerced to a long integer within
.\"O an expression.
シェル変数をオペランドにすることもできます。
パラメータ展開は式の評価より前に行われます。
式の中では、パラメータの値は long 型の整数に強制的に変換されます。
.\"O Within an expression, shell variables may also be referenced by name
.\"O without using the parameter expansion syntax.
.\"O The value of a variable is evaluated as an arithmetic expression
.\"O when it is referenced.
式の中では、シェル変数を (パラメータ展開規則を用いずに)
変数名で参照できます。
変数の値は変数が参照された際に算術式として評価されます。
.\"O A shell variable need not have its integer attribute
.\"O turned on to be used in an expression.
式で用いるためにシェル変数の整数属性を有効にする必要はありません。
.PP
.\"O Constants with a leading 0 are interpreted as octal numbers.
.\"O A leading 0x or 0X denotes hexadecimal.
.\"O Otherwise, numbers take the form [\fIbase#\fP]n, where \fIbase\fP
.\"O is a decimal number between 2 and 64 representing the arithmetic
.\"O base, and \fIn\fP is a number in that base.
.\"O If \fIbase#\fP is omitted, then base 10 is used.
先頭が 0 である定数は 8 進数として解釈されます。
先頭が 0x または 0X ならば 16 進数として解釈されます。
それ以外の場合には、数値は
[\fIbase#\fP]n の形式で表します。ここで \fIbase\fP は 2 から 64 の間の
10 進数であり、算術的な意味での基数を表します。
\fIn\fP はその基数における数を表します。
.\"O The digits greater than 9 are represented by the lowercase letters,
.\"O the uppercase letters, _, and @, in that order.
.\"O If \fIbase\fP is less than or equal to 36, lowercase and uppercase
.\"O letters may be used interchangably to represent numbers between 10
.\"O and 35.
ある桁において 9 より大きい数字を表すには文字を使います。
文字を使う場合には、アルファベット小文字、大文字、_, @ をこの順番で使います。
\fIbase\fP が 36 以下の場合には、大文字と小文字は区別されず、
大文字と小文字のどちらを使っても
10 から 35 までの数字を表現できます。
.PP
.\"O Operators are evaluated in order of precedence.  Sub-expressions in
.\"O parentheses are evaluated first and may override the precedence
.\"O rules above.
演算子は優先度の順に評価されます。括弧内にある部分式は最初に評価され、
前述の優先規則よりも優先させることができます。
.\"O .SH "CONDITIONAL EXPRESSIONS"
.SH 条件式
.\"O Conditional expressions are used by the \fB[[\fP compound command and
.\"O the \fBtest\fP and \fB[\fP builtin commands to test file attributes
.\"O and perform string and arithmetic comparisons.
.\"O Expressions are formed from the following unary or binary primaries.
.\"O If any \fIfile\fP argument to one of the primaries is of the form
.\"O \fI/dev/fd/n\fP, then file descriptor \fIn\fP is checked.
条件式は複合コマンド \fB[[\fP と組み込みコマンドの \fBtest\fP および
\fB[\fP によって使用でき、ファイルの属性を調べたり、
文字列比較や算術式比較を行ったりできます。
式は以下に示す単項のプライマリや二値のプライマリから構成されます。
プライマリのいずれかに対する
\fIfile\fP 引き数が \fI/dev/fd/n\fP という形式ならば、
ファイル・ディスクリプター \fIn\fP が調べられます。
.\"O If the \fIfile\fP argument to one of the primaries is one of
.\"O \fI/dev/stdin\fP, \fI/dev/stdout\fP, or \fI/dev/stderr\fP, file
.\"O descriptor 0, 1, or 2, respectively, is checked.
プライマリのいずれかに対する \fIfile\fP 引き数が
\fI/dev/stdin\fP、\fI/dev/stdout\fP、\fI/dev/stderr\fP
のいずれかであれば、 対応するファイル・ディスクリプターが調べられます。
( \fI/dev/stdin\fP、\fI/dev/stdout\fP、\fI/dev/stderr\fP に対応する
ファイル・ディスクリプターはそれぞれ 0、1、2 です。)
.sp 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-a \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists.
\fIfile\fP が存在すれば真となります。
.TP
.B \-b \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a block special file.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつブロック特殊ファイルならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-c \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a character special file.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつキャラクタ特殊ファイルならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-d \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a directory.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつディレクトリならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-e \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists.
\fIfile\fP が存在すれば真となります。
.TP
.B \-f \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a regular file.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつ通常ファイルならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-g \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is set-group-id.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつ set-group-id されていれば真となります。
.TP
.B \-h \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a symbolic link.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつシンボリックリンクならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-k \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and its ``sticky'' bit is set.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつ ``sticky''
ビットが設定されていれば真となります。
.TP
.B \-p \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a named pipe (FIFO).
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつ名前付きパイプ (FIFO) ならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-r \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is readable.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつ読み込み可能ならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-s \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and has a size greater than zero.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつそのサイズが 0 より大きければ真となります。
.TP
.B \-t \fIfd\fP
.\"O True if file descriptor
.\"O .I fd
.\"O is open and refers to a terminal.
ファイル・ディスクリプター
.I fd
がオープンされており、かつ端末を参照していれば真となります。
.TP
.B \-u \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and its set-user-id bit is set.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、
かつ set-user-id ビットが設定されていれば真となります。
.TP
.B \-w \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is writable.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつ書き込み可能ならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-x \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is executable.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつ実行可能ならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-O \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is owned by the effective user id.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつ (実行中のシェルの)
実効ユーザ ID に所有されていれば真となります。
.TP
.B \-G \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is owned by the effective group id.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつ (実行中のシェルの)
実効グループ ID に所有されていれば真となります。
.TP
.B \-L \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a symbolic link.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつシンボリックリンクならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-S \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a socket.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、かつソケットならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-N \fIfile\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile\fP exists and has been modified since it was last read.
\fIfile\fP が存在し、
かつ前回読み込まれた後に修正されていれば真となります。
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \-\fBnt\fP \fIfile2\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile1\fP is newer (according to
.\"O modification date) than \fIfile2\fP.
\fIfile1\fP が (変更日時に関して) \fIfile2\fP より新しければ真となります。
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \-\fBot\fP \fIfile2\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile1\fP is older than \fIfile2\fP.
\fIfile1\fP が \fIfile2\fP より古ければ真となります。
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \fB\-ef\fP \fIfile2\fP
.\"O True if \fIfile1\fP and \fIfile2\fP have the same device and
.\"O inode numbers.
\fIfile1\fP と \fIfile2\fP とで
デバイス番号と i-ノード番号が同じならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-o \fIoptname\fP
.\"O True if shell option
.\"O .I optname
.\"O is enabled.
.\"O See the list of options under the description of the
.\"O .B \-o
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin below.
シェルオプション
.I optname
が有効ならば真となります。後述する組み込みコマンド
.B set
に対するオプションの説明中にあるオプション一覧を参照してください。
.TP
.B \-z \fIstring\fP
.\"O True if the length of \fIstring\fP is zero.
\fIstring\fP の長さが 0 ならば真となります。
.TP
.B \-n \fIstring\fP
.TP
\fIstring\fP
.\"O True if the length of
.\"O .I string
.\"O is non-zero.
.I string
の長さが 0 でなければ真となります。
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB==\fP \fIstring2\fP
.\"O True if the strings are equal.  \fB=\fP may be used in place of
.\"O \fB==\fP.
文字列が同じならば真となります。\fB==\fP の代わりに \fB=\fP も使えます。
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB!=\fP \fIstring2\fP
.\"O True if the strings are not equal.
2 つの文字列が異なれば真となります。
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB<\fP \fIstring2\fP
.\"O True if \fIstring1\fP sorts before \fIstring2\fP lexicographically
.\"O in the current locale.
現在のロケールにおいて、\fIstring1\fP が \fIstring2\fP よりも
辞書順で前にある場合に真となります。
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB>\fP \fIstring2\fP
.\"O True if \fIstring1\fP sorts after \fIstring2\fP lexicographically
.\"O in the current locale.
現在のロケールにおいて、\fIstring1\fP が \fIstring2\fP よりも
辞書順で後にある場合に真となります。
.TP
.I \fIarg1\fP \fBOP\fP \fIarg2\fP
.SM
.\"O .B OP
.\"O is one of
.\"O .BR \-eq ,
.\"O .BR \-ne ,
.\"O .BR \-lt ,
.\"O .BR \-le ,
.\"O .BR \-gt ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR \-ge .
.B OP
は
.BR \-eq ,
.BR \-ne ,
.BR \-lt ,
.BR \-le ,
.BR \-gt ,
.BR \-ge
のいずれかです。
.\"O These arithmetic binary operators return true if \fIarg1\fP
.\"O is equal to, not equal to, less than, less than or equal to,
.\"O greater than, or greater than or equal to \fIarg2\fP, respectively.
.\"O .I Arg1
.\"O and
.\"O .I arg2
.\"O may be positive or negative integers.
これらの二値演算子が真を返すのはそれぞれ、
\fIarg1\fP が \fIarg2\fP に対して等しい場合、
等しくない場合、小さい場合、小さいか等しい場合、大きい場合、
大きいか等しい場合です。
.I arg1
や
.I arg2
には、正または負の整数を使用できます。
.PD
.\"O .SH "SIMPLE COMMAND EXPANSION"
.SH 単純なコマンドの展開
.\"O When a simple command is executed, the shell performs the following
.\"O expansions, assignments, and redirections, from left to right.
単純なコマンドを実行すると、シェルは以下に示す展開、代入、
リダイレクションを左から右の順で実行します。
.IP 1.
.\"O The words that the parser has marked as variable assignments (those
.\"O preceding the command name) and redirections are saved for later
.\"O processing.
パーザが変数代入 (コマンド名の前にあるもの)
またはリダイレクションと判断した単語は、
保存されて後で処理されます。
.IP 2.
.\"O The words that are not variable assignments or redirections are
.\"O expanded.  If any words remain after expansion, the first word
.\"O is taken to be the name of the command and the remaining words are
.\"O the arguments.
変数代入でもリダイレクションでもない単語が展開されます。
もし展開の後に残っている単語があれば、
その最初の単語がコマンド名となり、残りが引き数となります。
.IP 3.
.\"O Redirections are performed as described above under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR REDIRECTION .
リダイレクションが前述の
.SM
.BR リダイレクション
で説明したように実行されます。
.IP 4.
.\"O The text after the \fB=\fP in each variable assignment undergoes tilde
.\"O expansion, parameter expansion, command substitution, arithmetic expansion,
.\"O and quote removal before being assigned to the variable.
変数代入の \fB=\fP の後にあるテキストに対して、チルダ展開、
パラメータ展開、コマンド置換、算術式展開、クォート削除が行われます。
この処理は変数を代入する前に行われます。
.PP
.\"O If no command name results, the variable assignments affect the current
.\"O shell environment.  Otherwise, the variables are added to the environment
.\"O of the executed command and do not affect the current shell environment.
.\"O If any of the assignments attempts to assign a value to a readonly variable,
.\"O an error occurs, and the command exits with a non-zero status.
コマンド名が残らなかった場合には、
変数を代入した結果が現在のシェル環境に効果を及ぼします。
そうでない場合、変数は実行されるコマンドの環境に追加されるだけで、
現在のシェル環境には影響を与えません。
読み込み専用の変数に対して代入をしようとするとエラーが発生し、
そのコマンドは 0 でないステータスで終了します。
.PP
.\"O If no command name results, redirections are performed, but do not
.\"O affect the current shell environment.  A redirection error causes the
.\"O command to exit with a non-zero status.
コマンド名が残らなかった場合、リダイレクションは行われますが、
現在のシェル環境は影響を受けません。
リダイレクションのエラーが起きると、
コマンドは 0 でないステータスで終了します。
.PP
.\"O If there is a command name left after expansion, execution proceeds as
.\"O described below.  Otherwise, the command exits.  If one of the expansions
.\"O contained a command substitution, the exit status of the command is
.\"O the exit status of the last command substitution performed.  If there
.\"O were no command substitutions, the command exits with a status of zero.
展開の後にコマンド名が残っている場合、後述するように実行が進行します。
そうでない場合はコマンドは終了します。
展開のいずれかがコマンド置換である場合には、
コマンドの終了ステータスは
最後に実行されたコマンド置換の終了ステータスになります。
コマンド置換が行われなかった場合には、
コマンドはステータス 0 で終了します。
.\"O .SH "COMMAND EXECUTION"
.SH コマンドの実行
.\"O After a command has been split into words, if it results in a
.\"O simple command and an optional list of arguments, the following
.\"O actions are taken.
コマンドが単語に分割された後に、
単純なコマンドとそれに対する引き数リスト
(引き数リストは省略可能) となった場合、以下の動作が行われます。
.PP
.\"O If the command name contains no slashes, the shell attempts to
.\"O locate it.  If there exists a shell function by that name, that
.\"O function is invoked as described above in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR FUNCTIONS .
コマンド名にスラッシュが含まれない場合、
シェルはコマンドの位置を特定しようとします。
その名前のシェル関数が存在すれば、前に
.SM
.BR 関数
で説明したようにその関数が呼び出されます。
.\"O If the name does not match a function, the shell searches for
.\"O it in the list of shell builtins.  If a match is found, that
.\"O builtin is invoked.
名前が関数にマッチしない場合には、
シェルはシェルの組み込みコマンドのリストを探します。
マッチするものがあった場合、その組み込みコマンドが呼び出されます。
.PP
.\"O If the name is neither a shell function nor a builtin,
.\"O and contains no slashes,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O searches each element of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O for a directory containing an executable file by that name.
名前がシェル関数も組み込みコマンドでなく、
かつスラッシュを含まない場合には、
.B bash
は
.SM
.B PATH
の各要素を検索し、その名前の実行ファイルを含むディレクトリを探します。
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O uses a hash table to remember the full pathnames of executable
.\"O files (see
.\"O .B hash
.\"O under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS"
.\"O below).
.B bash
はハッシュ表を使って実行ファイルの完全なパス名を記憶します (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
の
.B hash
の項を参照)。
.\"O A full search of the directories in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O is performed only if the command is not found in the hash table.
.\"O If the search is unsuccessful, the shell prints an error
.\"O message and returns an exit status of 127.
.SM
.B PATH
に含まれるディレクトリの完全な探索は、
そのコマンドがハッシュ表の中に無い場合にのみ行われます。
検索にも失敗すると、シェルはエラーメッセージを出力し、
終了ステータス 127 を返します。
.PP
.\"O If the search is successful, or if the command name contains
.\"O one or more slashes, the shell executes the named program in a
.\"O separate execution environment.
.\"O Argument 0 is set to the name given, and the remaining arguments
.\"O to the command are set to the arguments given, if any.
検索に成功したか、コマンド名に 1 つ以上のスラッシュが含まれる場合には、
シェルは指定されたプログラムを独立した実行環境で実行します。
引き数 0 には指定された名前が設定され、
コマンドに対する残りの引き数には
(もしあれば) 指定された引き数が設定されます。
.PP
.\"O If this execution fails because the file is not in executable
.\"O format, and the file is not a directory, it is assumed to be
.\"O a \fIshell script\fP, a file
.\"O containing shell commands.  A subshell is spawned to execute
.\"O it.  This subshell reinitializes itself, so
.\"O that the effect is as if a new shell had been invoked
.\"O to handle the script, with the exception that the locations of
.\"O commands remembered by the parent (see
.\"O .B hash
.\"O below under
.\"O .SM
.\"O \fBSHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS\fP)
.\"O are retained by the child.
このファイルが実行可能フォーマットでないために実行が失敗し、
かつディレクトリでもない場合には、
このファイルは \fIシェルスクリプト(shell script)\fPであると見なされます。
シェルスクリプトとは、シェルのコマンドが書かれているファイルのことです。
シェルスクリプトを実行するためにサブシェルが呼び出されます。
このサブシェルは自分自身を再初期化し、
シェルスクリプトを処理するために
新しいシェルが起動されたかのような結果になります。ただし、
親が記憶しているコマンドの位置 (後述の
.SM
\fBシェルの組み込みコマンド\fP
における
.B hash
の項を参照) は子にも引き継がれます。
.PP
.\"O If the program is a file beginning with
.\"O .BR #! ,
.\"O the remainder of the first line specifies an interpreter
.\"O for the program.  The shell executes the
.\"O specified interpreter on operating systems that do not
.\"O handle this executable format themselves.  The arguments to the 
.\"O interpreter consist of a single optional argument following the
.\"O interpreter name on the first line of the program, followed
.\"O by the name of the program, followed by the command
.\"O arguments, if any.
プログラムが
.BR #!
で始まるファイルである場合、
最初の行の残りの部分はこのプログラムのインタプリタを指定します。
シェルは指定されたインタプリタをオペレーティングシステム上で実行します。
オペレーティングシステムは、この実行可能フォーマットを直接処理しません。
インタプリタに対する引き数は、
プログラムの先頭の行のインタプリタ名の後の省略可能な引き数 1 つと、
その後のプログラム名、さらに
(もしあれば) その後のコマンドへの引き数から構成されます。
.\"O .SH COMMAND EXECUTION ENVIRONMENT
.SH コマンド実行環境
.\"O The shell has an \fIexecution environment\fP, which consists of the
.\"O following:
シェルは以下の要素からなる\fI実行環境(execution environment)\fPを持ちます:
.sp 1
.IP \(bu
.\"O open files inherited by the shell at invocation, as modified by
.\"O redirections supplied to the \fBexec\fP builtin
起動時にそのシェルが継承したオープンされているファイル。
これは組み込みコマンド \fBexec\fP に与えられている
リダイレクション機能で変更されます。
.IP \(bu
.\"O the current working directory as set by \fBcd\fP, \fBpushd\fP, or
.\"O \fBpopd\fP, or inherited by the shell at invocation
現在の作業ディレクトリ (current working directory)。これは \fBcd\fP,
\fBpushd\fP, \fBpopd\fP で設定するか、
あるいは起動時にそのシェルが継承します。
.IP \(bu
.\"O the file creation mode mask as set by \fBumask\fP or inherited from
.\"O the shell's parent
ファイル作成モードのマスク。
これは \fBumask\fP で設定するか、あるいはそのシェルの親から継承します。
.IP \(bu
.\"O current traps set by \fBtrap\fP
\fBtrap\fP で設定された現在のトラップ。
.IP \(bu
.\"O shell parameters that are set by variable assignment or with \fBset\fP
.\"O or inherited from the shell's parent in the environment
シェルのパラメータ。これは変数の代入か \fBset\fP で設定されるか、
あるいはその環境内にある親シェルから継承します。
.IP \(bu
.\"O shell functions defined during execution or inherited from the shell's
.\"O parent in the environment
実行中に定義されるか、その環境内にある親シェルから継承したシェル関数。
.IP \(bu
.\"O options enabled at invocation (either by default or with command-line
.\"O arguments) or by \fBset\fP
起動時に有効にしたか
(デフォルト値あるいはコマンドライン引き数で設定した値)、
\fBset\fP で有効にしたオプション。
.IP \(bu
.\"O options enabled by \fBshopt\fP
\fBshopt\fP で有効にしたオプション。
.IP \(bu
.\"O shell aliases defined with \fBalias\fP
\fBalias\fP で定義したシェルエイリアス。
.IP \(bu
.\"O various process IDs, including those of background jobs, the value
.\"O of \fB$$\fP, and the value of \fB$PPID\fP
各種プロセスID。これにはバックグラウンドジョブや \fB$$\fP の値、
\fB$PPID\fP の値が含まれます。
.PP
.\"O When a simple command other than a builtin or shell function
.\"O is to be executed, it
.\"O is invoked in a separate execution environment that consists of
.\"O the following.  Unless otherwise noted, the values are inherited
.\"O from the shell.
組み込みコマンドやシェル関数を除く単純なコマンドを実行するとき、
このコマンドは独立した実行環境内で呼び出されます。
この環境は以下の要素から成り立っています。
特に断らない限り、この値はシェルから引き継がれます。
.sp 1
.IP \(bu
.\"O the shell's open files, plus any modifications and additions specified
.\"O by redirections to the command
シェルのオープンしているファイルと、
コマンドに対するリダイレクションで指定した変更・追加をこれに加えたもの。
.IP \(bu
.\"O the current working directory
現在の作業ディレクトリ
.IP \(bu
.\"O the file creation mode mask
ファイル作成モードのマスク
.IP \(bu
.\"O shell variables marked for export, along with variables exported for
.\"O the command, passed in the environment
エクスポートするシェル変数と、
そのコマンドに対してエクスポートされた変数。
これらは環境で渡されます。
.IP \(bu
.\"O traps caught by the shell are reset to the values the inherited
.\"O from the shell's parent, and traps ignored by the shell are ignored
シェルが捕捉したトラップは、
そのシェルの親から継承された値に再設定されます。
そのシェルが無視したトラップは無視されます。
.PP
.\"O A command invoked in this separate environment cannot affect the
.\"O shell's execution environment. 
この独立の環境内で呼び出されたコマンドが、
(親である) シェルの実行環境に影響を及ぼすことはできません。
.PP
.\"O Command substitution and asynchronous commands are invoked in a
.\"O subshell environment that is a duplicate of the shell environment,
.\"O except that traps caught by the shell are reset to the values
.\"O that the shell inherited from its parent at invocation.  Builtin
.\"O commands that are invoked as part of a pipeline are also executed in a
.\"O subshell environment.  Changes made to the subshell environment
.\"O cannot affect the shell's execution environment.
コマンド置換と非同期コマンドは、サブシェル環境内で呼び出されます。
このサブシェル環境はシェル環境を複製したものです。ただし、
シェルが捕捉したトラップは、
そのシェルの起動時に親から継承した値に再設定されます。
パイプラインの一部として起動された組み込みコマンドは、
サブシェル環境で実行されます。サブシェル環境に対して行われた変更は、
元のシェル実行環境に影響を及ぼすことはできません。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境
.\"O When a program is invoked it is given an array of strings
.\"O called the
.\"O .IR environment .
.\"O This is a list of 
.\"O \fIname\fP\-\fIvalue\fP pairs, of the form
.\"O .IR "name\fR=\fPvalue" .
プログラムの起動時には、
.I 環境 (environment)
と呼ばれる文字列の配列が渡されます。
これは \fI変数名\fP\-\fI値\fP のペアからなるリストで、
.IR "変数名\fR=\fP値"
という形になります。
.PP
.\"O The shell provides several ways to manipulate the environment.
シェルは、環境を操作する様々な方法を提供しています。
.\"O On invocation, the shell scans its own environment and
.\"O creates a parameter for each name found, automatically marking
.\"O it for
.\"O .I export
.\"O to child processes.  Executed commands inherit the environment.
起動時には、シェルは自分自身の環境を調べ、
見つかった名前それぞれに対してパラメータを生成し、
それに自動的に印を付けて子プロセスに
.I エクスポート (export)
します。実行されたコマンドは環境を継承します。
.\"O The
.\"O .B export
.\"O and
.\"O .B declare \-x
.\"O commands allow parameters and functions to be added to and
.\"O deleted from the environment.  If the value of a parameter
.\"O in the environment is modified, the new value becomes part
.\"O of the environment, replacing the old.  The environment
.\"O inherited by any executed command consists of the shell's
.\"O initial environment, whose values may be modified in the shell,
.\"O less any pairs removed by the
.\"O .B unset
.\"O command, plus any additions via the
.\"O .B export
.\"O and
.\"O .B declare \-x
.\"O commands.
.B export
コマンドまたは
.B declare \-x
コマンドを用いると、
パラメータや関数の追加と削除を環境に対して行えます。
環境内のパラメータの値が変更されると、
新しい値は環境の一部となり、古い値と置き換わります。
実行されたコマンドが継承する環境は、
シェルの最初の環境から、
変数の値がシェル中で変更されたり、
一部のペアが
.B unset
コマンドで削除されたり、
.B export
コマンドや
.B declare \-x
コマンドで追加されたりしたものになります。
.PP
.\"O The environment for any
.\"O .I simple command
.\"O or function may be augmented temporarily by prefixing it with
.\"O parameter assignments, as described above in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR PARAMETERS .
.\"O These assignment statements affect only the environment seen
.\"O by that command.
.I 単純なコマンド
や関数に対する環境は、一時的に修正できます。
これは、既に
.SM
.BR パラメータ
の項で説明したように、パラメータ代入を前に置くことで行います。
このような代入が影響を与えるのは、
そのコマンドが参照する環境だけです。
.PP
.\"O If the 
.\"O .B \-k
.\"O option is set (see the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command below), then
.\"O .I all
.\"O parameter assignments are placed in the environment for a command,
.\"O not just those that precede the command name.
.B \-k
オプションを設定 (後述の組み込みコマンド
.B set
を参照) すると、コマンド名の前に置いたものだけではなく、
.I 全ての
パラメータ代入がそのコマンドの環境に影響を与えます。
.PP
.\"O When
.\"O .B bash
.\"O invokes an external command, the variable
.\"O .B _
.\"O is set to the full file name of the command and passed to that
.\"O command in its environment.
.B bash
が外部コマンドを起動したときには、変数
.B _
にはコマンドの完全なファイル名が設定され、
環境変数としてそのコマンドに渡されます。
.\"O .SH "EXIT STATUS"
.SH 終了ステータス
.\"O For the shell's purposes, a command which exits with a 
.\"O zero exit status has succeeded.  An exit status of zero
.\"O indicates success.  A non-zero exit status indicates failure.
.\"O When a command terminates on a fatal signal \fIN\fP, \fBbash\fP uses
.\"O the value of 128+\fIN\fP as the exit status.
シェルは、終了コード 0 で終了したコマンドは正常終了したとみなします。
終了コード 0 は成功を示します。
0 以外の終了コードは失敗を示します。
あるコマンドが致命的なシグナル \fIN\fP で終了したときには、
\fBbash\fP は「128+\fIN\fP」の値を終了ステータスに使います。
.PP
.\"O If a command is not found, the child process created to
.\"O execute it returns a status of 127.  If a command is found
.\"O but is not executable, the return status is 126.
コマンドが見つからなかった場合には、
そのコマンドを実行するために生成された子プロセスが
ステータス 127 を返します。
コマンドが見つかったけれど実行できなかった場合には、
返却ステータスは 126 です。
.PP
.\"O If a command fails because of an error during expansion or redirection,
.\"O the exit status is greater than zero.
展開やリダイレクションの際のエラーのために
コマンドが失敗した場合には、
0 より大きい終了ステータスが返されます。
.PP
.\"O Shell builtin commands return a status of 0 (\fItrue\fP) if
.\"O successful, and non-zero (\fIfalse\fP) if an error occurs
.\"O while they execute. 
.\"O All builtins return an exit status of 2 to indicate incorrect usage.
シェルの組み込みコマンドは、
成功した場合にはステータス 0 (\fI真\fP) を返し、
実行中にエラーが起こった場合には 0 でない値 (\fI偽\fP) を返します。
.PP
.\"O \fBBash\fP itself returns the exit status of the last command
.\"O executed, unless a syntax error occurs, in which case it exits
.\"O with a non-zero value.  See also the \fBexit\fP builtin
.\"O command below.
\fBbash\fP 自身が返す終了ステータスは、文法エラーが起きなければ、
実行した最後のコマンドの終了ステータスです。
文法エラーの場合には 0 でない値が終了ステータスとなります。
後述の組み込みコマンド \fBexit\fP も参照してください。
.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O When \fBbash\fP is interactive, in the absence of any traps, it ignores
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGTERM
.\"O (so that \fBkill 0\fP does not kill an interactive shell),
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGINT
.\"O is caught and handled (so that the \fBwait\fP builtin is interruptible).
.\"O In all cases, \fBbash\fP ignores
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGQUIT .
\fBbash\fP が対話的であり、トラップが全く無いとき、\fBbash\fP は
.SM
.B SIGTERM
を無視し (したがって \fBkill 0\fP では対話シェルは kill されません)、
.SM
.B SIGINT
を捕捉、処理します
(したがって組み込みコマンド \fBwait\fP は割り込み可能です)。
どんな場合でも、\fBbash\fP は
.SM
.BR SIGQUIT
を無視します。
.\"O If job control is in effect,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O ignores
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGTTIN ,
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGTTOU ,
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGTSTP .
ジョブ制御が有効な状態ならば、
.B bash
は
.SM
.BR SIGTTIN ,
.SM
.BR SIGTTOU ,
.SM
.BR SIGTSTP
を無視します。
.PP
.\"O Synchronous jobs started by \fBbash\fP have signal handlers
.\"O set to the values inherited by the shell from its parent.
.\"O When job control is not in effect, asynchronous commands
.\"O ignore
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGINT
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGQUIT
.\"O as well.
\fBbash\fP が起動した同期ジョブは、
シェルが自分の親から継承した値をシグナルハンドラに設定します。
ジョブ制御が有効でないときには、非同期コマンドは
.SM
.B SIGINT
と
.SM
.B SIGQUIT
も無視します。
.\"O Commands run as a result of command substitution ignore the
.\"O keyboard-generated job control signals
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGTTIN ,
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGTTOU ,
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGTSTP .
コマンド置換の結果として実行されたコマンドは、
キーボードで生成されたジョブ制御シグナルを無視します。
無視されるシグナルは
.SM
.BR SIGTTIN ,
.SM
.BR SIGTTOU ,
.SM
.BR SIGTSTP
です。
.PP
.\"O The shell exits by default upon receipt of a
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGHUP .
.\"O Before exiting, it resends the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGHUP
.\"O to all jobs, running or stopped.
.\"O Stopped jobs are sent
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGCONT
.\"O to ensure that they receive the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGHUP .
デフォルトでは、シェルは
.SM
.BR SIGHUP
を受け取ると終了します。
終了する前には、シェルは実行中・停止中の全てのジョブに対して
.B SIGHUP
を再送信します。停止しているジョブには
.SM
.B SIGCONT
が送られ、このジョブが
.SM
.BR SIGHUP
を受け取るようにします。
.\"O To prevent the shell from
.\"O sending the signal to a particular job, it should be removed from the
.\"O jobs table with the 
.\"O .B disown
.\"O builtin (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS"
.\"O below) or marked 
.\"O to not receive
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGHUP
.\"O using
.\"O .BR "disown \-h" .
特定のジョブに対してシェルからシグナルが送られないようにするためには、
組み込みコマンド
.B disown
(後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照) を使って、そのジョブをジョブテーブルから削除するか、あるいは
.B "disown \-h"
を使って、
.SM
.B SIGHUP
を受け取らないようにマークを付けます。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B huponexit
.\"O shell option has been set with
.\"O .BR shopt ,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O sends a 
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGHUP
.\"O to all jobs when an interactive login shell exits.
シェルオプションの
.B huponexit
が
.BR shopt
を使って設定された場合、対話的なログインシェルが終了するときに、
.B bash
は
.SM
.B SIGHUP
を全てのジョブに送ります。
.PP
.\"O When \fBbash\fP receives a signal for which a trap has been set while
.\"O waiting for a command to complete, the trap will not be executed until
.\"O the command completes.
.\"O When \fBbash\fP is waiting for an asynchronous command via the \fBwait\fP
.\"O builtin, the reception of a signal for which a trap has been set will
.\"O cause the \fBwait\fP builtin to return immediately with an exit status
.\"O greater than 128, immediately after which the trap is executed.
コマンドの完了を待っている間に、トラップが設定されたシグナルを
\fBbash\fP が受け取ったとき、
そのトラップはコマンドが完了するまで実行されません。
\fBbash\fP が組み込みコマンドの
\fBwait\fP を使って非同期コマンドを待っている時に、
トラップが設定されているシグナルを受け取ると、
組み込みコマンド \fBwait\fP は即座に復帰させられます。
この際の終了ステータスは 128 より大きい値になります。
また復帰するのはトラップが実行された直後です。
.\"O .SH "JOB CONTROL"
.SH ジョブ制御
.\"O .I Job control
.\"O refers to the ability to selectively stop (\fIsuspend\fP)
.\"O the execution of processes and continue (\fIresume\fP)
.\"O their execution at a later point.  A user typically employs
.\"O this facility via an interactive interface supplied jointly
.\"O by the system's terminal driver and
.\"O .BR bash .
.I ジョブ制御(job control)
とは、プロセスの実行を選択的に停止 (\fIサスペンド/suspend\fP) させ、
後に再び実行を続けさせる (\fIリジューム/resume\fP) 機能のことです。
ユーザは通常、システムの端末ドライバと
.B bash
を組み合わせて使い、対話的インタフェースを通してこの機能を利用します。
.PP
.\"O The shell associates a
.\"O .I job
.\"O with each pipeline.  It keeps a table of currently executing
.\"O jobs, which may be listed with the
.\"O .B jobs
.\"O command.  When
.\"O .B bash
.\"O starts a job asynchronously (in the
.\"O .IR background ),
.\"O it prints a line that looks like:
シェルはパイプラインごとに
.I ジョブ(job)
を構成します。シェルは現在実行中のジョブのテーブルを保存しています。
このテーブルは
.B jobs
コマンドを使ってリスト表示できます。
.B bash
がジョブを非同期的に
.RI ( バックグラウンド
で) 起動したときには、
.B bash
は以下のような行を出力します:
.RS
.PP
[1] 25647
.RE
.PP
.\"O indicating that this job is job number 1 and that the process ID
.\"O of the last process in the pipeline associated with this job is 25647.
これは、このジョブのジョブ番号は 1 であり、
このジョブを構成するパイプライン中の最後のプロセスの ID が
25647 であることを示しています。
.\"O All of the processes in a single pipeline are members of the same job.
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O uses the
.\"O .I job
.\"O abstraction as the basis for job control.
1 つのパイプラインに含まれる全てのプロセスは同じジョブのメンバです。
.B bash
は、ジョブ制御の基礎として
.I ジョブ
という抽象化機構を使います。
.PP
.\"O To facilitate the implementation of the user interface to job
.\"O control, the operating system maintains the notion of a \fIcurrent terminal
.\"O process group ID\fP.  Members of this process group (processes whose
.\"O process group ID is equal to the current terminal process group ID)
.\"O receive keyboard-generated signals such as
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGINT .
ジョブ制御のためのユーザインタフェースの実装を容易にするために
オペレーティングシステムは
\fI現在の端末プロセスのグループ ID (current terminal process group ID)\fP
という情報を管理しています。
このプロセスグループのメンバ
(プロセスグループ ID が現在の端末プロセスのグループ ID と等しいプロセス) は、
.SM
.BR SIGINT
のような、キーボードで生成されたシグナルを受け取ります。
.\"O These processes are said to be in the
.\"O .IR foreground .
このようなプロセスは
.I フォアグラウンド (foreground)
にあると言われます。
.\"O .I Background
.\"O processes are those whose process group ID differs from the terminal's;
.\"O such processes are immune to keyboard-generated signals.
.I バックグラウンド (background)
プロセスは、
プロセスのグループ ID が端末のグループ ID と異なるプロセスです。
このようなプロセスは、キーボードで生成したシグナルの影響を受けません。
.\"O Only foreground processes are allowed to read from or write to the
.\"O terminal.  Background processes which attempt to read from (write to) the
.\"O terminal are sent a 
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGTTIN (SIGTTOU)
.\"O signal by the terminal driver, 
.\"O which, unless caught, suspends the process.
端末への読み書きが許されるのはフォアグラウンドプロセスだけです。
バックグラウンドプロセスが端末からの読み込み
(端末への書き込み) を行おうとすると、
このプロセスには端末ドライバから
.SM
.B SIGTTIN (SIGTTOU)
シグナルが送られます。
このシグナルを捕捉しなければ、プロセスは停止します。
.PP
.\"O If the operating system on which
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is running supports
.\"O job control,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O contains facilities to use it.
.B bash
を動かしているオペレーティングシステムがジョブ制御をサポートしているならば、
ユーザは
.B bash
を使ってジョブ制御を行えます。
.\"O Typing the
.\"O .I suspend
.\"O character (typically
.\"O .BR ^Z ,
.\"O Control-Z) while a process is running
.\"O causes that process to be stopped and returns control to 
.\"O .BR bash .
プロセスの動作中に
.I サスペンド
文字(通常は
.BR ^Z , 
Control-Z) を打ち込むと、そのプロセスは停止させられ、
.B bash
に制御が戻ります。
.\"O Typing the
.\"O .I "delayed suspend"
.\"O character (typically
.\"O .BR ^Y ,
.\"O Control-Y) causes the process to be stopped when it
.\"O attempts to read input from the terminal, and control to
.\"O be returned to
.\"O .BR bash .
.I "遅延サスペンド (delayed suspend)"
文字 (通常は
.BR ^Y , 
Control-Y) を打ち込むと、
そのプロセスは端末から入力を読み込もうとしたときに停止させられ、
制御が
.B bash
に戻ります。
.\"O The user may then manipulate the state of this job, using the
.\"O .B bg
.\"O command to continue it in the background, the
.\"O .B fg
.\"O command to continue it in the foreground, or
.\"O the
.\"O .B kill
.\"O command to kill it.  A \fB^Z\fP takes effect immediately,
.\"O and has the additional side effect of causing pending output
.\"O and typeahead to be discarded.
このときユーザはこのジョブの状態を操作できます。
利用できるのは、バックグラウンドで実行を継続するならば
.B bg
コマンド、フォアグラウンドで実行を継続するならば
.B fg
コマンド、プロセスを kill するなら
.B kill
コマンドです。\fB^Z\fP の効果は即座に現われるので、
未出力の出力や先行入力した文字が破棄されるという副作用があります。
.PP
.\"O There are a number of ways to refer to a job in the shell.
.\"O The character
.\"O .B %
.\"O introduces a job name.  Job number
.\"O .I n
.\"O may be referred to as
.\"O .BR %n .
シェル上でジョブを参照する方法は色々あります。文字
.B %
はジョブ名の始まりを示します。ジョブ番号
.I n
は
.B %n
として参照できます。
.\"O A job may also be referred to using a prefix of the name used to
.\"O start it, or using a substring that appears in its command line.
ジョブの参照には、
ジョブを起動する時に使った名前の先頭部分や
コマンドライン中に現われる部分文字列を使うこともできます。
.\"O For example,
.\"O .B %ce
.\"O refers to a stopped
.\"O .B ce
.\"O job.  If a prefix matches more than one job,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O reports an error.  Using
.\"O .BR %?ce ,
.\"O on the other hand, refers to any job containing the string
.\"O .B ce
.\"O in its command line.  If the substring matches more than one job,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O reports an error.  The symbols
.\"O .B %%
.\"O and
.\"O .B %+
.\"O refer to the shell's notion of the
.\"O .IR "current job" ,
.\"O which is the last job stopped while it was in
.\"O the foreground or started in the background.
例えば、
.B %ce
は停止しているジョブ
.B ce
を指します。先頭の部分がマッチするジョブが複数個ある場合には、
.B bash
はエラーを報告します。一方、
.BR %?ce
を用いると、文字列
.B ce
をコマンドライン中に含む任意のジョブを参照できます。
部分文字列がマッチするジョブが複数個ある場合には、
.B bash
はエラーを報告します。シンボル
.B %%
および
.B %+
は、シェルが覚えている
.IR "カレントジョブ (current job)"
を指します。これは、フォアグラウンドで起動されている時に停止されたか、
バックグラウンドで起動された最後のジョブです。
.\"O The 
.\"O .I "previous job"
.\"O may be referenced using
.\"O .BR %\- .
.\"O In output pertaining to jobs (e.g., the output of the
.\"O .B jobs
.\"O command), the current job is always flagged with a
.\"O .BR + ,
.\"O and the previous job with a
.\"O .BR \- .
.I "前のジョブ (previous job)"
は
.BR %\-
を使って参照できます。jobs コマンドの出力においては、
カレントジョブには必ず
.BR +
というフラグが付き、前のジョブには
.BR \-
というフラグが付きます。
.PP
.\"O Simply naming a job can be used to bring it into the
.\"O foreground:
.\"O .B %1
.\"O is a synonym for
.\"O \fB``fg %1''\fP,
.\"O bringing job 1 from the background into the foreground.
.\"O Similarly,
.\"O .B ``%1 &''
.\"O resumes job 1 in the background, equivalent to
.\"O \fB``bg %1''\fP.
単にジョブを呼べば、
そのジョブをフォアグラウンドに持ってきます。つまり、
.B %1
は
\fB``fg %1''\fP
と同義であり、
ジョブ 1 をバックグラウンドからフォアウグラウンドに持ってきます。
同様に
.B ``%1 &''
はジョブ 1 をバックグラウンドで実行再開させます。これは
\fB``bg %1''\fP
と同じ意味です。
.PP
.\"O The shell learns immediately whenever a job changes state.
.\"O Normally,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O waits until it is about to print a prompt before reporting
.\"O changes in a job's status so as to not interrupt
.\"O any other output.  If the 
.\"O .B \-b
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command
.\"O is enabled,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O reports such changes immediately.
ジョブの状態が変わると、シェルはそれを即座に知ります。
.B bash
がジョブの状態変化を報告するのは通常、プロンプトを出力する直前です。
これは他の出力を妨害しないためです。組み込みコマンド
.B set
で
.B \-b
オプションが指定されていると、
.B bash
はこのような変化を即座に報告します。
.PP
.\"O If an attempt to exit
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is made while jobs are stopped, the shell prints a warning message.  The
.\"O .B jobs
.\"O command may then be used to inspect their status.
.\"O If a second attempt to exit is made without an intervening command,
.\"O the shell does not print another warning, and the stopped
.\"O jobs are terminated.
ジョブを停止させたままで
.B bash
を終了 (exit) させようとすると、シェルは警告メッセージを出力します。
このような時には、
.B jobs
コマンドを使ってジョブの状態を調べられます。
間にコマンドを挟まずに
.B bash
を再び終了させようとすると、
シェルは警告を繰り返さないで、
停止されているジョブを終了させます。
.\"O .SH PROMPTING
.SH プロンプト
.\"O When executing interactively, 
.\"O .B bash
.\"O displays the primary prompt
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PS1
.\"O when it is ready to read a command, and the secondary prompt
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PS2
.\"O when it needs more input to complete a command.
対話的に動作している場合、
.B bash
はコマンドを読む込み準備ができた時にプライマリプロンプト
.SM
.B PS1
を表示し、コマンドを完成させるためにまだ入力が必要な時に
セカンダリプロンプト
.SM
.B PS2
を表示します。
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O allows these prompt strings to be customized by inserting a number of
.\"O backslash-escaped special characters that are decoded as follows:
.B bash
ではこれらのプロンプト文字列をカスタマイズできます。
この際にはバックスラッシュでエスケープされた
各種特殊文字を挿入でき、
これは以下のようにデコードされます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \ea
.\"O an ASCII bell character (07)
ASCII のベル文字 (07)
.TP
.B \ed
.\"O the date in "Weekday Month Date" format (e.g., "Tue May 26")
"曜日 月 日" という形式の日付 (例: "Tue May 26")
.TP
.B \ee
.\"O an ASCII escape character (033)
ASCII のエスケープ文字 (033)
.TP
.B \eh
.\"O the hostname up to the first `.'
ホスト名のうち最初の `.' までの部分
.TP
.B \eH
.\"O the hostname
ホスト名
.TP
.B \ej
.\"O the number of jobs currently managed by the shell
シェルによって現在管理されているジョブの数
.TP
.B \el
.\"O the basename of the shell's terminal device name
シェルの端末デバイスのベース名 (basename)
.TP
.B \en
.\"O newline
改行
.TP
.B \er
.\"O carriage return
復帰
.TP
.B \es
.\"O the name of the shell, the basename of
.\"O .B $0
.\"O (the portion following the final slash)
シェルの名前。つまり
.B $0
のベース名 (最後のスラッシュ以降の部分)
.TP
.B \et
.\"O the current time in 24-hour HH:MM:SS format
24 時間の HH:MM:SS 形式の現在の時刻
.TP
.B \eT
.\"O the current time in 12-hour HH:MM:SS format
12 時間の HH:MM:SS 形式の現在の時刻
.TP
.B \e@
.\"O the current time in 12-hour am/pm format
12 時間の HH:MM am/pm 形式の現在の時刻
.TP
.B \eu
.\"O the username of the current user
現在のユーザのユーザ名
.TP
.B \ev
.\"O the version of \fBbash\fP (e.g., 2.00)
\fBbash\fP のバージョン (例: 2.00)
.TP
.B \eV
.\"O the release of \fBbash\fP, version + patchlevel (e.g., 2.00.0)
\fBbash\fP のリリース。バージョンにパッチレベルを加えたもの (例 : 2.00.0)
.TP
.B \ew
.\"O the current working directory
現在の作業ディレクトリ
.TP
.B \eW
.\"O the basename of the current working directory
現在の作業ディレクトリのベース名
.TP
.B \e!
.\"O the history number of this command
このコマンドの履歴番号
.TP
.B \e#
.\"O the command number of this command
このコマンドのコマンド番号
.TP
.B \e$
.\"O if the effective UID is 0, a
.\"O .BR # ,
.\"O otherwise a
.\"O .B $
実効 UID が 0 の場合に
.BR # 、
それ以外の場合は
.B $
.TP
.B \e\fInnn\fP
.\"O the character corresponding to the octal number \fInnn\fP
8進数 \fInnn\fP に対応する文字
.TP
.B \e\e
.\"O a backslash
バックスラッシュ
.TP
.B \e[
.\"O begin a sequence of non-printing characters, which could be used to
.\"O embed a terminal control sequence into the prompt
非表示文字のシーケンスの開始。
これを使うと、プロンプト中に端末の制御シーケンスを埋め込むことができます。
.TP
.B \e]
.\"O end a sequence of non-printing characters
非表示文字のシーケンスを終了します。
.PD
.RE
.PP
.\"O The command number and the history number are usually different:
コマンド番号と履歴番号は異なるのが普通です:
.\"O the history number of a command is its position in the history
.\"O list, which may include commands restored from the history file
.\"O (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTORY
.\"O below), while the command number is the position in the sequence
.\"O of commands executed during the current shell session.
コマンドの履歴番号とは履歴リスト内での位置です。
履歴リストは履歴ファイルから読み込めます。
(後述の
.SM
.B 履歴
を参照)
一方コマンド番号は、
現在のシェルのセッション中に実行された一連のコマンドの列における位置です。
.\"O After the string is decoded, it is expanded via
.\"O parameter expansion, command substitution, arithmetic
.\"O expansion, and quote removal, subject to the value of the
.\"O .B promptvars
.\"O shell option (see the description of the
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O command under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS"
.\"O below).
この文字列がデコードされた後、さらにパラメータ展開、コマンド置換、
算術式展開、クォート削除が適用されます。展開はシェルオプション
.B promptvars
(後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
の項にある
.B shopt
コマンドの説明を参照) の値に基づいて行われます。
.\"O .SH READLINE
.SH "READLINE ライブラリ"
.\"O This is the library that handles reading input when using an interactive
.\"O shell, unless the
.\"O .B \-\-noediting
.\"O option is given at shell invocation.
readline は対話シェルを使うときに入力の読み込みを処理するライブラリです。
ただし、シェルの起動時に
.B \-\-noediting
オプションが指定された場合には使われません。
.\"O By default, the line editing commands are similar to those of emacs.
.\"O A vi-style line editing interface is also available.
.\"O To turn off line editing after the shell is running, use the
.\"O .B +o emacs
.\"O or
.\"O .B +o vi
.\"O options to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).
デフォルトでは、行編集に使うコマンドは emacs のコマンドに似ています。
vi 形式の行編集インタフェースも使えます。
シェルを起動した後に行編集機能を無効にするには、組み込みコマンド
.B set
(後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照) に対して
.B +o emacs
オプションまたは
.B +o vi
オプションを設定してください。
.\"O .SS "Readline Notation"
.SS "Readline セクションにおける記法"
.PP
.\"O In this section, the emacs-style notation is used to denote
.\"O keystrokes.  Control keys are denoted by C\-\fIkey\fR, e.g., C\-n
.\"O means Control\-N.  Similarly, 
.\"O .I meta
.\"O keys are denoted by M\-\fIkey\fR, so M\-x means Meta\-X.  (On keyboards
.\"O without a 
.\"O .I meta
.\"O key, M\-\fIx\fP means ESC \fIx\fP, i.e., press the Escape key
.\"O then the
.\"O .I x
.\"O key.  This makes ESC the \fImeta prefix\fP.
.\"O The combination M\-C\-\fIx\fP means ESC\-Control\-\fIx\fP,
.\"O or press the Escape key
.\"O then hold the Control key while pressing the
.\"O .I x
.\"O key.)
このセクションでは、emacs 形式の記法を使ってキーストロークを表します。
コントロールキーは C\-\fIkey\fR で表します
(例: C\-n は Control\-N の意味です)。同様に
.I メタ
キーは M\-\fIkey\fR で表すので、M\-x は Meta\-X を表すことになります。
.RI ( メタ
キーが無いキーボードでは、M\-\fIx\fP は ESC \fIx\fP を表します。つまり、
エスケープキーを押した後に
.I x
キーを押します。これは ESC を
\fIメタプレフィックス (meta prefix)\fP にする操作です。
M\-C\-\fIx\fP の組み合わせは、ESC\-Control\-\fIx\fP
あるいはエスケープキーを押した後に、コントロールキーを押したまま
.I x
を押すことを示します。)
.PP
.\"O Readline commands may be given numeric
.\"O .IR arguments ,
.\"O which normally act as a repeat count.
.\"O Sometimes, however, it is the sign of the argument that is significant.
.\"O Passing a negative argument to a command that acts in the forward
.\"O direction (e.g., \fBkill\-line\fP) causes that command to act in a
.\"O backward direction. 
.\"O Commands whose behavior with arguments deviates from this are noted
.\"O below.
Readline のコマンドには数値の
.I 引き数
を指定できます。通常これは繰り返しの回数として作用します。
ただし場合によっては、引き数の符号が意味を持つこともあります。
前方に作用するコマンド (例: \fBkill\-line\fP) に負の引き数を渡すと、
コマンドは後方に作用します。
引き数に対する動作がこの説明と異なるコマンドについては後で説明します。
.PP
.\"O When a command is described as \fIkilling\fP text, the text
.\"O deleted is saved for possible future retrieval
.\"O (\fIyanking\fP).  The killed text is saved in a
.\"O \fIkill ring\fP.  Consecutive kills cause the text to be
.\"O accumulated into one unit, which can be yanked all at once. 
.\"O Commands which do not kill text separate the chunks of text
.\"O on the kill ring.
コマンドがテキストを\fIキル (kill)\fP すると説明されている時は、
削除されたテキストは、
後で取り出せる (\fIヤンク (yank)\fP できる) ように保存されます。
キルされたテキストは、\fIキルリング (kill ring)\fP に保存されます。
連続してキルを行うと、テキストは 1 つのまとまりとして保存されるので、
全部を一度にヤンクできます。テキストをキルしないコマンドが挟まると、
キルリング上のテキストが分離されます。
.\"O .SS "Readline Initialization"
.SS "Readline の初期化"
.PP
.\"O Readline is customized by putting commands in an initialization
.\"O file (the \fIinputrc\fP file).
.\"O The name of this file is taken from the value of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B INPUTRC
.\"O variable.  If that variable is unset, the default is
.\"O .IR ~/.inputrc .
コマンドを初期化ファイル (\fIinputrc\fP ファイル) に追加すると、
readline をカスタマイズできます。このファイルの名前は、変数
.SM
.B INPUTRC
の値から決まります。この変数が設定されていない場合のデフォルト値は
.I ~/.inputrc
です。
.\"O When a program which uses the readline library starts up, the
.\"O initialization file is read, and the key bindings and variables
.\"O are set.
.\"O There are only a few basic constructs allowed in the
.\"O readline initialization file.
.\"O Blank lines are ignored.
.\"O Lines beginning with a \fB#\fP are comments.
.\"O Lines beginning with a \fB$\fP indicate conditional constructs.
.\"O Other lines denote key bindings and variable settings.
readline ライブラリを使うプログラムが起動する際には、
この初期化ファイルが読み込まれ、キー割り当てと変数が設定されます。
readline の初期化ファイル中で使用できる基本的構文は、
以下のように少ししかありません。
空行は無視されます。
\fB#\fP で始まる行はコメントです。
\fB$\fP で始まる行は条件文です。
それ以外の行はキー割り当てと変数の設定です。
.PP
.\"O The default key-bindings may be changed with an
.\"O .I inputrc 
.\"O file.
.\"O Other programs that use this library may add their own commands
.\"O and bindings.
デフォルトのキー割り当ては
.I inputrc 
ファイルで変更できます。このライブラリを使う他のプログラムからも、
独自のコマンドとキー割り当てを追加できます。
.PP
.\"O For example, placing
例えば、
.RS
.PP
M\-Control\-u: universal\-argument
.RE
.\"O or
や
.RS
C\-Meta\-u: universal\-argument
.RE
.\"O into the 
.\"O .I inputrc
.\"O would make M\-C\-u execute the readline command
.\"O .IR universal\-argument .
を
.I inputrc
ファイルに書くと、M\-C\-u で readline の
.I universal\-argument
コマンドが実行されるようになります。
.PP
.\"O The following symbolic character names are recognized:
認識されるシンボリックな文字名を以下に示します:
.\"O .IR RUBOUT ,
.\"O .IR DEL ,
.\"O .IR ESC ,
.\"O .IR LFD ,
.\"O .IR NEWLINE ,
.\"O .IR RET ,
.\"O .IR RETURN ,
.\"O .IR SPC ,
.\"O .IR SPACE ,
.\"O and
.\"O .IR TAB .
.IR RUBOUT ,
.IR DEL ,
.IR ESC ,
.IR LFD ,
.IR NEWLINE ,
.IR RET ,
.IR RETURN ,
.IR SPC ,
.IR SPACE ,
.IR TAB 。
.PP
.\"O In addition to command names, readline allows keys to be bound
.\"O to a string that is inserted when the key is pressed (a \fImacro\fP).
readline では、コマンド名だけでなくキーにも文字列を割り当てできます。
つまり、そのキーが押されると文字列が挿入されます
(\fIマクロ\fP, \fImacro\fP)。
.\"O .SS "Readline Key Bindings"
.SS "Readline のキー割り当て"
.PP
.\"O The syntax for controlling key bindings in the
.\"O .I inputrc
.\"O file is simple.  All that is required is the name of the
.\"O command or the text of a macro and a key sequence to which
.\"O it should be bound. The name may be specified in one of two ways:
.\"O as a symbolic key name, possibly with \fIMeta\-\fP or \fIControl\-\fP
.\"O prefixes, or as a key sequence.
.I inputrc
ファイルにおける制御キーの割り当て方は単純です。
必要なものは、コマンドの名前あるいはマクロのテキストと、
これらが割り当てられるキーシーケンスだけです。
名前は 2 通りの方法で指定できます。
つまり、シンボリックなキーの名前
(たぶん、これに \fIMeta\-\fP や \fIControl\-\fP
プレフィックスが付いたもの) による指定と、
キーシーケンスによる指定です。
.PP
.\"O When using the form \fBkeyname\fP:\^\fIfunction\-name\fP or \fImacro\fP,
.\"O .I keyname
.\"O is the name of a key spelled out in English.  For example:
「\fBkeyname\fP:\^\fIfunction\-name\fP」あるいは
「\fBkeyname\fP:\^\fImacro\fP」の形式を使うときには、
.I keyname
は英語で書き下したキーの名前となります。例を以下に示します:
.sp
.RS
Control-u: universal\-argument
.br
Meta-Rubout: backward-kill-word
.br
Control-o: "> output"
.RE
.LP
.\"O In the above example,
.\"O .I C\-u
.\"O is bound to the function
.\"O .BR universal\-argument ,
.\"O .I M\-DEL
.\"O is bound to the function
.\"O .BR backward\-kill\-word ,
.\"O and
.\"O .I C\-o
.\"O is bound to run the macro
.\"O expressed on the right hand side (that is, to insert the text
.\"O .if t \f(CW> output\fP
.\"O .if n ``> output''
.\"O into the line).
この例では、
.I C\-u
が
.B universal\-argument
に、
.I M\-DEL
が
.B backward\-kill\-word
に割り当てられます。
また、
.I C\-o
はマクロの実行に割り当てられ、右辺値に展開されます (つまり、テキスト
.if t \f(CW> output\fP
.if n ``> output''
が編集行に挿入されます)。
.PP
.\"O In the second form, \fB"keyseq"\fP:\^\fIfunction\-name\fP or \fImacro\fP,
.\"O .B keyseq
.\"O differs from
.\"O .B keyname
.\"O above in that strings denoting
.\"O an entire key sequence may be specified by placing the sequence
.\"O within double quotes.  Some GNU Emacs style key escapes can be
.\"O used, as in the following example, but the symbolic character names
.\"O are not recognized.
後者の形式である「\fB"keyseq"\fP:\^\fIfunction\-name\fP」または
「\fB"keyseq"\fP:\^\fImacro\fP」においては、
.B keyseq
は先程の
.B keyname
とは異なり、
ダブルクォートで括ってキーシーケンス全体を示す文字列を表記しています。
以下の例で示すように、GNU Emacs 形式のキーエスケープの一部を使えます。
ただしシンボリックな文字名は認識されません。
.sp
.RS
"\eC\-u": universal\-argument
.br
"\eC\-x\eC\-r": re\-read\-init\-file
.br
"\ee[11~": "Function Key 1"
.RE
.PP
.\"O In this example,
.\"O .I C\-u
.\"O is again bound to the function
.\"O .BR universal\-argument .
この例でも、
.I C\-u
が
.B universal\-argument
機能に割り当てられています。
.\"O .I "C\-x C\-r"
.\"O is bound to the function
.\"O .BR re\-read\-init\-file ,
.\"O and 
.\"O .I "ESC [ 1 1 ~"
.\"O is bound to insert the text
.\"O .if t \f(CWFunction Key 1\fP.
.\"O .if n ``Function Key 1''.
.I "C\-x C\-r"
は
.B re\-read\-init\-file
機能に割り当てられ、
.I "ESC [ 1 1 ~"
は
.B "Function Key 1"
.if t \f(CWFunction Key 1\fP.
.if n ``Function Key 1''.
という文字列の挿入に割り当てられています。
.PP
.\"O The full set of GNU Emacs style escape sequences is
GNU Emacs 形式のエスケープシーケンスを以下に全て示します:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \eC\-
.\"O control prefix
コントロールプレフィックス
.TP
.B \eM\-
.\"O meta prefix
メタプレフィックス
.TP
.B \ee
.\"O an escape character
エスケープ文字
.TP
.B \e\e
.\"O backslash
バックスラッシュ
.TP
.B \e"
.\"O literal "
" という文字
.TP
.B \e'
.\"O literal '
\' という文字
.RE
.PD
.PP
.\"O In addition to the GNU Emacs style escape sequences, a second
.\"O set of backslash escapes is available:
GNU Emacs 形式のエスケープシーケンスに加えて、
別形式のバックスラッシュエスケープも使えます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \ea
.\"O alert (bell)
警告 (ベル)
.TP
.B \eb
.\"O backspace
バックスペース
.TP
.B \ed
.\"O delete
削除 (delete)
.TP
.B \ef
.\"O form feed
フォームフィード
.TP
.B \en
.\"O newline
改行
.TP
.B \er
.\"O carriage return
復帰
.TP
.B \et
.\"O horizontal tab
水平タブ
.TP
.B \ev
.\"O vertical tab
垂直タブ
.TP
.B \e\fInnn\fP
.\"O the character whose ASCII code is the octal value \fInnn\fP
.\"O (one to three digits)
ASCII コードの 8 進値が \fInnn\fP である文字  (1 文字につき数字 3 桁)
.TP
.B \ex\fInnn\fP
.\"O the character whose ASCII code is the hexadecimal value \fInnn\fP
.\"O (one to three digits)
ASCII コードの 16 進値が \fInnn\fP である文字 (1 文字につき数字 3 桁)
.RE
.PD
.PP
.\"O When entering the text of a macro, single or double quotes must
.\"O be used to indicate a macro definition.
.\"O Unquoted text is assumed to be a function name.
.\"O In the macro body, the backslash escapes described above are expanded.
.\"O Backslash will quote any other character in the macro text,
.\"O including " and '.
マクロのテキストを入力する際には、マクロ定義を示すために
シングルクォートやダブルクォートを使わなければなりません。
クォートされていないテキストは関数名と見なされます。
マクロ本体では、前述のバックスラッシュによるエスケープは展開されます。
バックスラッシュはマクロのテキスト内の他の文字を全てエスケープします。
これには " や ' も含まれます。
.PP
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O allows the current readline key bindings to be displayed or modified
.\"O with the
.\"O .B bind
.\"O builtin command.  The editing mode may be switched during interactive
.\"O use by using the
.\"O .B \-o
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).
.B bash
では、組み込みコマンドの
.B bind
を使って、readline の現在の キー割り当ての表示と変更を行えます。
また組み込みコマンド
.B set
に対して
.B \-o
オプションを使えば、編集モードを対話的利用の途中に切替え可能です
(後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照)。
.\"O .SS "Readline Variables"
.SS "Readline の変数"
.PP
.\"O Readline has variables that can be used to further customize its
.\"O behavior.  A variable may be set in the
.\"O .I inputrc
.\"O file with a statement of the form
Readline の動作をカスタマイズできる変数は他にもあります。
変数は
.I inputrc
ファイル中に
.RS
.PP
\fBset\fP \fIvariable\-name\fP \fIvalue\fP
.RE
.PP
という形式の文で設定できます。
.\"O Except where noted, readline variables can take the values
.\"O .B On
.\"O or
.\"O .BR Off .
特に断らない限り、readline の変数は
.B On
または
.B Off
のいずれかです。
.\"O The variables and their default values are:
変数とそのデフォルト値を以下に示します:
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B bell\-style (audible)
.\"O Controls what happens when readline wants to ring the terminal bell.
.\"O If set to \fBnone\fP, readline never rings the bell.  If set to
.\"O \fBvisible\fP, readline uses a visible bell if one is available.
.\"O If set to \fBaudible\fP, readline attempts to ring the terminal's bell.
readline が端末のベルを鳴らそうとしたときの動作を制御します。
\fBnone\fP が設定されている場合は、readline はベルを鳴らしません。
\fBvisible\fP が設定されている場合には、可能であれば可視ベル
(visible bell) が用いられます。\fBaudible\fP が設定されている場合には、
readline は端末のベルを鳴らそうとします。
.TP
.B comment\-begin (``#'')
.\"O The string that is inserted when the readline
.\"O .B insert\-comment
.\"O command is executed.
.\"O This command is bound to
.\"O .B M\-#
.\"O in emacs mode and to
.\"O .B #
.\"O in vi command mode.
readline の
.B insert\-comment
コマンドが実行されたときに挿入される文字列です。
このコマンドは emacs モードでは
.B M\-#
に割り当てられ、vi コマンドモードでは
.B #
に割り当てられます。
.TP
.B completion\-ignore\-case (Off)
.\"O If set to \fBOn\fP, readline performs filename matching and completion
.\"O in a case\-insensitive fashion.
\fBOn\fP が設定されていると、
readline がファイル名のマッチングと補完を行う際に
大文字と小文字が区別されません。
.TP
.B completion\-query\-items (100)
.\"O This determines when the user is queried about viewing
.\"O the number of possible completions
.\"O generated by the \fBpossible\-completions\fP command.
.\"O It may be set to any integer value greater than or equal to
.\"O zero.  If the number of possible completions is greater than
.\"O or equal to the value of this variable, the user is asked whether
.\"O or not he wishes to view them; otherwise they are simply listed
.\"O on the terminal.
\fBpossible\-completions\fP コマンドが生成した補完候補の数が、
いくつを越えると表示の可否をユーザに問い合わせるのかを決めます。
この変数には 0 以上の任意の整数を設定できます。
補完の候補数がこの変数の値以上の場合には、
ユーザに対して候補を表示するかどうかの問い合わせがなされます。
そうでない場合には、単に端末に補完の候補がリスト表示されます。
.TP
.B convert\-meta (On)
.\"O If set to \fBOn\fP, readline will convert characters with the
.\"O eighth bit set to an ASCII key sequence
.\"O by stripping the eighth bit and prefixing an
.\"O escape character (in effect, using escape as the \fImeta prefix\fP).
\fBOn\fP を設定すると、readline は
8 番目のビットがセットされている文字を
ASCII のキーシーケンスに変換します。
変換は、8 番目のビットを落として、
エスケープ文字を前に追加することによって行います
(実際にはエスケープ文字を\fIメタプレフィックス\fPとして用います)。
.TP
.B disable\-completion (Off)
.\"O If set to \fBOn\fP, readline will inhibit word completion.  Completion
.\"O characters will be inserted into the line as if they had been
.\"O mapped to \fBself-insert\fP.
\fBOn\fP を設定すると、readline は単語の補完を行わなくなります。
補完される文字の編集行への挿入は、
その文字を \fBself-insert\fP に割り当てたかのように行われます。
.TP
.B editing\-mode (emacs)
.\"O Controls whether readline begins with a set of key bindings similar
.\"O to \fIemacs\fP or \fIvi\fP.
.\"O .B editing\-mode
.\"O can be set to either
.\"O .B emacs
.\"O or
.\"O .BR vi .
readline の起動時に \fIemacs\fP と
\fIvi\fP のどちらに似たキー割り当てを使うのかを制御します。
.B editing\-mode
には
.B emacs
と
.BR vi
のいずれかを指定できます。
.TP
.B enable\-keypad (Off)
.\"O When set to \fBOn\fP, readline will try to enable the application
.\"O keypad when it is called.  Some systems need this to enable the
.\"O arrow keys.
\fBOn\fP を設定すると、
readline は呼び出された時にアプリケーションキーパッドを有効にしようとします。
一部のシステムでは、矢印キーを使うためにこれを有効にする必要があります。
.TP
.B expand\-tilde (Off)
.\"O If set to \fBon\fP, tilde expansion is performed when readline
.\"O attempts word completion.
\fBon\fP を設定すると、
readline が単語の補完を試みるときにチルダ展開が行われます。
.TP
.B horizontal\-scroll\-mode (Off)
.\"O When set to \fBOn\fP, makes readline use a single line for display,
.\"O scrolling the input horizontally on a single screen line when it
.\"O becomes longer than the screen width rather than wrapping to a new line.
\fBon\fP が設定されている時、readline は表示の際に行を
1 つしか使わないようになります。つまり行がスクリーンの幅より長くなると、
新しい行に折り返すのではなく、1 つの入力行の中で横にスクロールします。
.TP
.B input\-meta (Off)
.\"O If set to \fBOn\fP, readline will enable eight-bit input (that is,
.\"O it will not strip the high bit from the characters it reads),
.\"O regardless of what the terminal claims it can support.  The name
.\"O .B meta\-flag
.\"O is a synonym for this variable.
\fBOn\fP が設定されていると、readline は 8 ビットの入力が可能になりま
す(つまり、読み込んだ文字の再上位ビットを落としません)。この動作は、端
末のサポートとは無関係に行われます。
.B meta\-flag
という名前は、この変数の別名です。
.TP
.B isearch\-terminators (``C\-[C\-J'')
.\"O The string of characters that should terminate an incremental
.\"O search without subsequently executing the character as a command.
.\"O If this variable has not been given a value, the characters
.\"O \fIESC\fP and \fIC\-J\fP will terminate an incremental search.
インクリメンタル検索を終了させる文字からなる文字列です
(終了後にその文字がコマンドとして実行されることもありません)。
この変数に値が設定されていなければ、
\fIESC\fP と \fIC\-J\fP でインクリメンタル検索が終わります。
.TP
.B keymap (emacs)
.\"O Set the current readline keymap.  The set of valid keymap names is
.\"O \fIemacs, emacs\-standard, emacs\-meta, emacs\-ctlx, vi,
.\"O vi\-command\fP, and
.\"O .IR vi\-insert .
.\"O \fIvi\fP is equivalent to \fIvi\-command\fP; \fIemacs\fP is
.\"O equivalent to \fIemacs\-standard\fP.  The default value is
.\"O .IR emacs ;
.\"O the value of
.\"O .B editing\-mode
.\"O also affects the default keymap.
現在の readline のキーマップを設定します。
正しいキーマップ名を全て挙げると、
\fIemacs, emacs\-standard, emacs\-meta, emacs\-ctlx, vi,
vi\-command, vi\-insert\fP となります。\fIvi\fP は \fIvi\-command\fP
と等価で、\fIemacs\fP は \fIemacs\-standard\fP と等価です。
デフォルト値は
.IR emacs
です。
.B editing\-mode
の値もデフォルトキーマップに影響を与えます。
.TP
.B mark\-directories (On)
.\"O If set to \fBOn\fP, completed directory names have a slash
.\"O appended.
\fBOn\fP が設定されていると、
補完されたディレクトリ名の末尾にスラッシュが追加されます。
.TP
.B mark\-modified\-lines (Off)
.\"O If set to \fBOn\fP, history lines that have been modified are displayed
.\"O with a preceding asterisk (\fB*\fP).
\fBOn\fP が設定されていると、履歴行を表示する際に、
以前に変更されたものの先頭にアスタリスク (\fB*\fP) を付けて表示します。
.TP
.B output\-meta (Off)
.\"O If set to \fBOn\fP, readline will display characters with the
.\"O eighth bit set directly rather than as a meta-prefixed escape
.\"O sequence.
\fBOn\fP が設定されていると、
readline は 8 番目のビットが立っている文字を直接表示します。
メタ文字を前置したエスケープシーケンスでの表示は行いません。
.TP
.B print\-completions\-horizontally (Off)
.\"O If set to \fBOn\fP, readline will display completions with matches
.\"O sorted horizontally in alphabetical order, rather than down the screen.
\fBOn\fP が設定されていると、
readline は補完でマッチするものをアルファベット順にして、
縦方向ではなく横方向に並べて表示します。
.TP
.B show\-all\-if\-ambiguous (Off)
.\"O This alters the default behavior of the completion functions.  If
.\"O set to
.\"O .BR on ,
.\"O words which have more than one possible completion cause the
.\"O matches to be listed immediately instead of ringing the bell.
これは補完機能のデフォルトの挙動を変えます。
.B On
が設定されている場合、単語に対する補完候補が複数個あると、
マッチするものが即座にリスト表示されます。ベルは鳴らされません。
.TP
.B visible\-stats (Off)
.\"O If set to \fBOn\fP, a character denoting a file's type as reported
.\"O by \fIstat\fP(2) is appended to the filename when listing possible
.\"O completions.
\fBOn\fP が設定されていると、
\fIstat\fP(2) で得られるファイルの種類を表す文字が、
補完候補のリスト表示の際に追加されます。
.PD
.\"O .SS "Readline Conditional Constructs"
.SS Readline の条件構文
.PP
.\"O Readline implements a facility similar in spirit to the conditional
.\"O compilation features of the C preprocessor which allows key
.\"O bindings and variable settings to be performed as the result
.\"O of tests.  There are four parser directives used.
Readline には、
C 言語のプリプロセッサの条件付きコンパイル機能と
似たコンセプトに基づく機能が実装されています。
これを使うとキー割り当てや変数の設定を評価の結果として実行できます。
パーザディレクティブは 4 つあります。
.IP \fB$if\fP
.\"O The 
.\"O .B $if
.\"O construct allows bindings to be made based on the
.\"O editing mode, the terminal being used, or the application using
.\"O readline.  The text of the test extends to the end of the line;
.\"O no characters are required to isolate it.
.B $if
構文を使うと、編集モードや使っている端末、
readline を使っているアプリケーションに基づいた割り当てを行えます。
評価文のテキストは行の最後までです。
これを分離するには文字は必要ありません。
.RS
.IP \fBmode\fP
.\"O The \fBmode=\fP form of the \fB$if\fP directive is used to test
.\"O whether readline is in emacs or vi mode.
.\"O This may be used in conjunction
.\"O with the \fBset keymap\fP command, for instance, to set bindings in
.\"O the \fIemacs\-standard\fP and \fIemacs\-ctlx\fP keymaps only if
.\"O readline is starting out in emacs mode.
\fB$if\fP ディレクティブの \fBmode=\fP 形式は、
readline が emacs モードか
vi モードのどちらになっているかを調べるために使います。
例えばこれを \fBset keymap\fP コマンドと一緒に使い、
readline が emacs モードで始まった時だけ
キーの割り当てを \fIemacs\-standard\fP や 
\fIemacs\-ctlx\fP キーマップに設定できます。
.IP \fBterm\fP
.\"O The \fBterm=\fP form may be used to include terminal-specific
.\"O key bindings, perhaps to bind the key sequences output by the
.\"O terminal's function keys.  The word on the right side of the
.\"O .B =
.\"O is tested against the both full name of the terminal and the portion
.\"O of the terminal name before the first \fB\-\fP.  This allows
.\"O .I sun
.\"O to match both
.\"O .I sun
.\"O and
.\"O .IR sun\-cmd ,
.\"O for instance.
\fBterm=\fP 形式を使うと、
端末固有のキー割り当てを入れることができます。
これは端末のファンクションキーが出力する
キーシーケンスを割り当てる場合などに使えます。
.B =
の右辺の単語は、
端末の完全な名前および最初の
\fB\-\fP の前までの部分的な名前の両方に対して評価されます。
これにより例えば、
.I sun
は
.I sun
と
.I sun\-cmd
の両方にマッチできます。
.IP \fBapplication\fP
.\"O The \fBapplication\fP construct is used to include
.\"O application-specific settings.  Each program using the readline
.\"O library sets the \fIapplication name\fP, and an initialization
.\"O file can test for a particular value.
\fBapplication\fP はアプリケーション固有の設定を入れるために使います。
readline ライブラリを使っているプログラムはそれぞれ
\fIアプリケーション名 (application name)\fP を設定するので、
初期化ファイルはそれが特定の値かどうかを調べられます。
.\"O This could be used to bind key sequences to functions useful for
.\"O a specific program.  For instance, the following command adds a
.\"O key sequence that quotes the current or previous word in Bash:
これを使って、キーシーケンスを特定のプログラム用の
便利な機能に割り当てできます。例えば以下のコマンドは、
bash 内で現在または 1 つ前の単語をクォートするキーシーケンスを追加します:
.sp 1
.RS
.nf
\fB$if\fP Bash
# Quote the current or previous word
"\eC\-xq": "\eeb\e"\eef\e""
\fB$endif\fP
.fi
.RE
.RE
.IP \fB$endif\fP
.\"O This command, as seen in the previous example, terminates an
.\"O \fB$if\fP command.
このコマンドは上の例で見たように、\fB$if\fP コマンドを終了させます。
.IP \fB$else\fP
.\"O Commands in this branch of the \fB$if\fP directive are executed if
.\"O the test fails.
\fB$if\fP ディレクティブのこの分岐内におけるコマンドは、
評価が失敗した時に実行されます。
.IP \fB$include\fP
.\"O This directive takes a single filename as an argument and reads commands
.\"O and bindings from that file.  For example, the following directive
.\"O would read \fI/etc/inputrc\fP:
このディレクティブはファイル名 1 つを引き数に取り、
そのファイルからコマンドとキー割り当てを読み込みます。
例えば以下のディレクティブを使うと
\fI/etc/inputrc\fP が読み込まれます:
.sp 1
.RS
.nf
\fB$include\fP \^ \fI/etc/inputrc\fP
.fi
.RE
.\"O .SS Searching
.SS 検索
.PP
.\"O Readline provides commands for searching through the command history
.\"O (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTORY
.\"O below) for lines containing a specified string.
.\"O There are two search modes:
.\"O .I incremental
.\"O and
.\"O .IR non-incremental .
readline には、指定した文字列を含む行をコマンド履歴内から探すコマンド
が用意されています (後述の
.SM
.B 履歴
を参照)。検索のモードには、
.I インクリメンタル (incremental)
モードと
.I 非インクリメンタル (non-incremental)
モードの 2 つがあります。
.PP
.\"O Incremental searches begin before the user has finished typing the
.\"O search string.
.\"O As each character of the search string is typed, readline displays
.\"O the next entry from the history matching the string typed so far.
.\"O An incremental search requires only as many characters as needed to
.\"O find the desired history entry.
インクリメンタル検索は、
ユーザが検索文字列の入力を終えるより前に検索を開始します。
検索文字列に文字が追加されるたびに、
readline は現在まで入力した文字列にマッチする履歴から
次のエントリを表示します。インクリメンタル検索で必要なのは、
探している履歴エントリを見つけるために必要な数の文字だけです。
.\"O The characters present in the value of the \fBisearch-terminators\fP
.\"O variable are used to terminate an incremental search.
インクリメンタル検索を終了させるには、
\fBisearch-terminators\fP の値に入っている文字を使います。
.\"O If that variable has not been assigned a value the Escape and
.\"O Control-J characters will terminate an incremental search.
この変数に値が代入されていない場合には、エスケープ文字または
Control-J でインクリメンタル検索が終了します。
.\"O Control-G will abort an incremental search and restore the original
.\"O line.
Control-G はインクリメンタル検索を異常終了させ、元の行を復元します。
.\"O When the search is terminated, the history entry containing the
.\"O search string becomes the current line.
検索が終了すると、検索文字列を含む履歴エントリが現在の行になります。
.PP
.\"O To find other matching entries in the history list, type Control-S or
.\"O Control-R as appropriate.
.\"O This will search backward or forward in the history for the next
.\"O entry matching the search string typed so far.
.\"O Any other key sequence bound to a readline command will terminate
.\"O the search and execute that command.
.\"O For instance, a \fInewline\fP will terminate the search and accept
.\"O the line, thereby executing the command from the history list.
マッチした他の履歴リストのエントリを見つけるには、Control-S または
Control-R を適宜入力します。これにより、
今まで入力した検索文字列にマッチする次のエントリを
履歴の前方または後方に向かって探します。
readline に割り当てられた他のキーシーケンスを入力すると検索が終わり、
そのコマンドが実行されます。例えば、\fI改行\fPは検索を終了させて、
その行を入力します。これにより、履歴リスト中のコマンドが実行されます。
.PP
.\"O Non-incremental searches read the entire search string before starting
.\"O to search for matching history lines.  The search string may be
.\"O typed by the user or be part of the contents of the current line.
インクリメンタルでない検索の場合には、
履歴行にマッチするものの検索を始める前に検索する文字列全体を読み込みます。
検索文字列には、ユーザが入力したものか、現在の行の内容の一部を使えます。
.\"O .SS "Readline Command Names"
.SS "Readline のコマンド名"
.PP
.\"O The following is a list of the names of the commands and the default
.\"O key sequences to which they are bound.
.\"O Command names without an accompanying key sequence are unbound by default.
以下に示すのは、
コマンドの名前およびそれらが割り当てられている
デフォルトのキーシーケンスの一覧です。
対応するキーシーケンスが無いコマンド名には、
デフォルトではキーは割り当てられていません。
.\"O In the following descriptions, \fIpoint\fP refers to the current cursor
.\"O position, and \fImark\fP refers to a cursor position saved by the
.\"O \fBset\-mark\fP command.
.\"O The text between the point and mark is referred to as the \fIregion\fP.
以下の説明では、\fIポイント (point)\fP は現在のカーソルの位置を表し、
\fIマーク (mark)\fP は
\fBset\-mark\fP コマンドによって保存されたカーソル位置を表します。
ポイントとマークの間のテキストは、\fIリージョン (region)\fP で表します。
.\"O .SS Commands for Moving
.SS 移動コマンド
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B beginning\-of\-line (C\-a)
.\"O Move to the start of the current line.
現在の行の先頭に移動します。
.TP
.B end\-of\-line (C\-e)
.\"O Move to the end of the line.
行の末尾に移動します。
.TP
.B forward\-char (C\-f)
.\"O Move forward a character.
1 文字進みます。
.TP
.B backward\-char (C\-b)
.\"O Move back a character.
1 文字戻ります。
.TP
.B forward\-word (M\-f)
.\"O Move forward to the end of the next word.  Words are composed of
.\"O alphanumeric characters (letters and digits).
次の単語の最後に進みます。単語は英数字 (文字と数字) からなります。
.TP
.B backward\-word (M\-b)
.\"O Move back to the start of the current or previous word.  Words are
.\"O composed of alphanumeric characters (letters and digits).
現在の単語あるいは前の単語の先頭に戻ります。
単語は英数字 (文字と数字) からなります。
.TP
.B clear\-screen (C\-l)
.\"O Clear the screen leaving the current line at the top of the screen.
.\"O With an argument, refresh the current line without clearing the
.\"O screen.
現在の行を画面の一番上の行に残したまま、画面をクリアします。
引き数を付けると、画面をクリアせずに現在の行を再描画します。
.TP
.B redraw\-current\-line
.\"O Refresh the current line.
現在の行を再描画します。
.PD
.\"O .SS Commands for Manipulating the History
.SS 履歴操作のためのコマンド
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B accept\-line (Newline, Return)
.\"O Accept the line regardless of where the cursor is.  If this line is
.\"O non-empty, add it to the history list according to the state of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTCONTROL
.\"O variable.  If the line is a modified history
.\"O line, then restore the history line to its original state.
カーソルの位置に関わらず、行を入力します。この行が空でなければ、変数
.SM
.B HISTCONTROL
の状態に従って、これが履歴リストに追加されます。
行が履歴リストを変更したものならば、履歴行は元の状態に戻されます。
.TP
.B previous\-history (C\-p)
.\"O Fetch the previous command from the history list, moving back in
.\"O the list.
履歴リストを戻り、履歴リストから前の行を取り出します。
.TP
.B next\-history (C\-n)
.\"O Fetch the next command from the history list, moving forward in the
.\"O list.
履歴リストを進み、履歴リストから次の行を取り出します。
.TP
.B beginning\-of\-history (M\-<)
.\"O Move to the first line in the history.
履歴の最初の行に移動します。
.TP
.B end\-of\-history (M\->)
.\"O Move to the end of the input history, i.e., the line currently being
.\"O entered.
入力履歴の最後に移動します。つまり、現在入力中の行に移動します。
.TP
.B reverse\-search\-history (C\-r)
.\"O Search backward starting at the current line and moving `up' through
.\"O the history as necessary.  This is an incremental search.
現在の行を開始点にして後方に向かって検索を行い、
必要に応じて履歴を「遡って」いきます。これはインクリメンタル検索です。
.TP
.B forward\-search\-history (C\-s)
.\"O Search forward starting at the current line and moving `down' through
.\"O the history as necessary.  This is an incremental search.
現在の行を開始点にして前方に向かって検索を行い、
必要に応じて履歴を「下って」いきます。これはインクリメンタル検索です。
.TP
.B non\-incremental\-reverse\-search\-history (M\-p)
.\"O Search backward through the history starting at the current line
.\"O using a non-incremental search for a string supplied by the user.
現在の行を開始点にして、履歴リストを後方に向かって検索を行います。
この際には、ユーザが入力した文字列を
非インクリメンタルモードで検索します。
.TP
.B non\-incremental\-forward\-search\-history (M\-n)
.\"O Search forward through the history using a non-incremental search for
.\"O a string supplied by the user.
現在の行を開始点にして、履歴リストを前方に向かって検索を行います。
この際には、ユーザが入力した文字列を
非インクリメンタルモードで検索します。
.TP
.B history\-search\-forward
.\"O Search forward through the history for the string of characters
.\"O between the start of the current line and the point.
.\"O This is a non-incremental search.
履歴を前方に向かって検索し、
現在の行の先頭とポイントの間の文字列を探します。
これは非インクリメンタル検索です。
.TP
.B history\-search\-backward
.\"O Search backward through the history for the string of characters
.\"O between the start of the current line and the point.
.\"O This is a non-incremental search.
履歴を後方に向かって検索し、
現在の行の先頭およびポイントの間の文字列を探します。
これは非インクリメンタル検索です。
.TP
.B yank\-nth\-arg (M\-C\-y)
.\"O Insert the first argument to the previous command (usually
.\"O the second word on the previous line) at point.
.\"O With an argument
.\"O .IR n ,
.\"O insert the \fIn\fPth word from the previous command (the words
.\"O in the previous command begin with word 0).  A negative argument
.\"O inserts the \fIn\fPth word from the end of the previous command.
前のコマンドに対する最初の引き数 (通常は前の行の 2 番目の単語)
をポイントに挿入します。引き数
.I n
が付いていると、前のコマンドの \fIn\fP 番目の単語
(前のコマンドの単語は 0 から数えます)。
引き数が負ならば、前のコマンドの最後から
\fIn\fP 番目の単語が挿入されます。
.TP
.B
yank\-last\-arg (M\-.\^, M\-_\^)
.\"O Insert the last argument to the previous command (the last word of
.\"O the previous history entry).  With an argument,
.\"O behave exactly like \fByank\-nth\-arg\fP.
.\"O Successive calls to \fByank\-last\-arg\fP move back through the history
.\"O list, inserting the last argument of each line in turn.
前のコマンドの最後の引き数
(一つ前の履歴エントリの最後の単語) を挿入します。
引き数があると、\fByank\-nth\-arg\fP と全く同じように動作します。
\fByank\-last\-arg\fP を繰り返して呼び出すと、
履歴リストを遡って参照が行われ、
それぞれの行の最後の引き数が順番に挿入されます。
.TP
.B shell\-expand\-line (M\-C\-e)
.\"O Expand the line as the shell does.  This
.\"O performs alias and history expansion as well as all of the shell
.\"O word expansions.  See
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTORY EXPANSION
.\"O below for a description of history expansion.
シェルのように行を展開します。
エイリアスや履歴の展開など、シェルの行う単語展開を行います。
履歴の展開の説明については、後述の
.SM
.B 履歴の展開
を参照してください。
.TP
.B history\-expand\-line (M\-^)
.\"O Perform history expansion on the current line.
.\"O See
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTORY EXPANSION
.\"O below for a description of history expansion.
現在の行で履歴の展開を行います。
履歴の展開の説明については、後述の
.SM
.B 履歴の展開
を参照してください。
.TP
.B magic\-space
.\"O Perform history expansion on the current line and insert a space.
.\"O See
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTORY EXPANSION
.\"O below for a description of history expansion.
現在の行で履歴の展開を行い、空白を挿入します。
履歴の展開の説明については、後述の
.SM
.B 履歴の展開
を参照してください。
.TP
.B alias\-expand\-line
.\"O Perform alias expansion on the current line.
.\"O See
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B ALIASES
.\"O above for a description of alias expansion.
現在の行でエイリアスの展開を行います。
エイリアスの展開の説明については、前述の
.SM
.B エイリアス
を参照してください。
.TP
.B history\-and\-alias\-expand\-line
.\"O Perform history and alias expansion on the current line.
現在の行で履歴とエイリアスの展開を行います。
.TP
.B insert\-last\-argument (M\-.\^, M\-_\^)
.\"O A synonym for \fByank\-last\-arg\fP.
\fByank\-last\-arg\fP と同じものです。
.TP
.B operate\-and\-get\-next (C\-o)
.\"O Accept the current line for execution and fetch the next line
.\"O relative to the current line from the history for editing.  Any
.\"O argument is ignored.
現在の行を実行し、
現在の行の次の行を編集するために履歴から取得します。
引き数は全て無視されます。
.PD
.\"O .SS Commands for Changing Text
.SS テキスト編集のためのコマンド
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B delete\-char (C\-d)
.\"O Delete the character at point.  If point is at the
.\"O beginning of the line, there are no characters in the line, and
.\"O the last character typed was not bound to \fBdelete\-char\fP,
.\"O then return
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR EOF .
ポイントの文字を削除します。
ポイントが行の先頭であり、その行に文字が無く、
さらに打ち込んだ最後の文字が
\fBdelete\-char\fP に割り当てられていなければ、
.SM
.B EOF
が返されます。
.TP
.B backward\-delete\-char (Rubout)
.\"O Delete the character behind the cursor.  When given a numeric argument,
.\"O save the deleted text on the kill ring.
カーソルの前の文字を削除します。数値の引き数を与えると、
削除したテキストをキルリングに保存します。
.TP
.B forward\-backward\-delete\-char
.\"O Delete the character under the cursor, unless the cursor is at the
.\"O end of the line, in which case the character behind the cursor is
.\"O deleted.  By default, this is not bound to a key.
カーソルが行末になければカーソルがある位置の文字を削除します。
カーソルが行末にある場合には、カーソルの前の文字を削除します。
デフォルトでは、これはキーに割り当てられていません。
.TP
.B quoted\-insert (C\-q, C\-v)
.\"O Add the next character typed to the line verbatim.  This is
.\"O how to insert characters like \fBC\-q\fP, for example.
次に打ち込んだ文字をそのまま行に追加します。
これは \fBC\-q\fP 等の文字を挿入するために使います。
.TP
.B tab\-insert (C\-v TAB)
.\"O Insert a tab character.
タブ文字を挿入します。
.TP
.B self\-insert (a,\ b,\ A,\ 1,\ !,\ ...)
.\"O Insert the character typed.
打ち込んだ文字を挿入します。
.TP
.B transpose\-chars (C\-t)
.\"O Drag the character before point forward over the character at point,
.\"O moving point forward as well.
.\"O If point is at the end of the line, then this transposes
.\"O the two characters before point.
.\"O Negative arguments have no effect.
ポイントの前にある文字を動かし、
現在ポイントがある文字の後ろに持っていきます。
同時にポイントも前に進みます。ポイントが行の最後にある場合は、
ポイントの前の 2 文字が交換されます。
負の引き数を指定すると、何も起こりません。
.TP
.B transpose\-words (M\-t)
.\"O Drag the word before point past the word after point,
.\"O moving point over that word as well.
ポイントの前にある単語を動かし、
ポイントの後ろにある単語の後ろに持っていきます。
この際には、ポイントも始めに前にあった単語の後ろまで移動します。
.TP
.B upcase\-word (M\-u)
.\"O Uppercase the current (or following) word.  With a negative argument,
.\"O uppercase the previous word, but do not move point.
現在の (または後ろの) 単語を大文字にします。
負の引き数を指定すると、前の単語を大文字にしますが、
ポイントは動きません。
.TP
.B downcase\-word (M\-l)
.\"O Lowercase the current (or following) word.  With a negative argument,
.\"O lowercase the previous word, but do not move point.
現在の (または後ろの) 単語を小文字にします。
負の引き数を指定すると、前の単語を小文字にしますが、
ポイントは動きません。
.TP
.B capitalize\-word (M\-c)
.\"O Capitalize the current (or following) word.  With a negative argument,
.\"O capitalize the previous word, but do not move point.
現在の (または後ろの) 単語をキャピタライズします
(単語の先頭の文字を大文字にします)。
負の引き数を指定すると前の単語をキャピタライズしますが、
ポイントは動きません。
.PD
.\"O .SS Killing and Yanking
.SS キルとヤンク
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B kill\-line (C\-k)
.\"O Kill the text from point to the end of the line.
ポイントから行末までのテキストをキルします。
.TP
.B backward\-kill\-line (C\-x Rubout)
.\"O Kill backward to the beginning of the line.
現在のカーソル位置から行頭までをキルします。
.TP
.B unix\-line\-discard (C\-u)
.\"O Kill backward from point to the beginning of the line.
.\"O The killed text is saved on the kill-ring.
.\"O .\" There is no real difference between this and backward-kill-line
ポイントから行頭までをキルします。
キルされたテキストはキルリング (kill-ring) に入ります。
.\" このコマンドと backward-kill-line は実際には相違点はありません。
.TP
.B kill\-whole\-line
.\"O Kill all characters on the current line, no matter where point is.
現在の行の文字を全てキルします。ポイントの位置は関係ありません。
.TP
.B kill\-word  (M\-d)
.\"O Kill from point to the end of the current word, or if between
.\"O words, to the end of the next word.
.\"O Word boundaries are the same as those used by \fBforward\-word\fP.
ポイントから現在の単語の終わりまでをキルします。
ポイントが単語と単語の間であれば、後ろの単語の終わりまでをキルします。
単語の境界は \fBforward\-word\fP で使われているものと同じです。
.TP
.B backward\-kill\-word (M\-Rubout)
.\"O Kill the word behind point.
.\"O Word boundaries are the same as those used by \fBbackward\-word\fP.
ポイントの下にある単語をキルします。
単語の境界は \fBbackward\-word\fP で使われているものと同じです。
.TP
.B unix\-word\-rubout (C\-w)
.\"O Kill the word behind point, using white space as a word boundary.
.\"O The killed text is saved on the kill-ring.
ポイントの下にある単語をキルします。
その際には空白を単語の境界として用います。
キルされたテキストはキルリングに入ります。
.TP
.B delete\-horizontal\-space (M\-\e)
.\"O Delete all spaces and tabs around point.
ポイントの周りの空白とタブを全て削除します。
.TP
.B kill\-region
.\"O Kill the text in the current region.
現在のリージョン中のテキストをキルします。
.TP
.B copy\-region\-as\-kill
.\"O Copy the text in the region to the kill buffer.
リージョン中のテキストをキルバッファにコピーします。
.TP
.B copy\-backward\-word
.\"O Copy the word before point to the kill buffer.
.\"O The word boundaries are the same as \fBbackward\-word\fP.
ポイントの前の単語をキルバッファにコピーします。単語の境界は
\fBbackward\-word\fP と同じです。
.TP
.B copy\-forward\-word
.\"O Copy the word following point to the kill buffer.
.\"O The word boundaries are the same as \fBforward\-word\fP.
ポイントの後ろの単語をキルバッファにコピーします。単語の境界は
\fBforward\-word\fP と同じです。
.TP
.B yank (C\-y)
.\"O Yank the top of the kill ring into the buffer at point.
キルリングの先頭のテキストをポイントのあるバッファにヤンクします。
.TP
.B yank\-pop (M\-y)
.\"O Rotate the kill ring, and yank the new top.  Only works following
.\"O .B yank
.\"O or
.\"O .BR yank\-pop .
キルリングをローテートし、新たに先頭になったテキストをヤンクします。
.B yank
または
.B yank\-pop
の後にしか使えません。
.PD
.\"O .SS Numeric Arguments
.SS 数値の引き数
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B digit\-argument (M\-0, M\-1, ..., M\-\-)
.\"O Add this digit to the argument already accumulating, or start a new
.\"O argument.  M\-\- starts a negative argument.
既に蓄積中の引き数にこの数字を追加するか、
またはこの数字によって新しい引き数を始めます。
M\-\- を使うと、負の値を指定できます。
.TP
.B universal\-argument
.\"O This is another way to specify an argument.
.\"O If this command is followed by one or more digits, optionally with a
.\"O leading minus sign, those digits define the argument.
引き数を指定する別法です。
このコマンドの後に 1 つ以上の数字がある場合
(頭にマイナス記号を付けることもできます)、
これらの数字で引き数が定義されます。
.\"O If the command is followed by digits, executing
.\"O .B universal\-argument
.\"O again ends the numeric argument, but is otherwise ignored.
コマンドの後に数字を続けた場合、
.B universal\-argument
を再び実行すると数値の引き数を終了しますが、
そうでない場合は無視されます。
.\"O As a special case, if this command is immediately followed by a
.\"O character that is neither a digit or minus sign, the argument count
.\"O for the next command is multiplied by four.
特殊なケースとして、
このコマンドの直後に数字でもマイナス記号でもない文字がある場合には、
次のコマンドの引き数カウントは 4 倍にされます。
.\"O The argument count is initially one, so executing this function the
.\"O first time makes the argument count four, a second time makes the
.\"O argument count sixteen, and so on.
最初は引き数カウントは 1 なので、
この機能を一度実行すると引き数カウントは 4 になり、
次に実行すると引き数カウントは 16 になります。
それ以降も同様です。
.PD
.\"O .SS Completing
.SS 補完
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B complete (TAB)
.\"O Attempt to perform completion on the text before point.
.\"O .B Bash
.\"O attempts completion treating the text as a variable (if the
.\"O text begins with \fB$\fP), username (if the text begins with
.\"O \fB~\fP), hostname (if the text begins with \fB@\fP), or
.\"O command (including aliases and functions) in turn.  If none
.\"O of these produces a match, filename completion is attempted.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完を試みます。
.B bash
が補完を行う際にはテキストの扱いの種類を順に試しますが、
その順序は、変数 (テキストが \fB$\fP で始まる場合)、
ユーザ名 (テキストが \fB~\fP で始まる場合)、
ホスト名 (テキストが \fB@\fP で始まる場合)、
コマンド (エイリアスや関数も含みます) です。
これらのうちいずれにもマッチしない場合には、
ファイル名補完を試みます。
.TP
.B possible\-completions (M\-?)
.\"O List the possible completions of the text before point.
ポイントの前のテキストを補完して得られるものの候補を列挙します。
.TP
.B insert\-completions (M\-*)
.\"O Insert all completions of the text before point
.\"O that would have been generated by
.\"O \fBpossible\-completions\fP.
ポイントの前のテキストを補完して得られるものを全て挿入します。
挿入されるものは、\fBpossible\-completions\fP で列挙されるものと同じです。
.TP
.B menu\-complete
.\"O Similar to \fBcomplete\fP, but replaces the word to be completed
.\"O with a single match from the list of possible completions.
.\"O Repeated execution of \fBmenu\-complete\fP steps through the list
.\"O of possible completions, inserting each match in turn.
\fBcomplete\fP コマンドに似ていますが、
補完される単語を補完候補リストのうちの 1 つと置換します。
\fBmenu\-complete\fP を繰り返して実行すると、
補完の候補リストが次々と順番に挿入されます。
.\"O At the end of the list of completions, the bell is rung
.\"O (subject to the setting of \Bbell\-style\fP)
.\"O and the original text is restored.
補完リストの最後まで来るとベルが
(\fBbell\-style\fP の設定に基づいて)
鳴らされ、元のテキストに戻ります。
.\"O An argument of \fIn\fP moves \fIn\fP positions forward in the list
.\"O of matches; a negative argument may be used to move backward
.\"O through the list.
.\"O This command is intended to be bound to \fBTAB\fP, but is unbound
.\"O by default.
引き数 \fIn\fP を指定すると、リスト中の位置が \fIn\fP 個進みます。
負の引き数を指定すると、リスト中を逆向きに戻れます。
このコマンドは \fBTAB\fP に割り当てることを意図して用意されたものですが、
デフォルトでは割り当ては行われていません。
.TP
.B delete\-char\-or\-list
.\"O Deletes the character under the cursor if not at the beginning or
.\"O end of the line (like \fBdelete\-char\fP).
.\"O If at the end of the line, behaves identically to
.\"O \fBpossible\-completions\fP.
.\"O This command is unbound by default.
カーソルが行頭や行末に無ければ、カーソルの下の文字を削除します
(\fBdelete\-char\fP と同様です)。カーソルが行末にある場合は、
\fBpossible\-completions\fP と同じ動作をします。
このコマンドはデフォルトではキーに割り当てられていません。
.TP
.B complete\-filename (M\-/)
.\"O Attempt filename completion on the text before point.
ポイントの前のテキストについて、ファイル名の補完を試みます。
.TP
.B possible\-filename\-completions (C\-x /)
.\"O List the possible completions of the text before point,
.\"O treating it as a filename.
ポイントの前のテキストについて、補完の候補を列挙します。
テキストはファイル名として扱います。
.TP
.B complete\-username (M\-~)
.\"O Attempt completion on the text before point, treating
.\"O it as a username.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完を試みます。
テキストはユーザ名として扱います。
.TP
.B possible\-username\-completions (C\-x ~)
.\"O List the possible completions of the text before point,
.\"O treating it as a username.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完の候補を列挙します。
テキストはユーザ名として扱います。
.TP
.B complete\-variable (M\-$)
.\"O Attempt completion on the text before point, treating
.\"O it as a shell variable.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完を試みます。
テキストはシェル変数として扱います。
.TP
.B possible\-variable\-completions (C\-x $)
.\"O List the possible completions of the text before point,
.\"O treating it as a shell variable.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完の候補を列挙します。
テキストはシェル変数として扱います。
.TP
.B complete\-hostname (M\-@)
.\"O Attempt completion on the text before point, treating
.\"O it as a hostname.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完を試みます。
テキストはホスト名として扱います。
.TP
.B possible\-hostname\-completions (C\-x @)
.\"O List the possible completions of the text before point,
.\"O treating it as a hostname.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完の候補を列挙します。
テキストはホスト名として扱います。
.TP
.B complete\-command (M\-!)
.\"O Attempt completion on the text before point, treating
.\"O it as a command name.  Command completion attempts to
.\"O match the text against aliases, reserved words, shell
.\"O functions, shell builtins, and finally executable filenames,
.\"O in that order.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完を試みます。
テキストはコマンド名として扱います。
コマンド補完の際にマッチングを試みる順序は、
エイリアス、予約語、シェル関数、シェルの組み込みコマンド、
実行ファイルです。
.TP
.B possible\-command\-completions (C\-x !)
.\"O List the possible completions of the text before point,
.\"O treating it as a command name.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完の候補を列挙します。
テキストはコマンド名として扱います。
.TP
.B dynamic\-complete\-history (M\-TAB)
.\"O Attempt completion on the text before point, comparing
.\"O the text against lines from the history list for possible
.\"O completion matches.
ポイントの前のテキストについて補完を試みます。
テキストの比較が行われるのは、
履歴リスト中の行のうち補完の候補となるものです。
.TP
.B complete\-into\-braces (M\-{)
.\"O Perform filename completion and insert the list of possible completions
.\"O enclosed within braces so the list is available to the shell (see
.\"O .B Brace Expansion
.\"O above).
ファイル名補完を実行し、補完の候補リストを挿入します。
シェルから利用可能なリストとなるように、
返される候補はブレースで括られます (前述の
.B ブレース展開
を参照)。
.PD
.\"O .SS Keyboard Macros
.SS キーボードマクロ
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B start\-kbd\-macro (C\-x (\^)
.\"O Begin saving the characters typed into the current keyboard macro.
現在のキーボードマクロに対して入力される文字列の保存を開始します。
.TP
.B end\-kbd\-macro (C\-x )\^)
.\"O Stop saving the characters typed into the current keyboard macro
.\"O and store the definition.
現在のキーボードマクロに対して入力された文字列の保存を終了し、
この定義を格納します。
.TP
.B call\-last\-kbd\-macro (C\-x e)
.\"O Re-execute the last keyboard macro defined, by making the characters
.\"O in the macro appear as if typed at the keyboard.
最後に定義されたキーボードマクロを再実行します。
再実行は、
マクロ中の文字列をキーボードでの入力と同様に出力することによって行います。
.PD
.\"O .SS Miscellaneous
.SS その他
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B re\-read\-init\-file (C\-x C\-r)
.\"O Read in the contents of the \fIinputrc\fP file, and incorporate
.\"O any bindings or variable assignments found there.
\fIinputrc\fP ファイルの内容を読み込み、
このファイル中の割り当てや変数設定を取り込みます。
.TP
.B abort (C\-g)
.\"O Abort the current editing command and
.\"O ring the terminal's bell (subject to the setting of
.\"O .BR bell\-style ).
現在の編集行を捨て、端末のベルを鳴らします (この動作は
.B bell\-style
の設定に従って行います)。
.TP
.B do\-uppercase\-version (M\-a, M\-b, M\-\fIx\fP, ...)
.\"O If the metafied character \fIx\fP is lowercase, run the command
.\"O that is bound to the corresponding uppercase character.
メタ文字と共に入力された文字 \fIx\fP が小文字であれば、
これに対応する大文字に割り当てられているコマンドを実行します。
.TP
.B prefix\-meta (ESC)
.\"O Metafy the next character typed.
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B ESC
.\"O .B f
.\"O is equivalent to
.\"O .BR Meta\-f .
次に入力される文字を、
メタプレフィックスされたことにします。
.SM
.B ESC
.B f
は
.B Meta\-f
と同じ意味です。
.TP
.B undo (C\-_, C\-x C\-u)
.\"O Incremental undo, separately remembered for each line.
インクリメンタルアンドゥを行います。
これは行ごとに別々に記憶されています。
.TP
.B revert\-line (M\-r)
.\"O Undo all changes made to this line.  This is like executing the
.\"O .B undo
.\"O command enough times to return the line to its initial state.
この行に対して行った変更を全て取り消します。
このコマンドは、行が初期状態に戻るまで
.B undo
コマンドを実行するようなものです。
.TP
.B tilde\-expand (M\-&)
.\"O Perform tilde expansion on the current word.
現在の単語についてチルダ展開を実行します。
.TP
.B set\-mark (C\-@, M\-<space>)
.\"O Set the mark to the point.  If a
.\"O numeric argument is supplied, the mark is set to that position.
ポイントにマークを設定します。
数字の引き数が与えられた場合には、
マークにはその位置が設定されます。
.TP
.B exchange\-point\-and\-mark (C\-x C\-x)
.\"O Swap the point with the mark.  The current cursor position is set to
.\"O the saved position, and the old cursor position is saved as the mark.
ポイントをマークと入れ換えます。
現在のカーソル位置は保存されている位置となり、
古いカーソル位置がマークとして保存されます。
.TP
.B character\-search (C\-])
.\"O A character is read and point is moved to the next occurrence of that
.\"O character.  A negative count searches for previous occurrences.
文字を 1 つ読み込み、
その文字が次に現われる場所にポイントを移動させます。
負のカウントを与えると、その文字が前に現われた場所を探します。
.TP
.B character\-search\-backward (M\-C\-])
.\"O A character is read and point is moved to the previous occurrence of that
.\"O character.  A negative count searches for subsequent occurrences.
文字を 1 つ読み込み、
その文字が前に現われた場所にポイントを移動させます。
負のカウントを与えると、その文字が次に現われる場所を探します。
.TP
.B insert\-comment (M\-#)
.\"O The value of the readline
.\"O .B comment\-begin
.\"O variable is inserted at the beginning of the current line, and the line
.\"O is accepted as if a newline had been typed.  The default value of
.\"O \fBcomment\-begin\fP causes this command to make the current line
.\"O a shell comment.
まず readline の
.B comment\-begin
変数の値が現在の行の先頭に挿入され、
次に改行が打ち込まれたのと同じように行の入力が行われます。
\fBcomment\-begin\fP のデフォルト値によって、
このコマンドは現在の行をシェルのコメントとします。
.TP
.B glob\-expand\-word (C\-x *)
.\"O The word before point is treated as a pattern for pathname expansion,
.\"O and the list of matching file names is inserted, replacing the word.
ポイントの前の単語がパス名展開のパターンとして扱われ、
この単語と置き換えられる形でマッチするファイル名のリストが挿入されます。
.TP
.B glob\-list\-expansions (C\-x g)
.\"O The list of expansions that would have been generated by
.\"O .B glob\-expand\-word
.\"O is displayed, and the line is redrawn.
.B glob\-expand\-word
で生成されるのと同じ展開結果のリストが表示され、
行が再描画されます。
.TP
.B dump\-functions
.\"O Print all of the functions and their key bindings to the
.\"O readline output stream.  If a numeric argument is supplied,
.\"O the output is formatted in such a way that it can be made part
.\"O of an \fIinputrc\fP file.
機能とそのキー割り当てを全て、
readline の出力ストリームに出力します。
数値の引き数を与えると、
出力は \fIinputrc\fP に書き込める形に整形されます。
.TP
.B dump\-variables
.\"O Print all of the settable readline variables and their values to the
.\"O readline output stream.  If a numeric argument is supplied,
.\"O the output is formatted in such a way that it can be made part
.\"O of an \fIinputrc\fP file.
設定可能な readline の変数とその値を全て
readline の出力ストリームに出力します。
数値の引き数を与えると、
出力は \fIinputrc\fP に書き込める形に整形されます。
.TP
.B dump\-macros
.\"O Print all of the readline key sequences bound to macros and the
.\"O strings they ouput.  If a numeric argument is supplied,
.\"O the output is formatted in such a way that it can be made part
.\"O of an \fIinputrc\fP file.
マクロとマクロが出力する文字列に割り当てられた
readline のキーシーケンスを全て出力します。
数値の引き数を与えると、
出力は \fIinputrc\fP に書き込める形に整形されます。
.\"O 原文の ouput は output の typo でしょう
.TP
.B display\-shell\-version (C\-x C\-v)
.\"O Display version information about the current instance of
.\"O .BR bash .
現在実行している
.B bash
のバージョン情報を表示します。
.PD
.\"O .SS Programmable Completion
.SS プログラム補完
.PP
.\"O When word completion is attempted for an argument to a command for
.\"O which a completion specification (a \fIcompspec\fP) has been defined
.\"O using the \fBcomplete\fP builtin (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS"
.\"O below), the programmable completion facilities are invoked.
\fBcomplete\fP 組み込みコマンドで
補完仕様 (\fIcompspec\fP) が定義されているコマンドに対して
引き数の単語補完が試みられると、
プログラム可能な補完の機能が呼び出されます
(\fBcomplete\fP 組み込みコマンドについては、後述する
.SM
.B "シェルの組み込みコマンド"
を参照)。
.PP
.\"O First, the command name is identified.
.\"O If a compspec has been defined for that command, the
.\"O compspec is used to generate the list of possible completions for the word.
.\"O If the command word is a full pathname, a compspec for the full
.\"O pathname is searched for first.
.\"O If no compspec is found for the full pathname, an attempt is made to
.\"O find a compspec for the portion following the final slash.
まず、コマンド名が特定されます。
そのコマンドに対して補完仕様が定義されていれば、
それがその単語の補完候補のリスト作成に使われます。
コマンドの単語がフルパス名であれば、
最初にフルパス名の補完仕様が検索されます。
フルパス名の補完仕様が見つからなかった場合は、
最後のスラッシュ以降の部分に対して該当する補完仕様を見つけようとします。
.PP
.\"O Once a compspec has been found, it is used to generate the list of
.\"O matching words.
.\"O If a compspec is not found, the default \fBbash\fP completion as
.\"O described above under \fBCompleting\fP is performed.
補完仕様が見つかると、
それはマッチする単語のリストを作成するために使用されます。
補完仕様が見つからなかった場合は、
前述の \fB補完\fP で説明したようなデフォルトの
\fBbash\fP の補完が行われます。
.PP
.\"O First, the actions specified by the compspec are used.
.\"O Only matches which are prefixed by the word being completed are
.\"O returned.
.\"O When the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-d
.\"O option is used for filename or directory name completion, the shell
.\"O variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FIGNORE
.\"O is used to filter the matches.
まず、補完仕様で指定された動作が用いられます。
補完される単語の前置部分にマッチするものだけが返されます。
ファイル名やディレクトリ名の補完に
.B \-f
や
.B \-d
オプションが使用された場合は、シェル変数
.SM
.B FIGNORE
がマッチのフィルタとして使用されます。
.PP
.\"O Any completions specified by a filename expansion pattern to the
.\"O \fB\-G\fP option are generated next.
.\"O The words generated by the pattern need not match the word
.\"O being completed.
.\"O The
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B GLOBIGNORE
.\"O shell variable is not used to filter the matches, but the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FIGNORE
.\"O variable is used.
続いて
\fB\-G\fP オプションによって指定された
ファイル名展開パターンの補完が生成されます。
パターンによって生成された単語は、
補完される単語とマッチする必要はありません。
.SM
.B GLOBIGNORE
シェル変数はマッチのフィルタとしては使われませんが、
.SM
.B FIGNORE
変数は使用されます。
.PP
.\"O Next, the string specified as the argument to the \fB\-W\fP option
.\"O is considered.
.\"O The string is first split using the characters in the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O special variable as delimiters.
.\"O Shell quoting is honored.
.\"O Each word is then expanded using
.\"O brace expansion, tilde expansion, parameter and variable expansion,
.\"O command substitution, arithmetic expansion, and pathname expansion,
.\"O as described above under 
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR EXPANSION .
.\"O The results are split using the rules described above under
.\"O \fBWord Splitting\fP.
.\"O The results of the expansion are prefix-matched against the word being
.\"O completed, and the matching words become the possible completions.
次に、
\fB\-W\fP オプションで指定された引き数の文字列が考慮されます。
文字列は、最初に
.SM
.B IFS
特殊変数の文字を区切り文字として分割されます。
シェルのクォート処理は考慮されます。
それぞれの単語は、前述の
.SM
.B 展開
で示したように、ブレース展開、チルダ展開、パラメータと変数の展開、
コマンド置換、算術式展開、パス名展開が行われます。
結果は、前述の\fB単語の分割\fPで示した規則によって分割されます。
展開の結果は補完される単語の前置部分とマッチが行われ、
マッチした単語が補完候補となります。
.PP
.\"O After these matches have been generated, any shell function or command
.\"O specified with the \fB\-F\fP and \fB\-C\fP options is invoked.
.\"O When the command or function is invoked, the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B COMP_LINE
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B COMP_POINT
.\"O variables are assigned values as described above under
.\"O \fBShell Variables\fP.
.\"O If a shell function is being invoked, the 
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B COMP_WORDS
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B COMP_CWORD
.\"O variables are also set.
.\"O When the function or command is invoked, the first argument is the
.\"O name of the command whose arguments are being completed, the
.\"O second argument is the word being completed, and the third argument
.\"O is the word preceding the word being completed on the current command line.
.\"O No filtering of the generated completions against the word being completed
.\"O is performed; the function or command has complete freedom in generating
.\"O the matches.
これらのマッチが生成された後、
シェル関数や \fB\-F\fP や
\fB\-C\fP オプションで指定されたコマンドが呼び出されます。
コマンドや関数が呼び出されるときは、
.SM
.B COMP_LINE
と
.SM
.B COMP_POINT
変数に後述の\fBシェル変数\fPで示すように値が設定されます。
シェル関数が呼び出される場合は、
.SM
.B COMP_WORDS
と
.SM
.B COMP_CWORD
変数も設定されます。
関数やコマンドが呼び出されるときは、
最初の引き数は引き数が補完されるコマンドの名前、
二番目の引き数は補完される単語、
三番目の引き数は現在のコマンドラインで補完中の単語の
前に置かれる単語となります。
補完される単語に対して生成された補完の候補はフィルタリングされません。
関数やコマンドは生成されたマッチとは無関係に補完されます。
.PP
.\"O Any function specified with \fB\-F\fP is invoked first.
.\"O The function may use any of the shell facilities, including the
.\"O \fBcompgen\fP builtin described below, to generate the matches.
.\"O It must put the possible completions in the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B COMPREPLY
.\"O array variable.
\fB\-F\fP で指定された関数がまず呼び出されます。
関数は、後述する \fBcompgen\fP 組み込みコマンドを含めた、
全てのシェルの機能を使ってマッチを生成します。
補完候補は必ず
.SM
.B COMPREPLY
配列変数に格納されます。
.PP
.\"O Next, any command specified with the \fB\-C\fP option is invoked
.\"O in an environment equivalent to command substitution.
.\"O It should print a list of completions, one per line, to the
.\"O standard output.
.\"O Backslash may be used to escape a newline, if necessary.
続いて \fB\-C\fP オプションで指定されたコマンドが呼び出され、
環境変数をコマンド置換します。
このコマンドは、補完候補を 1 行にひとつずつ標準出力に出力します。
必要があれば、バックスラッシュが改行をエスケープするために使用されます。
.PP
.\"O After all of the possible completions are generated, any filter
.\"O specified with the \fB\-X\fP option is applied to the list.
.\"O The filter is a pattern as used for pathname expansion; a \fB&\fP
.\"O in the pattern is replaced with the text of the word being completed.
.\"O A literal \fB&\fP may be escaped with a backslash; the backslash
.\"O is removed before attempting a match.
.\"O Any completion that matches the pattern will be removed from the list.
.\"O A leading \fB!\fP negates the pattern; in this case any completion
.\"O not matching the pattern will be removed.
全ての補完候補が生成された後で、
\fB\-X\fP オプションで指定されたフィルタが補完候補に作用します。
フィルタは、パス名展開で使用されたようなパターンです。パターン中の
\fB&\fP は補完される単語に置換されます。
文字通りの \fB&\fP はバックスラッシュでエスケープします。
バックスラッシュはマッチを試みる前に削除されます。
パターンにマッチした補完は候補から削除されます。
先行する \fB!\fP はパターンを否定します。
この場合、パターンにマッチしなかった補完が削除されます。
.PP
.\"O Finally, any prefix and suffix specified with the \fB\-P\fP and \fB\-S\fP
.\"O options are added to each member of the completion list, and the result is
.\"O returned to the readline completion code as the list of possible
.\"O completions.
最後に、\fB\-P\fP と \fB\-S\fP オプションで指定された
前置部分と後置部分が補完候補のそれぞれに加えられます。
そして結果が readline 補完コードに補完候補のリストとして返されます。
.PP
.\"O If the previously-applied actions do not generate any matches, and the
.\"O \fB\-o dirnames\fP option was supplied to \fBcomplete\fP when the
.\"O compspec was defined, directory name completion is attempted.
直前に行われた動作が何にもマッチせず、
補完仕様が定義されたときに
.B \-o dirname
オプションが
.B complete
に与えられていれば、
ディレクトリ名への補完が試みられます。
.PP
.\"O By default, if a compspec is found, whatever it generates is returned
.\"O to the completion code as the full set of possible completions.
.\"O The default \fBbash\fP completions are not attempted, and the readline
.\"O default of filename completion is disabled.
デフォルトでは、補完仕様が見つかった場合、
それが生成したものがなんであれ、
可能性のある補完すべてのリストとして、補完コードに返されます。
デフォルトの \fBbash\fP 補完は試みられず、
readline のデフォルトのファイル名補完は無効になります。
.\"O If the \fB-o default\fP option was supplied to \fBcomplete\fP when the
.\"O compspec was defined, readline's default completion will be performed
.\"O if the compspec generates no matches.
補完仕様の定義時に
.B \-o default
オプションが
.B complete
に与えられていれば、
補完仕様が何にもマッチしなければ
readline のデフォルトの補完が行われます。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴 (HISTORY)
.\"O When the
.\"O .B \-o history
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin is enabled, the shell provides access to the
.\"O \fIcommand history\fP,
.\"O the list of commands previously typed.
.B \-o history
オプションを組み込みコマンドの
.B set
で有効にすると、
\fIコマンド履歴 (command history)\fP (以前に入力したコマンドのリスト)
にアクセスできるようになります。
.\"O The value of the \fBHISTSIZE\fP variable is used as the
.\"O number of commands to save in a history list.
変数 \fBHISTSIZE\fP の値が、
履歴リストに保存するコマンドの数になります。
.\"O The text of the last
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTSIZE
.\"O commands (default 500) is saved.  The shell
.\"O stores each command in the history list prior to parameter and
.\"O variable expansion (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EXPANSION
.\"O above) but after history expansion is performed, subject to the
.\"O values of the shell variables
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTIGNORE
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR HISTCONTROL .
過去に入力したコマンドのうち、最新
.SM
.B HISTSIZE
個分 (デフォルトは 500 個) のテキストが保存されます。
シェルは各コマンドを、パラメータ展開や変数展開
(前述の
.SM
.B 展開
を参照) を行う前のかたちで履歴リストに格納します。
ただし、履歴展開は実行してから格納します。
履歴展開はシェル変数
.SM
.B HISTIGNORE
と
.SM
.BR HISTCONTROL
の値に従って実行されます。
.PP
.\"O On startup, the history is initialized from the file named by
.\"O the variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTFILE
.\"O (default \fI~/.bash_history\fP).
起動時に、履歴は
.SM
.B HISTFILE
変数 (デフォルトは \fI~/.bash_history\fP)
が示すファイルの内容で初期化されます。
.\"O The file named by the value of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTFILE
.\"O is truncated, if necessary, to contain no more than
.\"O the number of lines specified by the value of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR HISTFILESIZE .
.SM
.B HISTFILE
で指定されたファイルは、
.SM
.B HISTFILESIZE
で指定された行数を越えないように、必要に応じて切り詰められます。
.\"O When an interactive shell exits, the last
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTSIZE
.\"O lines are copied from the history list to
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR HISTFILE .
対話的なシェルが終了する際には、最近の
.SM
.B HISTSIZE
個の行が履歴リストから
.SM
.B HISTFILE
にコピーされます。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B histappend
.\"O shell option is enabled
.\"O (see the description of
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS"
.\"O below), the lines are appended to the history file,
.\"O otherwise the history file is overwritten.
シェルオプションの
.B histappend
(
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
の項の
.B shopt
の説明を参照) が有効になっていると、
これらの行は履歴ファイルの末尾に追加されます。
このオプションが無効ならば、履歴ファイルは上書きされます。
.\"O If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTFILE
.\"O is unset, or if the history file is unwritable, the history is
.\"O not saved.  After saving the history, the history file is truncated
.\"O to contain no more than
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTFILESIZE
.\"O lines.  If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTFILESIZE
.\"O is not set, no truncation is performed.
.SM
.B HISTFILE
が設定されていないか、履歴ファイルが書き込めない状態だと、
履歴は保存されません。
履歴の保存を行った後には、履歴ファイルは行数が
.SM
.B HISTFILESIZE
行を越えないように切り詰められます。
.SM
.B HISTFILESIZE
が設定されていなければ、切り詰めは行われません。
.PP
.\"O The builtin command
.\"O .B fc
.\"O (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below) may be used to list or edit and re-execute a portion of
.\"O the history list.
組み込みコマンド
.B fc
(後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照) を用いると、履歴リストの一部をリスト・編集して再実行できます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B history
.\"O builtin may be used to display or modify the history list and
.\"O manipulate the history file.
.\"O When using command-line editing, search commands
.\"O are available in each editing mode that provide access to the
.\"O history list.
組み込みコマンドの
.B history
を用いると、履歴リストを表示・編集したり、
履歴ファイルを操作できます。
コマンドラインを編集する際には、
各編集モードでいろいろな検索コマンドが利用でき、
履歴リストへアクセスできます。
.PP
.\"O The shell allows control over which commands are saved on the history
.\"O list.  The
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTCONTROL
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTIGNORE
.\"O variables may be set to cause the shell to save only a subset of the
.\"O commands entered.
このシェルでは、どのコマンドが履歴リストに保存されるかを制御できます。
.SM
.B HISTCONTROL
変数と
.SM
.B HISTIGNORE
変数を設定すると、
シェルは入力されたコマンドの一部しか保存しなくなります。
.\"O The
.\"O .B cmdhist
.\"O shell option, if enabled, causes the shell to attempt to save each
.\"O line of a multi-line command in the same history entry, adding
.\"O semicolons where necessary to preserve syntactic correctness.
シェルオプションの
.B cmdhist
を有効にすると、シェルは複数行に別れているコマンドの各行を
同じ履歴エントリに保存しようとします。
この際には、文法的な正しさを保つためにセミコロンが必要に応じて追加されます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B lithist
.\"O shell option causes the shell to save the command with embedded newlines
.\"O instead of semicolons.  See the description of the
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O builtin below under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS"
.\"O for information on setting and unsetting shell options.
シェルオプションの
.B lithist
を有効にすると、このシェルは行の途中に
セミコロンではなく改行文字を置く形でコマンドを保存します。
シェルオプションの設定と設定取り消しについては、後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
における説明を参照してください。
.\"O .SH "HISTORY EXPANSION"
.SH 履歴の展開
.PP
.\"O The shell supports a history expansion feature that
.\"O is similar to the history expansion in
.\"O .BR csh.
.\"O This section describes what syntax features are available.  This
.\"O feature is enabled by default for interactive shells, and can be
.\"O disabled using the
.\"O .B \+H
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS
.\"O below).  Non-interactive shells do not perform history expansion
.\"O by default.
このシェルは、
.B csh
の履歴展開と同じような機能をサポートしています。
このセクションでは、履歴展開で使用できる記法・機能を説明します。
この機能は対話的シェルならばデフォルトで有効になっていますが、
組み込みコマンド
.B set
の
.B \+H
オプション (後述の
.SM
.B シェルの組み込みコマンド
を参照) で無効にできます。
非対話的シェルの場合は、デフォルトでは履歴展開は行われません。
.PP
.\"O History expansions introduce words from the history list into
.\"O the input stream, making it easy to repeat commands, insert the
.\"O arguments to a previous command into the current input line, or
.\"O fix errors in previous commands quickly.
履歴展開は、履歴リスト中の単語を入力ストリームに入れます。
この機能を利用すると、コマンドを繰り返したり、
前のコマンドで指定したオプションを現在の入力行に挿入したり、
前のコマンドの誤りを手早く直したり、
といったことが簡単にできるようになります。
.PP
.\"O History expansion is performed immediately after a complete line
.\"O is read, before the shell breaks it into words.
.\"O It takes place in two parts.
.\"O The first is to determine which line from the history list
.\"O to use during substitution.
.\"O The second is to select portions of that line for inclusion into
.\"O the current one.
履歴展開が実行されるのは入力行全体を読み込んだ直後であり、
シェルが行を単語に分割するよりも前です。
履歴展開の動作は 2 段階で行われます。
まず最初に、置換に使う行を履歴リストから選びます。
次に、その行のどの部分を現在の行に書き込むかを選択します。
.\"O The line selected from the history is the \fIevent\fP,
.\"O and the portions of that line that are acted upon are \fIwords\fP.
.\"O Various \fImodifiers\fP are available to manipulate the selected words.
履歴リストから選ばれた行は\fIイベント (event)\fP と呼ばれ、
この行のうち動作の対象となる部分を\fI単語列 (words)\fPと呼びます。
様々な\fI修飾子 (modifier)\fP が利用でき、
選択された単語列の操作が可能になっています。
.\"O The line is broken into words in the same fashion as when reading input,
.\"O so that several \fImetacharacter\fP-separated words surrounded by
.\"O quotes are considered one word.
行の単語への分割は入力を読み込む時と同じように行われるので、
\fIメタ文字\fPで区切られた複数の単語をクォートで括ったものは
1 つの単語と見なされます。
.\"O History expansions are introduced by the appearance of the
.\"O history expansion character, which is \^\fB!\fP\^ by default.
.\"O Only backslash (\^\fB\e\fP\^) and single quotes can quote
.\"O the history expansion character.
履歴展開が行われるのは、履歴展開文字が現われた時です。
履歴展開文字はデフォルトでは \^\fB!\fP\^ です。
履歴展開文字をクォートできるのは、
バックスラッシュ (\^\fB\e\fP\^) とシングルクォートだけです。
.PP
.\"O Several shell options settable with the
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O builtin may be used to tailor the behavior of history expansion.
組み込みコマンドの
.B shopt
を用いて、何種類かあるシェルオプションを設定すると、
履歴展開の動作を調整できます。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B histverify
.\"O shell option is enabled (see the description of the
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O builtin), and
.\"O .B readline
.\"O is being used, history substitutions are not immediately passed to
.\"O the shell parser.
シェルオプションの
.B histverify
が有効で (組み込みコマンド
.B shopt
の説明を参照)、かつ
.B readline
が使われている場合には、
履歴置換を行った結果はすぐにはシェルのパーザに渡されません。
.\"O Instead, the expanded line is reloaded into the
.\"O .B readline
.\"O editing buffer for further modification.
展開された行は
.B readline
の編集バッファに再び読み込まれ、さらに編集が行える状態になります。
.\"O If
.\"O .B readline
.\"O is being used, and the
.\"O .B histreedit
.\"O shell option is enabled, a failed history substitution will be reloaded
.\"O into the
.\"O .B readline
.\"O editing buffer for correction.
.B readline
を使用しており、かつシェルオプションの
.B histreedit
が有効である場合、履歴置換が失敗してもその結果は
.B readline
の編集バッファに再び読み込まれ、訂正できる状態となります。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B history
.\"O builtin command may be used to see what a history expansion will
.\"O do before using it.
組み込みコマンド
.B history
の
.B \-p
オプションを使うと、実際に履歴展開を行う前に、
どのように展開されるのかを見ることができます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B history
.\"O builtin may be used to add commands to the end of the history list
.\"O without actually executing them, so that they are available for
.\"O subsequent recall.
組み込みコマンド
.B history
の
.B \-s
オプションを使うと、
コマンドを履歴リストの末尾に (実際の実行はせずに) 追加できます。
追加したコマンドは、後で再呼び出しできます。
.PP
.\"O The shell allows control of the various characters used by the
.\"O history expansion mechanism (see the description of
.\"O .B histchars
.\"O above under
.\"O .BR "Shell Variables" ).
このシェルでは、履歴展開機構で使ういろいろな文字を制御できます
(前述の
.BR シェル変数
の項目における
.B histchars
の説明を参照)。
.\"O .SS Event Designators
.SS イベント指示子 (Event Designator)
.PP
.\"O An event designator is a reference to a command line entry in the
.\"O history list.
イベント指示子は、
履歴リスト中のコマンドラインエントリを参照するものです。
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.B !
.\"O Start a history substitution, except when followed by a
.\"O .BR blank ,
.\"O newline, = or (.
履歴置換を開始します。ただし、\fBブランク文字\fR、
改行文字、=, ( のいずれかが後に続く場合は除きます。
.TP
.B !\fIn\fR
.\"O Refer to command line
.\"O .IR n .
.I n
行目のコマンドラインを参照します。
.TP
.B !\-\fIn\fR
.\"O Refer to the current command line minus
.\"O .IR n .
現在から
.I n
行前のコマンドラインを参照します。
.TP
.B !!
.\"O Refer to the previous command.  This is a synonym for `!\-1'.
1 行前のコマンドラインを参照します。`!\-1' と同義です。
.TP
.B !\fIstring\fR
.\"O Refer to the most recent command starting with 
.\"O .IR string .
.I string
で始まるコマンドのうち、一番現在に近いところで実行したものを参照します。
.TP
.B !?\fIstring\fR\fB[?]\fR
.\"O Refer to the most recent command containing
.\"O .IR string .
.\"O The trailing \fB?\fP may be omitted if
.\"O .I string
.\"O is followed immediately by a newline.
.I string
を含むコマンドのうち、一番現在に近いところで実行したものを参照します。
.I string
の直後が改行文字ならば、最後の \fB?\fP は省略しても構いません。
.TP
.B \d\s+2^\s-2\u\fIstring1\fP\d\s+2^\s-2\u\fIstring2\fP\d\s+2^\s-2\u
.\"O Quick substitution.  Repeat the last command, replacing
.\"O .I string1
.\"O with
.\"O .IR string2 .
.\"O Equivalent to
.\"O ``!!:s/\fIstring1\fP/\fIstring2\fP/''
.\"O (see \fBModifiers\fP below).
簡易置換。
.I string1
を
.IR string2
に置換して直前のコマンドを繰り返します。
``!!:s/\fIstring1\fP/\fIstring2\fP/'' と同義です
(後述の\fB修飾子\fPを参照)。
.TP
.B !#
.\"O The entire command line typed so far.
今までのところまでに打ち込んだコマンドライン全体です。
.PD
.\"O .SS Word Designators
.SS 単語指示子 (Word Designators)
.PP
.\"O Word designators are used to select desired words from the event.
.\"O A 
.\"O .B :
.\"O separates the event specification from the word designator.
.\"O It may be omitted if the word designator begins with a
.\"O .BR ^ ,
.\"O .BR $ ,
.\"O .BR * ,
.\"O .BR \- ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR % .
.\"O Words are numbered from the beginning of the line,
.\"O with the first word being denoted by 0 (zero).
.\"O Words are inserted into the current line separated by single spaces.
単語指示子 (word designator) は、
イベントから欲しい単語を選ぶ時に用いられます。
イベント指定と単語指示子のセパレータには
.B :
を用います。
単語指示子が
.BR ^ ,
.BR $ ,
.BR * ,
.BR \- ,
.B %
のいずれかで始まる場合には、このセパレータは省略できます。
単語には行の先頭から番号が振られます。
先頭の単語が 0 番目になります。
単語は現在の行に、空白 1 つで区切られて挿入されます。
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.\"O .B 0 (zero)
.B 0 (ゼロ)
.\"O The zeroth word.  For the shell, this is the command
.\"O word.
0 番目の単語。このシェルにとっては、これはコマンドを表す単語です。
.TP
.I n
.\"O The \fIn\fRth word.
\fIn\fR 番目の単語。
.TP
.B ^
.\"O The first argument.  That is, word 1.
最初の引き数。つまり 1 番目の単語です。
.TP
.B $
.\"O The last argument.
最後の引き数。
.TP
.B %
.\"O The word matched by the most recent `?\fIstring\fR?' search.
`?\fIstring\fR?' 検索にマッチする、一番現在に近い単語。
.TP
.I x\fB\-\fPy
.\"O A range of words; `\-\fIy\fR' abbreviates `0\-\fIy\fR'.
単語の範囲。`0\-\fIy\fR' の省略形として `\-\fIy\fR' が使えます。
.TP
.B *
.\"O All of the words but the zeroth.  This is a synonym
.\"O for `\fI1\-$\fP'.  It is not an error to use
.\"O .B *
.\"O if there is just one
.\"O word in the event; the empty string is returned in that case.
0 番目を除く全ての単語。これは `\fI1\-$\fP' の別表現です。
イベント中に 1 つしか単語が現われないときに
.B *
を使ってもエラーにはなりません。
このような場合には空文字列が返されます。
.TP
.B x*
.\"O Abbreviates \fIx\-$\fP.
\fIx\-$\fP の省略形です。
.TP
.B x\-
.\"O Abbreviates \fIx\-$\fP like \fBx*\fP, but omits the last word.
\fBx*\fP と同様に \fIx\-$\fP の省略形ですが、
ただし最後の単語は含みません。
.PD
.PP
.\"O If a word designator is supplied without an event specification, the
.\"O previous command is used as the event.
イベント指定なしに単語指示子が与えられた場合、
直前のコマンドがイベントとして使われます。
.\"O .SS Modifiers
.SS 修飾子 (Modifiers)
.PP
.\"O After the optional word designator, there may appear a sequence of
.\"O one or more of the following modifiers, each preceded by a `:'.
単語指示子 (省略可能) の後には、
以下に示す修飾子を、1 個以上のシーケンスのかたちで置けます。
それぞれの修飾子の前には `:' をつけます。
.PP
.PD 0
.PP
.TP
.B h
.\"O Remove a trailing file name component, leaving only the head.
パス名から末尾にある部分 (ファイル名) を取り除き、
前の方 (ディレクトリ部) だけを残します。
.TP
.B t
.\"O Remove all leading file name components, leaving the tail.
パス名から前の方 (ディレクトリ部) を取り除き、
末尾にある部分 (ファイル名) だけを残します。
.TP
.B r
.\"O Remove a trailing suffix of the form \fI.xxx\fP, leaving the
.\"O basename.
末尾にある \fI.xxx\fP 形式のサフィックスを取り除き、
ベース名 (basename) だけを残します。
.TP
.B e
.\"O Remove all but the trailing suffix.
末尾のサフィックスだけを残して、全ての部分を取り除きます。
.TP
.B p
.\"O Print the new command but do not execute it.
新しいコマンドを表示しますが、実行はしません。
.TP
.B q
.\"O Quote the substituted words, escaping further substitutions.
置換が行われた単語をクォートし、それ以上の置換が行われないようにします。
.TP
.B x
.\"O Quote the substituted words as with
.\"O .BR q ,
.\"O but break into words at
.\"O .B blanks
.\"O and newlines.
.B q
と同じように置換後の単語をクォートしますが、
.B 空白文字
と改行文字のところで単語に分割します。
.TP
.B s/\fIold\fP/\fInew\fP/
.\"O Substitute
.\"O .I new
.\"O for the first occurrence of
.\"O .I old
.\"O in the event line.  Any delimiter can be used in place of /.  The
.\"O final delimiter is optional if it is the last character of the
.\"O event line.  The delimiter may be quoted in
.\"O .I old
.\"O and
.\"O .I new
.\"O with a single backslash.  If & appears in
.\"O .IR new ,
.\"O it is replaced by
.\"O .IR old .
イベント行で最初に現われた
.I old
を
.I new
に置き換えます。/ の代わりに任意の区切り文字を使うこともできます。
最後の区切り文字がイベント行の最後の文字ならば、
これは省略できます。
.I old
と
.I new
の中では、
バックスラッシュ 1 つでクォートすれば区切り文字も使えます。
.I new 
に & が含まれている場合には、これは
.I old
に置き換えられます。
.\"O A single backslash will quote the &.  If
.\"O .I old
.\"O is null, it is set to the last
.\"O .I old
.\"O substituted, or, if no previous history substitutions took place,
.\"O the last
.\"O .I string
.\"O in a
.\"O .B !?\fIstring\fR\fB[?]\fR
.\"O search.
バックスラッシュ 1 つを前に置けば & をクォートできます。
.I old
が空文字列ならば、これには前回に置換された
.I old
が設定されます。
以前に履歴置換が全く行われていない場合には、現在に一番近い
.B !?\fIstring\fR\fB[?]\fR
の検索で使われた
.I string
が設定されます。
.TP
.B &
.\"O Repeat the previous substitution.
直前の置換を繰り返します。
.TP
.B g
.\"O Cause changes to be applied over the entire event line.  This is
.\"O used in conjunction with `\fB:s\fP' (e.g., `\fB:gs/\fIold\fP/\fInew\fP/\fR')
.\"O or `\fB:&\fP'.  If used with
.\"O `\fB:s\fP', any delimiter can be used
.\"O in place of /, and the final delimiter is optional
.\"O if it is the last character of the event line.
変更をイベント行全体に適用します。
これは `\fB:s\fP' と組み合わせて使われます
(例:`\fB:gs/\fIold\fP/\fInew\fP/\fR')。
`\fB:s\fP' と一緒に使った場合には、
/ の代わりに任意の区切り文字を使えます。
また最後の区切り文字がイベント行の最後の文字ならば、
これは省略できます。
.PD
.\"O .SH "SHELL BUILTIN COMMANDS"
.SH シェルの組み込みコマンド
.\" start of bash_builtins
.zZ
.PP
.\"O Unless otherwise noted, each builtin command documented in this
.\"O section as accepting options preceded by
.\"O .B \-
.\"O accepts
.\"O .B \-\-
.\"O to signify the end of the options.
特に断らない限り、このセクションで説明されている組み込みコマンドのうち
.B \-
で始まるオプションを受け付けるものは、オプションの終わりを表す
.B \-\-
も受け付けます。
.sp .5
.PD 0
.TP
\fB:\fP [\fIarguments\fP]
.PD
.\"O No effect; the command does nothing beyond expanding
.\"O .I arguments
.\"O and performing any specified
.\"O redirections.  A zero exit code is returned.
何もしません。このコマンドは
.I arguments
を展開し、指定されたリダイレクトを実行する以外には何も行いません。
終了コード 0 を返します。
.TP
.PD 0
\fB .\| \fP \fIfilename\fP [\fIarguments\fP]
.TP
\fBsource\fP \fIfilename\fP [\fIarguments\fP]
.PD
.\"O Read and execute commands from
.\"O .I filename
.\"O in the current
.\"O shell environment and return the exit status of the last command
.\"O executed from
.\"O .IR filename .
.I filename
からコマンドを読み込み、現在のシェル環境のもとで実行します。そして
.I filename
中で最後に実行したコマンドの終了ステータスを返します。
.\"O If
.\"O .I filename
.\"O does not contain a slash, file names in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O are used to find the directory containing
.\"O .IR filename .
.I filename
にスラッシュが含まれていない場合、
.I filename
は
.SM
.B PATH
に含まれるディレクトリから探されます。
.\"O The file searched for in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O need not be executable.
.\"O When \fBbash\fP is not in \fIposix mode\fP, the current directory is
.\"O searched if no file is found in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR PATH .
.SM
.B PATH
内で検索されるファイルは、実行可能である必要はありません。
.B bash
が
.I posix モード
で動作していれば、
.SM
.B PATH
中でファイルを見つけられなかった場合には、
カレントディレクトリが検索されます。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B sourcepath
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B shopt
.\"O builtin command is turned off, the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O is not searched.
組み込みコマンド
.B shopt
に対する
.B sourcepath
オプションが無効にされている場合、
.SM
.B PATH
の検索は行われません。
.\"O If any \fIarguments\fP are supplied, they become the positional
.\"O parameters when \fIfilename\fP is executed.  Otherwise the positional
.\"O parameters are unchanged.
.\"O The return status is the status of the last command exited within
.\"O the script (0 if no commands are executed), and false if
.\"O .I filename
.\"O is not found or cannot be read.
何らかの \fIarguments\fP が与えられている場合、これらの引き数は
\fIfilename\fP を実行した時の位置パラメータとなります。
そうでない場合は、位置パラメータは変更されません。
返却ステータスはスクリプト内で最後に実行したコマンドのステータスです
(コマンドが全く実行されなければ 0 です)。また
.I filename
が見つからない場合や読み込めない場合には偽となります。
.TP
\fBalias\fP [\fB\-p\fP] [\fIname\fP[=\fIvalue\fP] ...]
.\"O \fBAlias\fP with no arguments or with the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option prints the list of aliases in the form
.\"O \fBalias\fP \fIname\fP=\fIvalue\fP on standard output.
.\"O When arguments are supplied, an alias is defined for
.\"O each \fIname\fP whose \fIvalue\fP is given.
\fBalias\fP コマンドを引き数を付けずに (あるいは
.B \-p
オプションを付けて) 実行すると、エイリアスのリストが
「\fBalias\fP \fIname\fP=\fIvalue\fP」の形で標準出力に出力されます。
引き数を与えた場合には、\fIvalue\fP を与えられた
\fIname\fP それぞれに対するエイリアスが定義されます。
.\"O A trailing space in  \fIvalue\fP causes the next word to be
.\"O checked for alias substitution when the alias is expanded.
.\"O For each \fIname\fP in the argument list for which no \fIvalue\fP
.\"O is supplied, the name and value of the alias is printed.
.\"O \fBAlias\fP returns true unless a \fIname\fP is given for which
.\"O no alias has been defined.
\fIvalue\fP の末尾に空白があると、エイリアスが展開された時に、
空白の次の単語についてエイリアス置換があるかどうか調べられます。
引き数リスト中に
\fIvalue\fP が与えられていない \fIname\fP があった場合は、
それぞれに対して名前とエイリアスの値が出力されます。
エイリアスが定義されていない \fIname\fP が与えられなければ、
\fBalias\fP は真を返します。
.TP
\fBbg\fP [\fIjobspec\fP]
.\"O Resume the suspended job \fIjobspec\fP in the background, as if it
.\"O had been started with
.\"O .BR & .
.\"O If \fIjobspec\fP is not present, the shell's notion of the
.\"O \fIcurrent job\fP is used.
.\"O .B bg
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O returns 0 unless run when job control is disabled or, when run with
.\"O job control enabled, if \fIjobspec\fP was not found or started without
.\"O job control.
サスペンドされているジョブ \fIjobspec\fP を
バックグラウンドで実行再開します。このジョブは、初めから
.B &
を付けて起動されていたかのように動作を続けます。
\fIjobspec\fP が無い場合には、
シェルが記録している\fIカレントジョブ (current job)\fP が使われます。
.B bg
.I jobspec
は通常 0 を返しますが、ジョブ制御が無効であるときに実行した場合や、
ジョブ制御が有効であっても
.I jobspec
が有効なジョブを指定していない場合や
.I jobspec
がジョブ制御無しで実行したジョブを指定している場合は異なる値を返します。
.TP
.PD 0
\fBbind\fP [\fB\-m\fP \fIkeymap\fP] [\fB\-lpsvPSV\fP]
.TP
\fBbind\fP [\fB\-m\fP \fIkeymap\fP] \fB\-x\fP \fIkeyseq\fP:\fIshell\-command\fP
.TP
\fBbind\fP [\fB\-m\fP \fIkeymap\fP] [\fB\-q\fP \fIfunction\fP] [\fB\-u\fP \fIfunction\fP] [\fB\-r\fP \fIkeyseq\fP]
.TP
\fBbind\fP [\fB\-m\fP \fIkeymap\fP] \fB\-f\fP \fIfilename\fP
.TP
\fBbind\fP [\fB\-m\fP \fIkeymap\fP] \fIkeyseq\fP:\fIfunction\-name\fP
.PD
.\"O Display current
.\"O .B readline
.\"O key and function bindings, or bind a key sequence to a
.\"O .B readline
.\"O function or macro.  The binding syntax accepted is identical to that of
.\"O .IR .inputrc ,
.\"O but each binding must be passed as a separate argument;
.\"O e.g., '"\eC\-x\eC\-r": re\-read\-init\-file'.  Options, if supplied, have the
.\"O following meanings:
.B readline
の現在のキー割り当てと関数割り当てを表示します。
あるいはキーシーケンスを
.B readline
の関数やマクロに割り当てます。受け付ける割り当ての記法は
.I .inputrc
と全く同じですが、
それぞれの割り当ては別々の引き数として渡さなければなりません。
例えば '"\eC\-x\eC\-r": re\-read\-init\-file' のように指定します。
オプションを指定した場合には、以下のような意味を持ちます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-m \fIkeymap\fP
.\"O Use
.\"O .I keymap
.\"O as the keymap to be affected by the subsequent bindings.
.\"O Acceptable
.\"O .I keymap
.\"O names are
.\"O \fIemacs, emacs\-standard, emacs\-meta, emacs\-ctlx, vi,
.\"O vi\-move, vi\-command\fP, and
.\"O .IR vi\-insert .
.\"O \fIvi\fP is equivalent to \fIvi\-command\fP; \fIemacs\fP is
.\"O equivalent to \fIemacs\-standard\fP.
キーマップ
.I keymap
を、以降の割り当てによって変更します。指定できる
.I keymap
名は、\fIemacs, emacs\-standard, emacs\-meta, emacs\-ctlx, vi,
vi\-move, vi\-command, vi\-insert\fP です。
\fIvi\fP は \fIvi\-command\fP と同じです。
また \fIemacs\fP は \fIemacs\-standard\fP と同じです。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O List the names of all \fBreadline\fP functions.
\fBreadline\fP 関数の名前を全てリスト表示します。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Display \fBreadline\fP function names and bindings in such a way
.\"O that they can be re-read.
\fBreadline\fP の関数の名前と割り当てを表示します。
表示は、再び読み込みできる形式で出力されます。
.TP
.B \-P
.\"O List current \fBreadline\fP function names and bindings.
\fBreadline\fP の関数の現在の名前と割り当てをリスト表示します。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Display \fBreadline\fP variable names and values in such a way that they
.\"O can be re-read.
\fBreadline\fP の変数名と値を表示します。
表示は、再び読み込みできる形式で出力されます。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O List current \fBreadline\fP variable names and values.
\fBreadline\fP の現在の変数名と値をリスト表示します。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Display \fBreadline\fP key sequences bound to macros and the strings
.\"O they output in such a way that they can be re-read.
\fBreadline\fP のマクロに割り当てられたキーシーケンスと、
マクロが出力する文字列を表示します。
表示は、再び読み込みできる形式で出力されます。
.TP
.B \-S
.\"O Display \fBreadline\fP key sequences bound to macros and the strings
.\"O they output.
\fBreadline\fP のマクロに割り当てられたキーシーケンスと、
マクロが出力する文字列を表示します。
.TP
.B \-f \fIfilename\fP
.\"O Read key bindings from \fIfilename\fP.
キー割り当てを \fIfilename\fP から読み込みます。
.TP
.B \-q \fIfunction\fP
.\"O Query about which keys invoke the named \fIfunction\fP.
指定された \fIfunction\fP を呼び出すキーを問い合わせます。
.TP
.B \-u \fIfunction\fP
.\"O Unbind all keys bound to the named \fIfunction\fP.
指定された \fIfunction\fP に割り当てられているキーの割り当てを
全て取り消します。
.TP
.B \-r \fIkeyseq\fP
.\"O Remove any current binding for \fIkeyseq\fP.
\fIkeyseq\fP に対する現在の割り当てを削除します。
.TP
.B \-x \fIkeyseq\fP:\fIshell\-command\fP
.\"O Cause \fIshell\-command\fP to be executed whenever \fIkeyseq\fP is
.\"O entered.
\fIkeyseq\fP が押されるたびごとに、
\fIshell\-command\fP が実行されるようにします。
.PD
.PP
.\"O The return value is 0 unless an unrecognized option is given or an
.\"O error occurred.
認識できないオプションが与えられた場合やエラーが起きた場合を除けば、
返り値は 0 です。
.RE
.TP
\fBbreak\fP [\fIn\fP]
.\"O Exit from within a
.\"O .BR for ,
.\"O .BR while ,
.\"O .BR until ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B select
.\"O loop.  If \fIn\fP is specified, break \fIn\fP levels.
.\"O .I n
.\"O must be \(>= 1.  If
.\"O .I n
.\"O is greater than the number of enclosing loops, all enclosing loops
.\"O are exited.  The return value is 0 unless the shell is not executing
.\"O a loop when
.\"O .B break
.\"O is executed.
.BR for ,
.BR while ,
.BR until ,
.B select
のループから抜けます。\fIn\fP が指定されていれば、\fIn\fP レベル分 
break します。
.I n
は 1 以上でなければなりません。
.I n
がループの深さよりも大きい場合には、全てのループから抜けます。
.B break
が実行された時にシェルがループを実行していれば、
返り値は 0 になります。
.TP
\fBbuiltin\fP \fIshell\-builtin\fP [\fIarguments\fP]
.\"O Execute the specified shell builtin, passing it
.\"O .IR arguments ,
.\"O and return its exit status.
.\"O This is useful when defining a
.\"O function whose name is the same as a shell builtin,
.\"O retaining the functionality of the builtin within the function.
.\"O The \fBcd\fP builtin is commonly redefined this way.
.\"O The return status is false if
.\"O .I shell\-builtin
.\"O is not a shell builtin command.
指定されたシェル組み込みコマンドを実行します。コマンドには
.I arguments
を引き数として渡し、このコマンドの終了ステータスを返します。
これはシェル組み込みコマンドと同じ名前の関数を定義する時に便利で、
その関数内で組み込みコマンドを使った時に、その機能を損ないません。
組み込みコマンド 
\fBcd\fP は普通、これを使って再定義されます。
.I shell\-builtin
がシェル組み込みコマンドでなければ、終了ステータスは偽となります。
.TP
\fBcd\fP [\fB\-LP\fP] [\fIdir\fP]
.\"O Change the current directory to \fIdir\fP.  The variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HOME
.\"O is the
.\"O default
.\"O .IR dir .
.\"O The variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B CDPATH
.\"O defines the search path for the directory containing
.\"O .IR dir .
カレントディレクトリを \fIdir\fP に変更します。
変数
.SM
.B HOME
の値が
.I dir
のデフォルト値です。変数
.SM
.B CDPATH
は、
.I dir
を含むディレクトリの検索パスを定義します。
.\"O Alternative directory names in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B CDPATH
.\"O are separated by a colon (:).  A null directory name in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B CDPATH
.\"O is the same as the current directory, i.e., ``\fB.\fP''.  If
.\"O .I dir
.\"O begins with a slash (/),
.\"O then
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B CDPATH
.\"O is not used. The
.\"O .B \-P
.\"O option says to use the physical directory structure instead of
.\"O following symbolic links (see also the
.\"O .B \-P
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command); the
.\"O .B \-L
.\"O option forces symbolic links to be followed.  An argument of
.\"O .B \-
.\"O is equivalent to
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR $OLDPWD .
.SM
.B CDPATH
内ではディレクトリ名はコロン (:) で区切ります。
.SM
.B CDPATH
中に空のディレクトリ名がある場合、これはカレントディレクトリ
(つまり ``\fB.\fP'') を意味します。
.I dir
がスラッシュ (/) で始まる場合には、
.SM
.B CDPATH
は使われません。
.B \-P
オプションは、シンボリックリンクを辿らないで物理的なディレクトリ構造を
使うように指示します (組み込みコマンド
.B set
の
.B \-P
オプションも参照)。
.B \-L
オプションを指定すると、シンボリックリンクを辿るようになります。
引き数に
.B \-
を指定するのは、
.SM
.B $OLDPWD
を指定するのと同じ意味です。
.\"O The return value is true if the directory was successfully changed;
.\"O false otherwise.
ディレクトリの変更が成功した場合には返り値は真になります。
そうでない場合には偽になります。
.TP
\fBcommand\fP [\fB\-pVv\fP] \fIcommand\fP [\fIarg\fP ...]
.\"O Run
.\"O .I command
.\"O with
.\"O .I args
.\"O suppressing the normal shell function lookup. Only builtin
.\"O commands or commands found in the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O are executed.  If the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is given, the search for
.\"O .I command
.\"O is performed using a default value for
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O that is guaranteed to find all of the standard utilities.
.I command
に引き数
.I args
を付けて実行します。シェル関数の通常の参照は行いません。
組み込みコマンドと
.SM
.B PATH
内で見つかるコマンドだけが実行されます。
.B \-p
オプションが与えられると、
.I command
の検索を行う際に
.B PATH
のデフォルト値が使われます。これにより、
標準ユーティリティを全て確実に見つけられます。
.\"O If either the
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-v
.\"O option is supplied, a description of
.\"O .I command
.\"O is printed.  The
.\"O .B \-v
.\"O option causes a single word indicating the command or file name
.\"O used to invoke
.\"O .I command
.\"O to be displayed; the
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O option produces a more verbose description.
.B \-V
オプションまたは
.B \-v
オプションを与えると、
.I command
の説明が出力されます。
.B \-v
オプションでは、
.I command
を起動する時に使われるコマンドやファイル名を示す単語が表示されます。
.B \-V
ではさらに詳しい説明が表示されます。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-v
.\"O option is supplied, the exit status is 0 if
.\"O .I command
.\"O was found, and 1 if not.  If neither option is supplied and
.\"O an error occurred or
.\"O .I command
.\"O cannot be found, the exit status is 127.  Otherwise, the exit status of the
.\"O .B command
.\"O builtin is the exit status of
.\"O .IR command .
.B \-V
オプションや
.B \-v
オプションを与えた場合、終了ステータスは
.I command
が見つかれば 0 となり、見つからなければ 1 となります。
どちらのオプションも与えなかった場合に、エラーが起きたり
.I command
を見つけられなかったりすると、終了ステータスは 127 になります。
それ以外の場合には、組み込みコマンド
.B command
の終了ステータスは、
.I command
の終了ステータスです。
.TP
\fBcompgen\fP [\fIoption\fP] [\fIword\fP]
.\"O Generate possible completion matches for \fIword\fP according to
.\"O the \fIoption\fPs, which may be any option accepted by the
.\"O .B complete
.\"O builtin with the exception of \fB\-p\fP and \fB\-r\fP, and write
.\"O the matches to the standard output.
.\"O When using the \fB\-F\fP or \fB\-C\fP options, the various shell variables
.\"O set by the programmable completion facilities, while available, will not
.\"O have useful values.
\fIoption\fP にしたがって、\fIword\fP の補完マッチのリストを生成します。
オプションには \fBcomplete\fP 組み込みコマンドと同じものが指定できますが、
\fB\-p\fP と \fB\-r\fP は指定できません。
マッチのリストは標準出力に出力されます。
\fB\-F\fP や \fB\-C\fP オプションを使用したときは、
プログラム補完機能によって設定されたさまざまなシェル変数は、
利用可能であっても有用な値を持ちません。
.sp 1
.\"O The matches will be generated in the same way as if the programmable
.\"O completion code had generated them directly from a completion specification
.\"O with the same flags.
.\"O If \fIword\fP is specified, only those completions matching \fIword\fP
.\"O will be displayed.
マッチは、同じフラグで指定されたプログラム補完コードが
直接補完を生成するのと同じ方法で生成されます。
\fIword\fP が指定されると、\fIword\fP にマッチする補完だけが表示されます。
.sp 1
.\"O The return value is true unless an invalid option is supplied, or no
.\"O matches were generated.
戻り値は、
無効なオプションが指定された場合やマッチが生成されなかった場合以外は
真になります。
.TP
.PD 0
\fBcomplete\fP [\fB\-abcdefjkvu\fP] [\fB\-o\fP \fIcomp-option\fP] [\fB\-A\fP \fIaction\fP] [\fB\-G\fP \fIglobpat\fP] [\fB\-W\fP \fIwordlist\fP] [\fB\-P\fP \fIprefix\fP] [\fB\-S\fP \fIsuffix\fP]
.br
[\fB\-X\fP \fIfilterpat\fP] [\fB\-F\fP \fIfunction\fP] [\fB\-C\fP \fIcommand\fP] \fIname\fP [\fIname ...\fP]
.TP
\fBcomplete\fP \fB\-pr\fP [\fIname\fP ...]
.PD
.\"O Specify how arguments to each \fIname\fP should be completed.
.\"O If the \fB\-p\fP option is supplied, or if no options are supplied,
.\"O existing completion specifications are printed in a way that allows
.\"O them to be reused as input.
.\"O The \fB\-r\fP option removes a completion specification for
.\"O each \fIname\fP, or, if no \fIname\fPs are supplied, all
.\"O completion specifications.
\fIname\fP 引き数それぞれを、どのように補完するのかを指定します。
\fB\-p\fP オプションが指定された場合や、
何もオプションが指定されなかった場合は、
既存の補完指定が (入力として再利用できるかたちで) 出力されます。
\fB\-r\fP オプションは、それぞれの \fIname\fP の補完指定を削除します。
\fIname\fP が指定されなかった場合はすべての補完指定を削除します。
.sp 1
.\"O The process of applying these completion specifications when word completion
.\"O is attempted is described above under \fBProgrammable Completion\fP.
単語補完が試みられたときにこれらの補完指定に加えられる処理は、
前述の \fBプログラム補完\fP で示しています。
.sp 1
.\"O Other options, if specified, have the following meanings.
.\"O The arguments to the \fB\-G\fP, \fB\-W\fP, and \fB\-X\fP options
.\"O (and, if necessary, the \fB\-P\fP and \fB\-S\fP options)
.\"O should be quoted to protect them from expansion before the
.\"O .B complete
.\"O builtin is invoked.
他のオプションが指定されたときは、以下のような意味を持ちます。
\fB\-G\fP, \fB\-W\fP, \fB\-X\fP オプションの引き数 (必要ならば
\fB\-P\fP と \fB\-S\fP オプションの場合も) はクォートして、
.B complete
組み込みコマンドが呼び出される前に展開されないようにすべきです。
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 8
\fB\-o\fP \fIcomp-option\fP
.\"O The \fIcomp-option\fP controls several aspects of the compspec's behavior
.\"O beyond the simple generation of completions.
.\"O \fIcomp-option\fP may be one of:
.I comp\-option
は補完仕様の動作をいくつかの点から制御し、
単純な補完生成以外ができるようにします。
.I comp\-option
には以下のどれかひとつを指定できます。
.RS
.TP 8
.B default
.\"O Use readline's default completion if the compspec generates no matches.
補完仕様がマッチを全く生成しなかった場合に、
readline のデフォルトの補完を用います。
.TP 8
.B dirnames
.\"O Perform directory name completion if the compspec generates no matches.
補完仕様がマッチを全く生成しなかった場合に、
ディレクトリ名を補完しようとします。
.TP 8
.B filenames
.\"O Tell readline that the compspec generates filenames, so it can perform any
.\"O filename\-specific processing (like adding a slash to directory names or
.\"O suppressing trailing spaces).  Intended to be used with shell functions.
補完仕様がファイル名を生成することを readline に伝え、
readline がファイル名特有の処理
(ディレクトリ名にスラッシュを加えたり、末尾の空白を削除したり、など)
を行えるようにします。
シェル関数と共に用いることを想定しています。
.RE
.TP 8
\fB\-A\fP \fIaction\fP
.\"O The \fIaction\fP may be one of the following to generate a list of possible
.\"O completions:
\fIaction\fP は補完対象リストの生成動作で、
以下のどれかひとつを指定します。
.RS
.TP 8
.B alias
.\"O Alias names.  May also be specified as \fB\-a\fP.
エイリアス名。\fB\-a\fP でも指定できます。
.TP 8
.B arrayvar
.\"O Array variable names.
配列変数名。
.TP 8
.B binding
.\"O \fBReadline\fP key binding names.
\fBreadline\fP キー割り当て名。
.TP 8
.B builtin
.\"O Names of shell builtin commands.  May also be specified as \fB\-b\fP.
シェル組み込みコマンド名。\fB\-b\fP でも指定できます。
.TP 8
.B command
.\"O Command names.  May also be specified as \fB\-c\fP.
コマンド名。\fB\-c\fP でも指定できます。
.TP 8
.B directory
.\"O Directory names.  May also be specified as \fB\-d\fP.
ディレクトリ名。\fB\-d\fP でも指定できます。
.TP 8
.B disabled
.\"O Names of disabled shell builtins.
無効にされているシェル組み込みコマンドの名前。
.TP 8
.B enabled
.\"O Names of enabled shell builtins.
有効にされているシェル組み込みコマンドの名前。
.TP 8
.B export
.\"O Names of exported shell variables.  May also be specified as \fB\-e\fP.
エクスポートされたシェル変数の名前。
\fB\-e\fP でも指定できます。
.TP 8
.B file
.\"O File names.  May also be specified as \fB\-f\fP.
ファイル名。\fB\-f\fP でも指定できます。
.TP 8
.B function
.\"O Names of shell functions.
シェル関数の名前。
.TP 8
.B helptopic
.\"O Help topics as accepted by the \fBhelp\fP builtin.
\fBhelp\fP 組み込みコマンドで許可されたヘルプトピック。
.TP 8
.B hostname
.\"O Hostnames, as taken from the file specified by the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HOSTFILE
.\"O shell variable.
.SM
.B HOSTFILE
シェル変数で指定されたファイルから得られたホスト名。
.TP 8
.B job
.\"O Job names, if job control is active.  May also be specified as \fB\-j\fP.
ジョブ制御が有効であれば、ジョブ名。\fB\-j\fP でも指定できます。
.TP 8
.B keyword
.\"O Shell reserved words.  May also be specified as \fB\-k\fP.
シェルの予約語。\fB\-k\fP でも指定できます。
.TP 8
.B running
.\"O Names of running jobs, if job control is active.
ジョブ制御が有効であれば、実行中のジョブ名。
.TP 8
.B setopt
.\"O Valid arguments for the \fB\-o\fP option to the \fBset\fP builtin.
\fBset\fP 組み込みコマンドの \fB\-o\fP オプションで有効な引き数。
.TP 8
.B shopt
.\"O Shell option names as accepted by the \fBshopt\fP builtin.
\fBshopt\fP 組み込みコマンドで許可されたシェルオプション名。
.TP 8
.B signal
.\"O Signal names.
シグナル名。
.TP 8
.B stopped
.\"O Names of stopped jobs, if job control is active.
ジョブ制御が有効であれば、停止しているジョブ名。
.TP 8
.B user
.\"O User names.  May also be specified as \fB\-u\fP.
ユーザ名。\fB\-u\fP でも指定できます。
.TP 8
.B variable
.\"O Names of all shell variables.  May also be specified as \fB\-v\fP.
すべてのシェル変数名。\fB\-v\fP でも指定できます。
.RE
.TP 8
\fB\-G\fP \fIglobpat\fP
.\"O The filename expansion pattern \fIglobpat\fP is expanded to generate
.\"O the possible completions.
ファイル名展開パターン \fIglobpat\fP
が展開されて補完対象のリストを生成します。
.TP 8
\fB\-W\fP \fIwordlist\fP
.\"O The \fIwordlist\fP is split using the characters in the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O special variable as delimiters, and each resultant word is expanded.
.\"O The possible completions are the members of the resultant list which
.\"O match the word being completed.
\fIwordlist\fP は
.SM
.B IFS
特殊変数を区切り文字として分割され、
それぞれの分割された単語は展開されます。
補完対象は、展開結果のリストのメンバのうち、
補完中の単語がマッチするものです。
.TP 8
\fB\-C\fP \fIcommand\fP
.\"O \fIcommand\fP is executed in a subshell environment, and its output is
.\"O used as the possible completions.
\fIcommand\fP がサブシェル環境で実行され、
その出力が補完対象として使用されます。
.TP 8
\fB\-F\fP \fIfunction\fP
.\"O The shell function \fIfunction\fP is executed in the current shell
.\"O environment.
.\"O When it finishes, the possible completions are retrieved from the value
.\"O of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B COMPREPLY
.\"O array variable.
シェル関数 \fIfunction\fP は現在のシェル環境で実行されます。
関数が終了したときに、補完対象が
.SM
.B COMPREPLY
配列変数から取得されます。
.TP 8
\fB\-X\fP \fIfilterpat\fP
.\"O \fIfilterpat\fP is a pattern as used for filename expansion.
.\"O It is applied to the list of possible completions generated by the
.\"O preceding options and arguments, and each completion matching
.\"O \fIfilterpat\fP is removed from the list.
.\"O A leading \fB!\fP in \fIfilterpat\fP negates the pattern; in this
.\"O case, any completion not matching \fIfilterpat\fP is removed.
\fIfilterpat\fP はファイル名展開として使用されるパターンです。
先行するオプション・引き数によって生成された補完対象リストに適用され、
\fIfilterpat\fP とマッチするそれぞれの補完がリストから削除されます。
\fIfilterpat\fP の前に \fB!\fP を置くとパターンを否定します。
この場合、\fIfilterpat\fP にマッチしない補完が削除されます。
.TP 8
\fB\-P\fP \fIprefix\fP
.\"O \fIprefix\fP is added at the beginning of each possible completion
.\"O after all other options have been applied.
他のすべてのオプションが作用したあとに、
\fIprefix\fP がそれぞれの補完対象の先頭に追加されます。
.TP 8
\fB\-S\fP \fIsuffix\fP
.\"O \fIsuffix\fP is appended to each possible completion
.\"O after all other options have been applied.
他のすべてのオプションが作用したあとに、
\fIprefix\fP がそれぞれの補完対象の末尾に追加されます。
.PD
.PP
.\"O The return value is true unless an invalid option is supplied, an option
.\"O other than \fB\-p\fP or \fB\-r\fP is supplied without a \fIname\fP
.\"O argument, an attempt is made to remove a completion specification for
.\"O a \fIname\fP for which no specification exists, or
.\"O an error occurs adding a completion specification.
不正なオプションが指定された場合、\fB\-p\fP と \fB\-r\fP 以外のオプションで
\fIname\fP が指定されなかった場合、
存在しない \fIname\fP の指定によって補完が削除されようとした場合、
補完の指定の追加に失敗した場合、を除いては、返り値は真になります。
.RE
.TP
\fBcontinue\fP [\fIn\fP]
.\"O Resume the next iteration of the enclosing
.\"O .BR for ,
.\"O .BR while ,
.\"O .BR until ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B select
.\"O loop.
.BR for ,
.BR while ,
.BR until ,
.B select
ループの次の繰り返し分から実行を継続します。
.\"O If
.\"O .I n
.\"O is specified, resume at the \fIn\fPth enclosing loop.
.\"O .I n
.\"O must be \(>= 1.  If
.\"O .I n
.\"O is greater than the number of enclosing loops, the last enclosing loop
.\"O (the ``top-level'' loop) is resumed.  The return value is 0 unless the
.\"O shell is not executing a loop when
.\"O .B continue
.\"O is executed.
.I n
を指定すると、深さを \fIn\fP 個分上がったループで実行を継続します。
.I n
は 1 以上でなければなりません。
.I n
がループの深さよりも大きい場合、
最後のループ (「トップレベル」のループ) で実行が継続されます。
.B continue
が実行された時にシェルがループの実行中でなかった場合を除き、
返り値は 0 となります。
.TP
.PD 0
\fBdeclare\fP [\fB\-afFirx\fP] [\fB\-p\fP] [\fIname\fP[=\fIvalue\fP]]
.TP
\fBtypeset\fP [\fB\-afFirx\fP] [\fB\-p\fP] [\fIname\fP[=\fIvalue\fP]]
.PD
.\"O Declare variables and/or give them attributes.
.\"O If no \fIname\fPs are given then display the values of variables.
変数を宣言したり、変数に属性を与えたりします。
\fIname\fP を指定しなければ、変数の値が表示されます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option will display the attributes and values of each
.\"O .IR name .
.B \-p
オプションを指定すると、
.I name
それぞれの属性と値が表示されます。
.\"O When
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O is used, additional options are ignored.
.B \-p
を使うと他のオプションは無視されます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-F
.\"O option inhibits the display of function definitions; only the
.\"O function name and attributes are printed.
.B \-F
オプションを指定すると、関数定義の表示を止めます。
関数の名前と属性だけが出力されます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-F
.\"O option implies
.\"O .BR \-f .
.\"O The following options can
.\"O be used to restrict output to variables with the specified attribute or
.\"O to give variables attributes:
.B \-F
オプションを指定すると、
.B \-f
オプションも指定したことになります。以下のオプションを使うと、
指定した属性を持つ変数の出力を制限したり、
変数に属性を与えたりできます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Each \fIname\fP is an array variable (see
.\"O .B Arrays
.\"O above).
\fIname\fP はそれぞれ配列変数 (前述の
.B 配列
を参照) です。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Use function names only.
関数名だけを使います。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O The variable is treated as an integer; arithmetic evaluation (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "ARITHMETIC EVALUATION" ") "
.\"O is performed when the variable is assigned a value.
変数を整数として扱います。変数に値が代入された時に算術式評価 (
.SM
.B 算術式評価
を参照) が実行されます。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Make \fIname\fPs readonly.  These names cannot then be assigned values
.\"O by subsequent assignment statements or unset.
\fIname\fP を読み込み専用にします。
これ以降、代入文を用いて値を代入したり unset したりできなくなります。
.TP
.B \-x
.\"O Mark \fIname\fPs for export to subsequent commands via the environment.
\fIname\fP に印を付け、
これ以降に実行するコマンドに環境経由でエクスポートします。
.PD
.PP
.\"O Using `+' instead of `\-'
.\"O turns off the attribute instead, with the exception that \fB+a\fP
.\"O may not be used to destroy an array variable.  When used in a function,
.\"O makes each
.\"O \fIname\fP local, as with the 
.\"O .B local
.\"O command.  The return value is 0 unless an invalid option is encountered,
.\"O an attempt is made to define a function using
.\"O .if n ``\-f foo=bar'',
.\"O .if t \f(CW\-f foo=bar\fP,
.\"O an attempt is made to assign a value to a readonly variable,
.\"O an attempt is made to assign a value to an array variable without
.\"O using the compound assignment syntax (see
.\"O .B Arrays
.\"O above), one of the \fInames\fP is not a valid shell variable name,
.\"O an attempt is made to turn off readonly status for a readonly variable,
.\"O an attempt is made to turn off array status for an array variable,
.\"O or an attempt is made to display a non-existent function with \fB\-f\fP.
`\-' ではなく `+' を使うと属性を消します。
ただし例外として、\fB+a\fP を使って配列変数を破棄することはできません。
関数内で使った場合、
.B local
コマンドを使った場合と同様に \fIname\fP はローカルとなります。
返り値は基本的には 0 ですが、不正なオプションに出会った場合、
.if n ``\-f foo=bar''
.if t \f(CW\-f foo=bar\fP
を使って関数を定義しようとした場合、
読み込み専用の変数に代入しようとした場合、
複合代入構文を使わずに配列変数に値を代入しようとした場合 (前述の
.B 配列
を参照)、\fIname\fP のいずれかが正しいシェル変数名でない場合、
読み込み専用変数の読み込み専用属性を無効にしようとした場合、
存在しない関数を \fB\-f\fP オプションで表示しようとした場合は除きます。
.RE
.TP
.B dirs [\fB\-clpv\fP] [+\fIn\fP] [\-\fIn\fP]
.\"O Without options, displays the list of currently remembered directories.
.\"O The default display is on a single line with directory names separated
.\"O by spaces.
.\"O Directories are added to the list with the 
.\"O .B pushd
.\"O command; the
.\"O .B popd
.\"O command removes entries from the list.
オプションが無いときは、
現在記憶しているディレクトリのリストが表示されます。
デフォルトでは、全てのディレクトリ名は空白で区切って
1 行で表示されます。ディレクトリは
.B pushd
コマンドによってリストに追加されます。
.B popd
コマンドはリストからエントリを削除します。
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
\fB+\fP\fIn\fP
.\"O Displays the \fIn\fPth entry counting from the left of the list
.\"O shown by
.\"O .B dirs
.\"O when invoked without options, starting with zero.
オプション無しで
.B dirs
を起動した時に表示されるリストの、
左から数えて \fIn\fP 番目のエントリを表示します。
エントリは 0 から始まります。
.TP
\fB\-\fP\fIn\fP
.\"O Displays the \fIn\fPth entry counting from the right of the list
.\"O shown by
.\"O .B dirs
.\"O when invoked without options, starting with zero.
オプション無しで
.B dirs
を起動した時に表示されるリストの、
右から数えて \fIn\fP 番目のエントリを表示します。
エントリは 0 から始まります。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Clears the directory stack by deleting all of the entries.
全てのエントリを削除し、ディレクトリスタックをクリアします。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O Produces a longer listing; the default listing format uses a 
.\"O tilde to denote the home directory.
長い形式のリスト表示を行います。
デフォルトのリスト表示フォーマットでは、
チルダを使ってホームディレクトリを表します。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Print the directory stack with one entry per line.
1 行に 1 エントリの形でディレクトリスタックを出力します。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Print the directory stack with one entry per line,
.\"O prefixing each entry with its index in the stack.
1 行に 1 エントリの形でディレクトリスタックを出力します。
各エントリの前にはスタック内での番号が表示されます。
.PD
.PP
.\"O The return value is 0 unless an
.\"O invalid option is supplied or \fIn\fP indexes beyond the end
.\"O of the directory stack.
不正なオプションが与えられた場合とインデックス
\fIn\fP がディレクトリスタックの終端を越えている場合を除き、
返り値は 0 となります。
.RE
.TP
\fBdisown\fP [\fB\-ar\fP] [\fB\-h\fP] [\fIjobspec\fP ...]
.\"O Without options, each
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O is removed from the table of active jobs.
オプション無しの場合には、それぞれの
.I jobspec
がアクティブなジョブのテーブルから削除されます。
.\"O If the \fB\-h\fP option is given, each
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O is not removed from the table, but is marked so that
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGHUP
.\"O is not sent to the job if the shell receives a
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SIGHUP .
\fB\-h\fP オプションが与えられている場合、どの
.I jobspec
もテーブルから削除されず、
シェルが
.SM
.BR SIGHUP
を受け取ってもそのジョブには
.SM
.B SIGHUP
が送られないように印が付けられます。
.\"O If no
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O is present, and neither the
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O nor the
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O option is supplied, the \fIcurrent job\fP is used.
.I jobspec
がなく、かつ
.B \-a
オプションも
.B \-r
オプションも与えられていない場合には、\fIカレントジョブ\fPが使われます。
.\"O If no
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O is supplied, the
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option means to remove or mark all jobs; the
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O option without a
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O argument restricts operation to running jobs.
.I jobspec
が与えられていない場合、
.B \-a
オプションは全てのジョブを削除するか
全てのジョブに印を付けるという意味
となります。
.I jobspec
引き数なしで
.B \-r
オプションを指定すると、
実行中のジョブだけが操作の対象となります。
.\"O The return value is 0 unless a
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O does not specify a valid job.
.I jobspec
が不正なジョブを指定していなければ、返り値は 0 となります。
.TP
\fBecho\fP [\fB\-neE\fP] [\fIarg\fP ...]
.\"O Output the \fIarg\fPs, separated by spaces, followed by a newline.
.\"O The return status is always 0.
\fIarg\fP を空白で区切って出力し、最後に改行を出力します。
終了ステータスは常に 0 です。
.\"O If \fB\-n\fP is specified, the trailing newline is
.\"O suppressed.  If the \fB\-e\fP option is given, interpretation of
.\"O the following backslash-escaped characters is enabled.  The
.\"O .B \-E
.\"O option disables the interpretation of these escape characters,
.\"O even on systems where they are interpreted by default.
\fB\-n\fP が指定された場合、最後の改行は出力されません。
\fB\-e\fP オプションを指定した場合、
以下に示す、バックスラッシュのエスケープ文字が解釈されるようになります。
.B \-E
オプションを指定すると、
デフォルトでこのようなエスケープ文字が解釈されるシステムであっても、
エスケープ文字が解釈されないようになります。
.\"O The \fBxpg_echo\fP shell option may be used to
.\"O dynamically determine whether or not \fBecho\fP expands these
.\"O escape characters by default.
\fBxpg_echo\fP シェルオプションを用いると、
\fBecho\fP がこれらのエスケープ文字を展開するかどうかの
デフォルト動作を動的に決定できます。
.\"O .B echo
.\"O does not interpret
.\"O .B \-\-
.\"O to mean the end of options.
.\"O .B echo
.\"O interprets the following escape sequences:
.B echo
は
.B \-\-
をオプションの終わりと解釈しません。
.B echo
は以下のエスケープシーケンスを解釈します:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \ea
.\"O alert (bell)
警告(ベル)
.TP
.B \eb
.\"O backspace
バックスペース
.TP
.B \ec
.\"O suppress trailing newline
行末に改行を付けない
.TP
.B \ee
.\"O an escape character
エスケープ文字
.TP
.B \ef
.\"O form feed
フォームフィード文字
.TP
.B \en
.\"O new line
改行
.TP
.B \er
.\"O carriage return
復帰文字
.TP
.B \et
.\"O horizontal tab
水平タブ
.TP
.B \ev
.\"O vertical tab
垂直タブ
.TP
.B \e\e
.\"O backslash
バックスラッシュ
.TP
.B \e\fInnn\fP
.\"O the character whose ASCII code is the octal value \fInnn\fP
.\"O (one to three digits)
ASCII コードの 8 進値が \fInnn\fP である文字 (1 文字につき数字 3 桁)。
.TP
.B \ex\fInnn\fP
.\"O the character whose ASCII code is the hexadecimal value \fInnn\fP
.\"O (one to three digits)
ASCII コードの 16 進値が \fInnn\fP である文字 (1 文字につき数字 3 桁)。
.PD
.RE
.TP
\fBenable\fP [\fB\-adnps\fP] [\fB\-f\fP \fIfilename\fP] [\fIname\fP ...]
.\"O Enable and disable builtin shell commands.
.\"O Disabling a builtin allows a disk command which has the same name
.\"O as a shell builtin to be executed without specifying a full pathname,
.\"O even though the shell normally searches for builtins before disk commands.
組み込みコマンドの有効/無効を設定します。
シェルは通常はディスクコマンドの前に組み込みコマンドを探しますが、
組み込みコマンドを無効にすると、
シェルの組み込みコマンドと同じ名前を持つディスクコマンドを、
完全なパス名を指定しなくても実行できます。
.\"O If \fB\-n\fP is used, each \fIname\fP
.\"O is disabled; otherwise,
.\"O \fInames\fP are enabled.  For example, to use the
.\"O .B test
.\"O binary found via the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O instead of the shell builtin version, run
.\"O .if t \f(CWenable -n test\fP.
.\"O .if n ``enable -n test''.
\fB\-n\fP を用いると、それぞれの \fIname\fP は無効となります。
それ以外の場合には、\fIname\fP は有効となります。
例えば、シェル組み込みのものでなく
.SM
.B PATH
上にある
.B test
バイナリを使うには
.if t \f(CWenable -n test\fP.
.if n ``enable -n test''.
を実行します。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option means to load the new builtin command
.\"O .I name
.\"O from shared object
.\"O .IR filename ,
.\"O on systems that support dynamic loading.  The
.\"O .B \-d
.\"O option will delete a builtin previously loaded with
.\"O .BR \-f .
.B \-f
オプションは新しい組み込みコマンド
.I name
を共有オブジェクト
.I filename
からロードするという意味です。
これは動的ロードをサポートしているシステムで使えます。
.B \-d
オプションは、以前に
.B \-f
オプションでロードした組み込みコマンドを削除します。
.\"O If no \fIname\fP arguments are given, or if the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is supplied, a list of shell builtins is printed.
.\"O With no other option arguments, the list consists of all enabled
.\"O shell builtins.
引き数 \fIname\fP が与えられなかった場合や、
.B \-p
オプションが与えられた場合、
シェルの組み込みコマンドのリストが表示されます。
他にオプション引き数が指定されていない場合には、
有効になっているシェル組み込みコマンド全てからなるリストが表示されます。
.\"O If \fB\-n\fP is supplied, only disabled builtins are printed.
\fB\-n\fP を与えると、無効にされている組み込みコマンドだけが出力されます。
.\"O If \fB\-a\fP is supplied, the list printed includes all builtins, with an
.\"O indication of whether or not each is enabled.
\fB\-a\fP を与えると、
それぞれ有効かどうかの表示付きで全ての組み込みコマンドが出力されます。
.\"O If \fB\-s\fP is supplied, the output is restricted to the POSIX
.\"O \fIspecial\fP builtins.
\fB\-s\fP を与えると、出力されるのは
POSIX の\fI特殊\fP組み込みコマンドだけに制限されます。
.\"O The return value is 0 unless a
.\"O .I name
.\"O is not a shell builtin or there is an error loading a new builtin
.\"O from a shared object.
.I name
がシェル組み込みコマンドでない場合と、
共有オブジェクトからの新しい組み込みコマンドのロードに失敗した場合を除き、
返り値は 0 となります。
.TP
\fBeval\fP [\fIarg\fP ...]
.\"O The \fIarg\fPs are read and concatenated together into a single
.\"O command.  This command is then read and executed by the shell, and
.\"O its exit status is returned as the value of
.\"O .BR eval .
.\"O If there are no
.\"O .IR args ,
.\"O or only null arguments,
.\"O .B eval
.\"O returns 0.
\fIarg\fP を読み込み、結合して 1 つのコマンドにされます。
次にシェルはこのコマンドを読み込んで実行し、
その終了ステータスが
.B eval
の値として返されます。
.I args
が無い場合や空の引き数しかない場合には
.B eval
は 0 を返します。
.TP
\fBexec\fP [\fB\-cl\fP] [\fB\-a\fP \fIname\fP] [\fIcommand\fP [\fIarguments\fP]]
.\"O If
.\"O .I command
.\"O is specified, it replaces the shell.
.\"O No new process is created.  The
.\"O .I arguments
.\"O become the arguments to \fIcommand\fP.
.I command
が指定されていると、シェルはこのコマンドに置き換えられます。
新しいプロセスは生成されません。
.I arguments
は \fIcommand\fP に対する引き数となります。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O option is supplied,
.\"O the shell places a dash at the beginning of the zeroth arg passed to 
.\"O .IR command .
.B \-l
オプションを与えると、シェルは
.I command
に渡す 0 番目のオプションの先頭にダッシュを設定します。
.\"O This is what
.\"O .IR login (1)
.\"O does.  The
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O option causes
.\"O .I command
.\"O to be executed with an empty environment.  If
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O is supplied, the shell passes
.\"O .I name
.\"O as the zeroth argument to the executed command.  If
.\"O .I command
.\"O cannot be executed for some reason, a non-interactive shell exits,
.\"O unless the shell option
.\"O .B execfail
.\"O is enabled, in which case it returns failure.
これは
.IR login (1)
が行う動作です。
.B \-c
オプションを与えると、
.I command
は空の環境で実行されます。
.B \-a
を与えると、シェルは実行するコマンドに 0 番目の引き数として
.I name
を渡します。何らかの理由で
.I command
が実行できない場合には非対話的シェルは終了します。
ただしシェルオプション
.B execfail
が設定されている場合は終了せず、この場合には偽が返されます。
.\"O An interactive shell returns failure if the file cannot be executed.
.\"O If
.\"O .I command
.\"O is not specified, any redirections take effect in the current shell,
.\"O and the return status is 0.  If there is a redirection error, the
.\"O return status is 1.
ファイルが実行できない場合には、対話的シェルは偽を返します。
.I command
が指定されていない場合、任意のリダイレクトはカレントシェルで効果を表し、
終了ステータスは 0 となります。
リダイレクトのエラーが起きた場合には、終了ステータスは 1 となります。
.TP
\fBexit\fP [\fIn\fP]
.\"O Cause the shell to exit
.\"O with a status of \fIn\fP.  If
.\"O .I n
.\"O is omitted, the exit status
.\"O is that of the last command executed.
.\"O A trap on
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EXIT
.\"O is executed before the shell terminates.
ステータス \fIn\fP でシェルを終了させます。
.I n
を省略すると、
終了ステータスは最後に実行したコマンドの終了ステータスとなります。
シェルが終了する前には、
.SM
.B EXIT
に対するトラップが実行されます。
.TP
.PD 0
\fBexport\fP [\fB\-fn\fP\^] [\fIname\fP[=\fIword\fP]] ...
.TP
.B export \-p
.PD
.\"O The supplied
.\"O .I names
.\"O are marked for automatic export to the environment of
.\"O subsequently executed commands.  If the 
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option is given,
.\"O the 
.\"O .I names
.\"O refer to functions.
与えられた
.I name
には印が付けられ、
これ以降に実行するコマンドの環境に
自動的にエクスポートされるようになります。
.B \-f
オプションを与えると、
.I name
は関数を参照します。
.\"O If no
.\"O .I names
.\"O are given, or if the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is supplied, a list
.\"O of all names that are exported in this shell is printed.
.I name
を与えなかった場合や、
.B \-p
オプションを与えた場合には、
このシェル内でエクスポートされている全ての名前のリストが出力されます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option causes the export property to be removed from the
.\"O named variables.
.B \-n
オプションを与えると、指定した変数からエクスポート属性が取り除かれます。
.\"O .B export
.\"O returns an exit status of 0 unless an invalid option is
.\"O encountered,
.\"O one of the \fInames\fP is not a valid shell variable name, or
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O is supplied with a
.\"O .I name
.\"O that is not a function.
不正なオプションがあった場合、
\fIname\fP のいずれかが不正なシェル変数名であった場合、
関数でない名前に対して
.B \-f
オプションを与えた場合を除き、
.B export
は終了ステータス 0 を返します。
.TP
.PD 0
\fBfc\fP [\fB\-e\fP \fIename\fP] [\fB\-nlr\fP] [\fIfirst\fP] [\fIlast\fP]
.TP
\fBfc\fP \fB\-s\fP [\fIpat\fP=\fIrep\fP] [\fIcmd\fP]
.PD
.\"O Fix Command.  In the first form, a range of commands from
.\"O .I first
.\"O to
.\"O .I last
.\"O is selected from the history list.
フィックスコマンド (Fix Command)。
最初の形式では、
.I first
から
.I last
までの範囲のコマンドが履歴リストから選択されます。
.\"O .I First
.\"O and
.\"O .I last
.\"O may be specified as a string (to locate the last command beginning
.\"O with that string) or as a number (an index into the history list,
.\"O where a negative number is used as an offset from the current
.\"O command number).  If 
.\"O .I last
.\"O is not specified it is set to
.\"O the current command for listing (so that
.\"O .if n ``fc \-l \-10''
.\"O .if t \f(CWfc \-l \-10\fP
.\"O prints the last 10 commands) and to
.\"O .I first
.\"O otherwise.
.I first
と
.I last
は文字列 (その文字列で始まる最後のコマンド) や
数値 (履歴リスト中でのインデックス。
負の値は現在のコマンド番号からのオフセットとして扱われます)
としても指定できます。
.I last
が指定されていなければ、リスト表示の場合には現在のコマンドが設定され
(したがって
.if n ``fc \-l \-10''
.if t \f(CWfc \-l \-10\fP
で最近のコマンド 10 個が出力されます)、それ以外の場合には
.I first
が設定されます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I first
.\"O is not specified it is set to the previous
.\"O command for editing and \-16 for listing.
.I first
が指定されていなければ、編集の場合には前のコマンドが設定され、
リスト表示の場合には \-16 が設定されます。
.sp 1
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option suppresses
.\"O the command numbers when listing.  The
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O option reverses the order of
.\"O the commands.  If the
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O option is given,
.\"O the commands are listed on
.\"O standard output.  Otherwise, the editor given by
.\"O .I ename
.\"O is invoked
.\"O on a file containing those commands.  If
.\"O .I ename
.\"O is not given, the
.\"O value of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FCEDIT
.\"O variable is used, and
.\"O the value of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EDITOR
.\"O if
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B FCEDIT
.\"O is not set.  If neither variable is set,
.\"O .FN vi
.\"O is used.  When editing is complete, the edited commands are
.\"O echoed and executed.
.B \-n
オプションを与えるとリストにコマンド番号が付きません。
.B \-r
オプションを与えるとコマンドの順序が逆になります。
.B \-l
オプションを与えると、コマンドは標準出力にリスト表示されます。
それ以外の場合には、これらのコマンドが書かれたファイルに対し、
.I ename
で指定したエディタが起動されます。
.I ename
が与えられていない場合は、変数
.SM
.B FCEDIT
の値が使われ、
.SM
.B FCEDIT
も設定されていない場合には
.SM
.B EDITOR
の値が使われます。
どちらの変数も設定されていなければ、
.FN vi
が使われます。
編集が終了すると、編集されたコマンドがエコー表示され、実行されます。
.sp 1
.\"O In the second form, \fIcommand\fP is re-executed after each instance
.\"O of \fIpat\fP is replaced by \fIrep\fP.
2 番目の形式では、\fIpat\fP の部分をそれぞれ \fIrep\fP で置き換えた後に
\fIcommand\fP が再実行されます。
.\"O A useful alias to use with this is
.\"O .if n ``r=fc -s'',
.\"O .if t \f(CWr='fc \-s'\fP,
.\"O so that typing
.\"O .if n ``r cc''
.\"O .if t \f(CWr cc\fP
.\"O runs the last command beginning with
.\"O .if n ``cc''
.\"O .if t \f(CWcc\fP
.\"O and typing
.\"O .if n ``r''
.\"O .if t \f(CWr\fP
.\"O re-executes the last command.
これを利用している便利なエイリアスに
.if n ``r=fc -s''
.if t \f(CWr='fc \-s'\fP
があります。
これを用いると
.if n ``r cc''
.if t \f(CWr cc\fP
と入力すれば
.if n ``cc''
.if t \f(CWcc\fP
で始まる最も新しいコマンドを実行でき、
.if n ``r''
.if t \f(CWr\fP
の入力すれば直前のコマンドを再実行できます。
.sp 1
.\"O If the first form is used, the return value is 0 unless an invalid
.\"O option is encountered or
.\"O .I first
.\"O or
.\"O .I last
.\"O specify history lines out of range.
最初の形式を用いた場合、不正なオプションがあるか、
.I first
または
.I last
が履歴行の範囲外を指定していなければ、返り値は 0 となります。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-e
.\"O option is supplied, the return value is the value of the last
.\"O command executed or failure if an error occurs with the temporary
.\"O file of commands.  If the second form is used, the return status
.\"O is that of the command re-executed, unless
.\"O .I cmd
.\"O does not specify a valid history line, in which case
.\"O .B fc
.\"O returns failure.
.B \-e
オプションが与えられた場合、
返り値は最後に実行されたコマンドの返り値となるか、
あるいはコマンドの一時ファイルでエラーが起きた場合には偽となります。
2 番目の形式を用いた場合、
終了ステータスは再実行されたコマンドの終了ステータスとなります。
ただし、
.I cmd
が有効な履歴行を指定していない場合は別で、この場合には
.B fc
は偽を返します。
.TP
\fBfg\fP [\fIjobspec\fP]
.\"O Resume
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O in the foreground, and make it the current job.
.I jobspec
の実行をフォアグラウンドで再開し、これをカレントジョブとします。
.\"O If
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O is not present, the shell's notion of the \fIcurrent job\fP is used.
.I jobspec
が無い場合、シェルが記録している\fIカレントジョブ\fPが使われます。
.\"O The return value is that of the command placed into the foreground,
.\"O or failure if run when job control is disabled or, when run with
.\"O job control enabled, if
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O does not specify a valid job or
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O specifies a job that was started without job control.
返り値はフォアグラウンドで再開されたコマンドの返り値ですが、
ジョブ制御が無効であるときに実行した場合や、
ジョブ制御が有効であっても
.I jobspec
が有効なジョブを指定していない場合や
.I jobspec
がジョブ制御無しで実行したジョブを指定している場合には偽となります。
.TP
\fBgetopts\fP \fIoptstring\fP \fIname\fP [\fIargs\fP]
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O is used by shell procedures to parse positional parameters.
.B getopts
はシェルの手続きが位置パラメータを解釈するために使います。
.\"O .I optstring
.\"O contains the option characters to be recognized; if a character
.\"O is followed by a colon, the option is expected to have an
.\"O argument, which should be separated from it by white space.
.I optstring
は識別の対象であるオプション文字列です。
ある文字の後にコロンがある場合、
そのオプションは引き数を取ることが期待されます。
引き数は空白でオプション文字と区切られていなければなりません。
.\"O The colon and question mark characters may not be used as
.\"O option characters.
コロンと疑問符はオプション文字として使えません。
.\"O Each time it is invoked,
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O places the next option in the shell variable
.\"O .IR name ,
.\"O initializing
.\"O .I name
.\"O if it does not exist,
.\"O and the index of the next argument to be processed into the
.\"O variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR OPTIND .
呼び出される度に、
.B getopts
は次に見つかったオプションをシェル変数
.I name
に格納し
.RI ( name
が存在しなければ初期化を行います)、
次に処理される引き数のインデックスを変数
.SM
.B OPTIND
に格納します。
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B OPTIND
.\"O is initialized to 1 each time the shell or a shell script
.\"O is invoked.  When an option requires an argument,
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O places that argument into the variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR OPTARG .
.SM
.B OPTIND
はシェルまたはシェルスクリプトが呼び出される度に 1 に初期化されます。
オプションが引き数を必要とする場合には、
.B getopts
はその引き数を変数
.SM
.B OPTARG
に格納します。
.\"O The shell does not reset
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B OPTIND
.\"O automatically; it must be manually reset between multiple
.\"O calls to
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O within the same shell invocation if a new set of parameters
.\"O is to be used.
シェルが
.SM
.B OPTIND
を自動的に再設定することはありません。
1 つのシェルが呼び出されている間に別のパラメータの組合せを使う場合には、
.B getopts
の呼び出しの間に手動で再設定を行わなければなりません。
.sp 1
.\"O When the end of options is encountered, \fBgetopts\fP exits with a
.\"O return value greater than zero.
.\"O \fBOPTIND\fP is set to the index of the first non-option argument,
.\"O and \fBname\fP is set to ?.
オプションの終わりに到達すると、
\fBgetopts\fP は 0 より大きい返り値で終了します。
\fBOPTIND\fP にはオプションでない最初の引き数のインデックスが設定され、
\fBname\fP には ? が設定されます。
.sp 1
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O normally parses the positional parameters, but if more arguments are
.\"O given in
.\"O .IR args ,
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O parses those instead.
.B getopts
は通常位置パラメータを展開しますが、他の引き数が
.I args
に指定されている場合には、
.B getopts
は位置パラメータでなくこれらを展開します。
.sp 1
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O can report errors in two ways.  If the first character of
.\"O .I optstring
.\"O is a colon,
.\"O .I silent
.\"O error reporting is used.  In normal operation diagnostic messages
.\"O are printed when invalid options or missing option arguments are
.\"O encountered.
.B getopts
は 2 通りの方法でエラーを報告できます。
.I optstring
の最初の文字がコロンならば、
.I 静かな (silent)
エラー報告が行われます。
通常の操作では、不正なオプションがある場合や
オプションの引き数が足りない場合に診断メッセージが出力されます。
.\"O If the variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B OPTERR
.\"O is set to 0, no error messages will be displayed, even if the first
.\"O character of 
.\"O .I optstring
.\"O is not a colon.
変数
.SM
.B OPTERR
に 0 が設定されている場合、エラーメッセージは全く出力されません。
これは、
.I optstring
の最初の文字がコロンでなくても同じです。
.sp 1
.\"O If an invalid option is seen,
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O places ? into
.\"O .I name
.\"O and, if not silent,
.\"O prints an error message and unsets
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR OPTARG .
不正なオプションがあった場合、
.B getopts
は ? を
.I name
に設定します。
さらに、静かなモードでない場合にはエラーメッセージが出力され、
.SM
.B OPTARG
の設定が取り消されます。
.\"O If
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O is silent,
.\"O the option character found is placed in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B OPTARG
.\"O and no diagnostic message is printed.
.B getopts
が静かなモードであれば、見つかったオプション文字は
.SM
.B OPTARG
に設定され、診断メッセージは出力されません。
.sp 1
.\"O If a required argument is not found, and
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O is not silent,
.\"O a question mark (\^\fB?\fP\^) is placed in
.\"O .IR name ,
.\"O .B OPTARG
.\"O is unset, and a diagnostic message is printed.
必要な引き数が見つからず、かつ
.B getopts
が静かなモードでない場合には、疑問符 (\^\fB?\fP\^) が
.I name
に設定され、
.B OPTARG
の設定が取り消され、診断メッセージが出力されます。
.\"O If
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O is silent, then a colon (\^\fB:\fP\^) is placed in
.\"O .I name
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B OPTARG
.\"O is set to the option character found.
.B getopts
が静かなモードならば、コロン (\^\fB:\fP\^) が
.I name
に設定され、
.SM
.B OPTARG
には見つかったオプション文字が設定されます。
.sp 1
.\"O .B getopts
.\"O returns true if an option, specified or unspecified, is found.
.\"O It returns false if the end of options is encountered or an
.\"O error occurs.
(指定の有無に関係なく) オプションが見つかった場合、
.B getopts
は真を返します。
オプションの最後に到達した場合や、エラーが起きた場合には、
.B getopts
は偽を返します。
.TP
\fBhash\fP [\fB\-r\fP] [\fB\-p\fP \fIfilename\fP] [\fIname\fP]
.\"O For each
.\"O .IR name ,
.\"O the full file name of the command is determined by searching
.\"O the directories in
.\"O .B $PATH
.\"O and remembered.
.I name
それぞれに対して、
.B $PATH
内のディレクトリの検索を行ってコマンドの完全なファイル名を調べ、
その結果を記憶します。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is supplied, no path search is performed, and
.\"O .I filename
.\"O is used as the full file name of the command.
.B \-p
オプションが指定されると、パス検索は実行されず、
.I filename
がそのコマンドの完全なファイル名として使われます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O option causes the shell to forget all
.\"O remembered locations.  If no arguments are given, information
.\"O about remembered commands is printed.
.\"O The return status is true unless a
.\"O .I name
.\"O is not found or an invalid option is supplied.
.B \-r
オプションを与えると、シェルは記憶している位置を全て忘れます。
引き数が与えられていない場合は、
記憶しているコマンドに関する情報が出力されます。
.I name
が見つからない場合と不正なオプションが与えられた場合を除き、
返却ステータスは真となります。
.TP
\fBhelp\fP [\fB\-s\fP] [\fIpattern\fP]
.\"O Display helpful information about builtin commands.  If
.\"O .I pattern
.\"O is specified,
.\"O .B help
.\"O gives detailed help on all commands matching
.\"O .IR pattern ;
.\"O otherwise help for all the builtins and shell control structures
.\"O is printed.
組み込みコマンドのヘルプ情報を表示します。
.I pattern
が指定された場合には、
.B help
はこの
.I pattern
にマッチする全てのコマンドに関する詳しいヘルプを出力します。
それ以外の場合には、
全ての組み込みコマンドと制御構造についての説明が出力されます。
.\"O The \fB\-s\fP option restricts the information displayed to a short
.\"O usage synopsis.
\fB\-s\fP オプションは、表示されるヘルプ情報を短い書式の使用法に限定します。
.\"O The return status is 0 unless no command matches
.\"O .IR pattern .
.I pattern
にマッチするコマンドが全くない場合を除き、返却ステータスは 0 です。
.TP
.PD 0
\fBhistory [\fIn\fP]
.TP
\fBhistory\fP \fB\-c\fP
.TP
\fBhistory \-d\fP \fIoffset\fP
.TP
\fBhistory\fP \fB\-anrw\fP [\fIfilename\fP]
.TP
\fBhistory\fP \fB\-p\fP \fIarg\fP [\fIarg ...\fP]
.TP
\fBhistory\fP \fB\-s\fP \fIarg\fP [\fIarg ...\fP]
.PD
.\"O With no options, display the command
.\"O history list with line numbers.  Lines listed
.\"O with a 
.\"O .B *
.\"O have been modified.  An argument of
.\"O .I n
.\"O lists only the last
.\"O .I n
.\"O lines.  If \fIfilename\fP is supplied, it is used as the
.\"O name of the history file; if not, the value of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B HISTFILE
.\"O is used.  Options, if supplied, have the following meanings:
オプションがない場合には、行番号付きでコマンド履歴を表示します。
.B *
付きでリスト表示されている行は変更された行です。
引き数
.I n
を指定すると、最新の
.I n
行だけがリスト表示されます。
\fIfilename\fP が与えられている場合、
これは履歴ファイルの名前として使われます。
これが与えられていない場合には
.SM
.B HISTFILE
の値が使われます。(指定されていれば) オプションは以下の意味を持ちます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Clear the history list by deleting all the entries.
履歴リストの全てのエントリを削除し、クリアします。
.TP
\fB\-d\fP \fIoffset\fP
.\"O Delete the history entry at position \fIoffset\fP.
\fIoffset\fP 番目にある履歴エントリを削除します。
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Append the ``new'' history lines (history lines entered since the
.\"O beginning of the current \fBbash\fP session) to the history file.
「新しい」履歴行
(\fBbash\fP の現在のセッションの開始以来入力された履歴行)
を履歴ファイルに追加します。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Read the history lines not already read from the history
.\"O file into the current history list.  These are lines
.\"O appended to the history file since the beginning of the
.\"O current \fBbash\fP session.
まだ履歴ファイルから読み込んでいない履歴行を
現在の履歴リストに読み込みます。
これらは、\fBbash\fP の現在のセッションの開始以降に
履歴ファイルに追加された行です。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Read the contents of the history file
.\"O and use them as the current history.
履歴ファイルの内容を読み込み、これらを現在の履歴として用います。
.TP
.B \-w
.\"O Write the current history to the history file, overwriting the
.\"O history file's contents.
現在の履歴を履歴ファイルに書き込みます。履歴ファイルの内容は上書きされます。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O Perform history substitution on the following \fIargs\fP and display
.\"O the result on the standard output.
.\"O Does not store the results in the history list.
.\"O Each \fIarg\fP must be quoted to disable normal history expansion.
後に続く \fIargs\fP に対して履歴置換を行い、
その結果を標準出力に表示します。
この結果は履歴リストには格納されません。
通常の履歴展開が行われないようにするため、
\fIarg\fP はそれぞれクォートしなければなりません。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Store the
.\"O .I args
.\"O in the history list as a single entry.  The last command in the
.\"O history list is removed before the
.\"O .I args
.\"O are added.
.I args
を 1 つのエントリとして履歴リストに格納します。
履歴リストの最後のコマンドは、
.I args
が追加される前に削除されます。
.PD
.PP
.\"O The return value is 0 unless an invalid option is encountered, an
.\"O error occurs while reading or writing the history file, an invalid
.\"O \fIoffset\fP is supplied as an argument to \fB\-d\fP, or the
.\"O history expansion supplied as an argument to \fB\-p\fP fails.
不正なオプションがある場合、
履歴ファイルの読み書きの間にエラーが起きた場合、
\fB\-d\fP オプションの引き数として不正な \fIoffset\fP の値が与えられた場合、
\fB\-p\fP オプションの引き数として与えられた履歴展開が失敗した場合を除き、
返り値は 0 になります。
.RE
.TP
.PD 0
\fBjobs\fP [\fB\-lnprs\fP] [ \fIjobspec\fP ... ]
.TP
\fBjobs\fP \fB\-x\fP \fIcommand\fP [ \fIargs\fP ... ]
.PD
.\"O The first form lists the active jobs.  The options have the following
.\"O meanings:
最初の形式を実行すると、アクティブなジョブがリスト表示されます。
オプションは以下の意味を持ちます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O List process IDs
.\"O in addition to the normal information.
通常の情報に加えて、プロセス ID をリスト表示します。
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O List only the process ID of the job's process group
.\"O leader.
そのジョブが属するプロセスグループのリーダーのプロセス ID だけを表示します。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Display information only about jobs that have changed status since
.\"O the user was last notified of their status.
ユーザがステータスを最後に通知されて以来、
ステータスの変更があったジョブに関する情報だけを表示します。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Restrict output to running jobs.
実行中のジョブだけを出力します。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Restrict output to stopped jobs.
停止中のジョブだけを出力します。
.PD
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O is given, output is restricted to information about that job.
.\"O The return status is 0 unless an invalid option is encountered
.\"O or an invalid
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O is supplied.
.I jobspec
が与えられている場合、
そのジョブに関する情報だけが出力されるます。
不正なオプションがある場合や、不正な
.I jobspec
が与えられた場合を除き、返却ステータスは 0 です。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-x
.\"O option is supplied,
.\"O .B jobs
.\"O replaces any
.\"O .I jobspec
.\"O found in
.\"O .I command
.\"O or
.\"O .I args
.\"O with the corresponding process group ID, and executes
.\"O .I command
.\"O passing it
.\"O .IR args ,
.\"O returning its exit status.
.B \-x
オプションが与えられた場合、
.B jobs
は
.I command
や
.I args
中で見つかった
.I jobspec
を全て対応するプロセスグループ ID に置き換え、
.I args
を渡して
.I command
を実行し、その終了ステータスを返します。
.RE
.TP
.PD 0
\fBkill\fP [\fB\-s\fP \fIsigspec\fP | \fB\-n\fP \fIsignum\fP | \fB\-\fP\fIsigspec\fP] [\fIpid\fP | \fIjobspec\fP] ...
.TP
\fBkill\fP \fB\-l\fP [\fIsigspec\fP | \fIexit_status\fP]
.PD
.\"O Send the signal named by
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O or
.\"O .I signum
.\"O to the processes named by
.\"O .I pid
.\"O or
.\"O .IR jobspec .
.I sigspec
または
.I signum
で指定されたシグナルを、
.I pid
または
.I jobspec
で指定されたプロセスに送ります。
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O is either a signal name such as
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGKILL
.\"O or a signal number;
.I sigspec
は
.SM
.B SIGKILL
のようなシグナル名、またはシグナルの番号です。
.\"O .I signum
.\"O is a signal number.  If
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O is a signal name, the name may be
.\"O given with or without the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIG
.\"O prefix.
.I signum
はシグナルの番号です。
.I sigspec
がシグナル名ならば、その名前には
.SM
.B SIG
プレフィックスはあっても無くても構いません。
.\"O If
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O is not present, then
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGTERM
.\"O is assumed.
.I sigspec
が無い場合には、
.SM
.B SIGTERM
が指定されたものとします。
.\"O An argument of
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O lists the signal names.
引き数に
.B \-l
を与えるとシグナル名がリスト表示されます。
.\"O If any arguments are supplied when
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O is given, the names of the signals corresponding to the arguments are
.\"O listed, and the return status is 0.
.B \-l
と同時に引き数を与えると、
引き数に対応するシグナルの名前がリスト表示され、
返却ステータスは 0 となります。
.\"O The \fIexit_status\fP argument to
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O is a number specifying either a signal number or the exit status of
.\"O a process terminated by a signal.
.B \-l
に対する引き数 \fIexit_status\fP は、
シグナル番号、またはシグナルによって終了させられた
プロセスの終了ステータスを指定する数です。
.\"O .B kill
.\"O returns true if at least one signal was successfully sent, or false
.\"O if an error occurs or an invalid option is encountered.
少なくとも 1 つのシグナルを正常に送れた場合、
.B kill
は真を返します。
エラーが起きた場合や不正なオプションがあった場合には、
.B kill
は偽を返します。
.TP
\fBlet\fP \fIarg\fP [\fIarg\fP ...]
.\"O Each
.\"O .I arg
.\"O is an arithmetic expression to be evaluated (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "ARITHMETIC EVALUATION" ).
各
.I arg
は評価される算術式です (
.SM
.B 算術式展開
を参照)。
.\"O If the last
.\"O .I arg
.\"O evaluates to 0,
.\"O .B let
.\"O returns 1; 0 is returned otherwise.
最後の
.I arg
を評価した結果が 0 であれば、
.B let
は 1 を返します。
それ以外の場合には 0 が返されます。
.TP
\fBlocal\fP [\fIoption\fP] [\fIname\fP[=\fIvalue\fP] ...]
.\"O For each argument, a local variable named
.\"O .I name 
.\"O is created, and assigned
.\"O .IR value .
それぞれの引き数に対して
.I name 
という名前のローカル変数が生成され、
.I value
が代入されます。
.\"O The \fIoption\fP can be any of the options accepted by \fBdeclare\fP.
\fIoption\fP には、
\fBdeclare\fP コマンドに使えるオプションがすべて使えます。
.\"O When
.\"O .B local
.\"O is used within a function, it causes the variable
.\"O .I name
.\"O to have a visible scope restricted to that function and its children.
関数内で
.B local
を使った場合、この変数
.I name
の可視スコープは、この関数とこの関数の子に制限されます。
.\"O With no operands,
.\"O .B local
.\"O writes a list of local variables to the standard output.  It is
.\"O an error to use
.\"O .B local
.\"O when not within a function.  The return status is 0 unless
.\"O .B local
.\"O is used outside a function, an invalid
.\"O .I name
.\"O is supplied, or
.\"O \fIname\fP is a readonly variable.
オペランドが無い場合、
.B local
はローカル変数の一覧を標準出力に出力します。
関数の内部以外で
.B local
を使うとエラーになります。
.B local
が関数の外部で使われたり、
不正な
.I name
が与えられたり、
\fIname\fP が読み取り専用であったりしなければ、
.B local
の返却ステータスは 0 となります。
.TP
.B logout
.\"O Exit a login shell.
ログインシェルを終了します。
.TP
\fBpopd\fP [\-\fBn\fP] [+\fIn\fP] [\-\fIn\fP]
.\"O Removes entries from the directory stack.  With no arguments,
.\"O removes the top directory from the stack, and performs a
.\"O .B cd
.\"O to the new top directory.
.\"O Arguments, if supplied, have the following meanings:
ディレクトリスタックからエントリを削除します。
引き数が無い場合には、スタック先頭のディレクトリが削除され、
新しく先頭となったディレクトリへの
.B cd
が実行されます。
引き数が指定された場合には、これは以下の意味を持ちます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
\fB+\fP\fIn\fP
.\"O Removes the \fIn\fPth entry counting from the left of the list
.\"O shown by
.\"O .BR dirs ,
.\"O starting with zero.  For example:
.\"O .if n ``popd +0''
.\"O .if t \f(CWpopd +0\fP
.\"O removes the first directory,
.\"O .if n ``popd +1''
.\"O .if t \f(CWpopd +1\fP
.\"O the second.
.B dirs
で表示されるリストの左から数えて \fIn\fP 番目のエントリを削除します。
エントリは 0 から数えます。例えば、
.if n ``popd +0''
.if t \f(CWpopd +0\fP
は最初のディレクトリを削除し、
.if n ``popd +1''
.if t \f(CWpopd +1\fP
は 2 番目のディレクトリを削除します。
.TP
\fB\-\fP\fIn\fP
.\"O Removes the \fIn\fPth entry counting from the right of the list
.\"O shown by
.\"O .BR dirs ,
.\"O starting with zero.  For example:
.\"O .if n ``popd -0''
.\"O .if t \f(CWpopd -0\fP
.\"O removes the last directory,
.\"O .if n ``popd -1''
.\"O .if t \f(CWpopd -1\fP
.\"O the next to last.
.B dirs
で表示されるリストの右から数えて \fIn\fP 番目のエントリを削除します。
エントリは 0 から数えます。例えば、
.if n ``popd -0''
.if t \f(CWpopd -0\fP
は最後のディレクトリを削除し、
.if n ``popd -1''
.if t \f(CWpopd -1\fP
は最後の 1 つ前のディレクトリを削除します。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Suppresses the normal change of directory when removing directories
.\"O from the stack, so that only the stack is manipulated.
スタックからディレクトリを削除する際に、
通常のディレクトリ変更を行いません。
したがって、スタックだけが操作されます。
.PD
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B popd
.\"O command is successful, a 
.\"O .B dirs
.\"O is performed as well, and the return status is 0.
.B popd
コマンドが成功すれば、
.B dirs
も実行され、返却ステータスは 0 となります。
.\"O .B popd
.\"O returns false if an invalid option is encountered, the directory stack
.\"O is empty, a non-existent directory stack entry is specified, or the
.\"O directory change fails.
.B popd
が偽を返すのは、不正なオプションがあった場合・
ディレクトリスタックが空の場合・
ディレクトリスタックの存在しないエントリが指定された場合・
ディレクトリ変更に失敗した場合です。
.RE
.TP
\fBprintf\fP \fIformat\fP [\fIarguments\fP]
.\"O Write the formatted \fIarguments\fP to the standard output under the
.\"O control of the \fIformat\fP.
.\"O The \fIformat\fP is a character string which contains three types of objects:
.\"O plain characters, which are simply copied to standard output, character
.\"O escape sequences, which are converted and copied to the standard output, and
.\"O format specifications, each of which causes printing of the next successive
.\"O \fIargument\fP.
\fIarguments\fP を整形して標準出力に書き出します。
フォーマットは \fIformat\fP で制御します。
\fIformat\fP は 3 つのタイプのオブジェクトを含む文字列です。
3 つのオブジェクトとは、(そのまま標準出力にコピーされる) プレーン文字・
(変換されて標準出力にコピーされる) 文字エスケープシーケンス・
(その後に続く引き数 \fIargument\fP それぞれの表示に用いられる)
表示フォーマット指定、です。
.\"O In addition to the standard \fIprintf\fP(1) formats, %b causes
.\"O \fBprintf\fP to expand backslash escape sequences in the corresponding
.\"O \fIargument\fP, and %q causes \fBprintf\fP to output the corresponding
.\"O \fIargument\fP in a format that can be reused as shell input.
\fIprintf\fP(1) 標準のフォーマット以外に、以下のフォーマットが使えます。
%b を用いると、\fBprintf\fP は対応する \fIargument\fP 中の
バックスラッシュのエスケープシーケンスを展開します。
また %q を用いると、\fBprintf\fP は対応する
\fIargument\fP をシェルの入力として再利用できるフォーマットで出力します。
.sp 1
.\"O The \fIformat\fP is reused as necessary to consume all of the \fIarguments\fP.
.\"O If the \fIformat\fP requires more \fIarguments\fP than are supplied, the
.\"O extra format specifications behave as if a zero value or null string, as
.\"O appropriate, had been supplied.  The return value is zero on success,
.\"O non-zero on failure.
\fIformat\fP は必要に応じて再利用され、
全ての \fIarguments\fP を処理します。
与えられたよりも多くの \fIarguments\fP を
\fIformat\fP が必要とする場合、余分のフォーマット指定は、
0 と空文字列のうち、適切な方が指定されたかのように動作します。
成功した場合の返り値は 0 で、失敗した場合の返り値は 0 以外です。
.TP
.PD 0
\fBpushd\fP [\fB\-n\fP] [\fIdir\fP]
.TP
\fBpushd\fP [\fB\-n\fP] [+\fIn\fP] [\-\fIn\fP]
.PD
.\"O Adds a directory to the top of the directory stack, or rotates
.\"O the stack, making the new top of the stack the current working
.\"O directory.  With no arguments, exchanges the top two directories
.\"O and returns 0, unless the directory stack is empty.
.\"O Arguments, if supplied, have the following meanings:
ディレクトリをディレクトリのスタックに追加するか、
スタックをローテートさせます。
この時、新しいスタックの最も上にあるものを
カレントの作業ディレクトリにします。
引き数を与えなければ、
一番上の 2 つのディレクトリを交換し、0 を返します。
ただし、ディレクトリスタックが空の場合を除きます。
引き数を与えた場合には、以下の意味を持ちます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
\fB+\fP\fIn\fP
.\"O Rotates the stack so that the \fIn\fPth directory
.\"O (counting from the left of the list shown by
.\"O .BR dirs ,
.\"O starting with zero)
.\"O is at the top.
スタックをローテートさせ、\fIn\fP 番目のディレクトリを一番上にします。
このとき
.B dirs
が表示するリストは左から数え始め、その左端は 0 となります。
.TP
\fB\-\fP\fIn\fP
.\"O Rotates the stack so that the \fIn\fPth directory
.\"O (counting from the right of the list shown by
.\"O .BR dirs ,
.\"O starting with zero) is at the top.
スタックをローテートさせ、\fIn\fP 番目のディレクトリを一番上にします。
このとき
.B dirs
が表示するリストは右から数え始め、その右端は 0 となります。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Suppresses the normal change of directory when adding directories
.\"O to the stack, so that only the stack is manipulated.
ディレクトリをスタックに追加した時に、
通常のディレクトリ変更を行いません。
したがって、スタックだけが操作されます。
.TP
.I dir
.\"O Adds
.\"O .I dir
.\"O to the directory stack at the top, making it the
.\"O new current working directory.
.I dir
をディレクトリスタックの一番上に追加します。
また、このディレクトリを新しいカレントの作業ディレクトリにします。
.PD
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B pushd
.\"O command is successful, a 
.\"O .B dirs
.\"O is performed as well.
.B pushd
コマンドが成功すると、
.B dirs
コマンドも実行されます。
.\"O If the first form is used,
.\"O .B pushd
.\"O returns 0 unless the cd to
.\"O .I dir
.\"O fails.  With the second form,
.\"O .B pushd
.\"O returns 0 unless the directory stack is empty,
.\"O a non-existent directory stack element is specified,
.\"O or the directory change to the specified new current directory
.\"O fails.
最初の形式を使った場合、
.I dir
への cd が失敗しなければ、
.B pushd
は 0 を返します。
2 番目の形式を使った場合にも、
.B pushd
は基本的には 0 を返します。
ただし、ディレクトリスタックが空の場合・
ディレクトリスタックの存在しない要素が指定された場合・
指定された新しいカレントディレクトリへの
ディレクトリ変更が失敗した場合は除きます。
.RE
.TP
\fBpwd\fP [\fB\-LP\fP]
.\"O Print the absolute pathname of the current working directory.
.\"O The pathname printed contains no symbolic links if the
.\"O .B \-P
.\"O option is supplied or the 
.\"O .B \-o physical
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin command is enabled.
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-L
.\"O option is used, the pathname printed may contain symbolic links.
.\"O The return status is 0 unless an error occurs while
.\"O reading the name of the current directory or an
.\"O invalid option is supplied.
現在の作業ディレクトリの絶対パス名を出力します。
.B \-P
オプションが指定された場合や、組み込みコマンド
.B set
の
.B \-o physical
オプションが有効になっている場合には、
出力されるパス名にはシンボリックリンクは含まれません。
.B \-L
オプションを使うと、
出力されるパス名にはシンボリックリンクが含まれているかもしれません。
カレントディレクトリの名前を読む際にエラーが起きたり、
不正なオプションが与えられなければ、返却ステータスは 0 となります。
.TP
\fBread\fP [\fB\-ers\fP] [\fB\-t\fP \fItimeout\fP] [\fB\-a\fP \fIaname\fP] [\fB\-p\fP \fIprompt\fP] [\fB\-n\fP \fInchars\fP] [\fB\-d\fP \fIdelim\fP] [\fIname\fP ...]
.\"O One line is read from the standard input, and the first word
.\"O is assigned to the first
.\"O .IR name ,
.\"O the second word to the second
.\"O .IR name ,
.\"O and so on, with leftover words and their intervening separators assigned
.\"O to the last
.\"O .IR name .
.\"O If there are fewer words read from the standard input than names,
.\"O the remaining names are assigned empty values.
.\"O The characters in 
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B IFS
.\"O are used to split the line into words.
標準入力から 1 行を読み込み、最初の単語を最初の
.I name
に代入し、2 番目の単語を 2 番目の
.I name
に代入します。以降も同様です。
余った単語とそれらの間の区切り文字は、最後の
.I name
に代入されます。
.I name
よりも標準入力から読み込んだ単語の方が少ない場合には、
余っている
.I name
には空文字列が値として代入されます。
.SM
.B IFS
中の文字が、行を単語に分割するために使われます。
.\"O The backslash character (\fB\e\fP) may be used to remove any special
.\"O meaning for the next character read and for line continuation.
バックスラッシュ文字 (\fB\e\fP) を使うと、
次に読み込んだ文字の特殊な意味を消したり、行を連結したりできます。
.\"O Options, if supplied, have the following meanings:
オプションが与えられていれば、以下の意味を持ちます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-a \fIaname\fP
.\"O The words are assigned to sequential indices
.\"O of the array variable
.\"O .IR aname ,
.\"O starting at 0.
.\"O .I aname
.\"O is unset before any new values are assigned.
.\"O Other \fIname\fP arguments are ignored.
単語を配列変数
.I aname
にインデックス順に代入します。インデックスは 0 から始まります。
新しい値が代入される前には、
.I aname
の設定は消されます。他の
\fIname\fP
引き数は無視されます。
.TP
.B \-d \fIdelim\fP
.\"O The first character of \fIdelim\fP is used to terminate the input line,
.\"O rather than newline.
改行ではなく、\fIdelim\fP の最初の文字が、入力行を終了するために使われます。
.TP
.B \-e
.\"O If the standard input
.\"O is coming from a terminal,
.\"O .B readline
.\"O (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B READLINE
.\"O above) is used to obtain the line.
標準入力を端末から読み込む場合、
.B readline
(前述の
.SM
.B READLINE ライブラリ
のセクションを参照) を使って行を取得します。
.TP
.B \-n \fInchars\fP
.\"O \fBread\fP returns after reading \fInchars\fP characters rather than
.\"O waiting for a complete line of input.
組み込みコマンド \fBread\fP は、
入力行全体が読み込まれるのを待たず、
文字 \fInchars\fP を読み込んだ時に戻ります。
.TP
.B \-p \fIprompt\fP
.\"O Display \fIprompt\fP, without a
.\"O trailing newline, before attempting to read any input.  The prompt
.\"O is displayed only if input is coming from a terminal.
入力を読み込もうとする前に\fIプロンプト\fPを表示します。
末尾に改行は付きません。
プロンプトが表示されるのは、入力を端末から読み込む場合だけです。
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Backslash does not act as an escape character.
.\"O The backslash is considered to be part of the line.
.\"O In particular, a backslash-newline pair may not be used as a line
.\"O continuation.
バックスラッシュはエスケープ文字として作用しません。
バックスラッシュは行の一部と見なされます。
特に、バックスラッシュと改行の組合せを使って
複数の行を接続することはできません。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Silent mode.  If input is coming from a terminal, characters are
.\"O not echoed.
静かな (silent) モード。端末に入力が行われても、文字はエコーされません。
.TP
.B \-t \fItimeout\fP
.\"O Cause \fBread\fP to time out and return failure if a complete line of
.\"O input is not read within \fItimeout\fP seconds.
.\"O This option has no effect if \fBread\fP is not reading input from the
.\"O terminal or a pipe.
入力行全体が \fItimeout\fP 秒以内で読み込まれない場合、
\fBread\fP をタイムアウトさせて、失敗の状態を返します。
このオプションは、
\fBread\fP が入力を端末やパイプから読み込んでいない場合、
何も効果がありません。
.PD
.PP
.\"O If no
.\"O .I names
.\"O are supplied, the line read is assigned to the variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR REPLY .
.\"O The return code is zero, unless end-of-file is encountered or \fBread\fP
.\"O times out.
.I name
が全く与えられていない場合、読み込まれた行は変数
.SM
.B REPLY
に代入されます。ファイル末尾に到達したり
\fBread\fP がタイムアウトしたりしなければ、終了コードは 0 です。
.RE
.TP
\fBreadonly\fP [\fB\-apf\fP] [\fIname\fP ...]
.PD
.\"O The given
.\"O \fInames\fP are marked readonly; the values of these
.\"O .I names
.\"O may not be changed by subsequent assignment.
指定された \fIname\fP に読み込み専用の印を付けます。
それ以降は、このような
.I name
の値を変更することはできません。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option is supplied, the functions corresponding to the
.\"O \fInames\fP are so
.\"O marked.
.B \-f
オプションを与えた場合、\fIname\fP に対応する関数に同様の印が付きます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option restricts the variables to arrays.
.B \-a
オプション与えると、配列変数だけが対象となります。
.\"O If no
.\"O .I name
.\"O arguments are given, or if the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is supplied, a list of all readonly names is printed.
.I name
引き数が全く与えられてない場合、または
.B \-p
オプションが与えられた場合、読み込み専用の名前全ての一覧が出力されます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option causes output to be displayed in a format that
.\"O may be reused as input.
.B \-p
オプションを使うと、
入力として再利用できるようなフォーマットで出力が行われます。
.\"O The return status is 0 unless an invalid option is encountered,
.\"O one of the
.\"O .I names
.\"O is not a valid shell variable name, or
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O is supplied with a
.\"O .I name
.\"O that is not a function.
返却ステータスは基本的に 0 ですが、
不正なオプションがあった場合、
.I name
のいずれかが有効なシェル変数名で無かった場合、
.B \-f
オプションに関数でない
.I name
を与えた場合は除きます。
.TP
\fBreturn\fP [\fIn\fP]
.\"O Causes a function to exit with the return value specified by
.\"O .IR n .
.\"O If 
.\"O .I n
.\"O is omitted, the return status is that of the last command
.\"O executed in the function body.  If used outside a function,
.\"O but during execution of a script by the 
.\"O .B .
.\"O (\fBsource\fP) command, it causes the shell to stop executing
.\"O that script and return either
.\"O .I n
.\"O or the exit status of the last command executed within the
.\"O script as the exit status of the script.  If used outside a
.\"O function and not during execution of a script by \fB.\fP\^,
.\"O the return status is false.
指定した返り値
.I n
で関数を終了させます。
.I n
を省略すると、返却ステータスは
関数内で最後に実行したコマンドの返却ステータスになります。
関数の外側で使われているが、
.B .
(\fBsource\fP) コマンドによるスクリプトの実行中である場合、
シェルはそのスクリプトの実行を止め、
.I n
またはスクリプト内で最後に実行されたコマンドの終了ステータスを
スクリプトの終了ステータスとして返します。
関数の外側で \fB.\fP\^ によるスクリプトの実行中以外に使われた場合、
返却ステータスは偽となります。
.TP
\fBset\fP [\fB\-\-abefhkmnptuvxBCHP\fP] [\fB\-o\fP \fIoption\fP] [\fIarg\fP ...]
.\"O Without options, the name and value of each shell variable are displayed
.\"O in a format that can be reused as input.
.\"O The output is sorted according to the current locale.
.\"O When options are specified, they set or unset shell attributes.
.\"O Any arguments remaining after the options are processed are treated
.\"O as values for the positional parameters and are assigned, in order, to 
.\"O .BR $1 ,
.\"O .BR $2 ,
.\"O .B ...
.\"O .BR $\fIn\fP .
オプション無しの場合は、シェル変数全ての名前と値の組が表示されます。
表示は、入力として再利用できるフォーマットで行われます。
出力は現在のロケールに従ってソートされます。
オプションが指定されている場合、
オプションはシェルの属性を設定または解除します。
オプションが処理された後に残っている引き数があれば、
これは位置パラメータの値として扱われ、
.BR $1 ,
.BR $2 ,
.B ...
.B $\fIn\fP
の順に代入されます。
.\"O Options, if specified, have the following meanings:
オプションが指定されていれば、以下の意味を持ちます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 8
.B \-a
.\"O Automatically mark variables and functions which are modified or created
.\"O for export to the environment of subsequent commands.
値を変更したり新規に設定したりした変数および関数が、
自動的に (後に実行するコマンドの) 環境として
エクスポートされるようになります。
.TP 8
.B \-b
.\"O Report the status of terminated background jobs
.\"O immediately, rather than before the next primary prompt.  This is
.\"O effective only when job control is enabled.
終了したバックグラウンドジョブのステータス報告を、
次のプライマリプロンプトの前ではなく、即座に行います。
これはジョブ制御が有効な場合に限り有効です。
.TP 8
.B \-e
.\"O Exit immediately if a \fIsimple command\fP (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL GRAMMAR
.\"O above) exits with a non-zero status.  The shell does not exit if the
.\"O command that fails is part of an
.\"O .I until
.\"O or
.\"O .I while
.\"O loop,
.\"O part of an
.\"O .I if
.\"O statement, part of a
.\"O .B &&
.\"O or
.\"O .B \(bv\(bv
.\"O list, or if the command's return value is
.\"O being inverted via
.\"O .BR ! .
\fI単純なコマンド\fP (前述の
.SM
.B シェルの文法
セクションを参照) が 0 でないステータスで終了した場合、即座に終了します。
ただし失敗したコマンドが
.I until
または
.I while
ループの一部である、
.I if
文の一部である、
.B &&
または
.B \(bv\(bv
リストの一部である、
コマンドの返り値が
.B !
で反転されている、のいずれかの場合にはシェルは終了しません。
.TP 8
.B \-f
.\"O Disable pathname expansion.
パス名展開を無効にします。
.TP 8 
.B \-h
.\"O Remember the location of commands as they are looked up for execution.
.\"O This is enabled by default.
コマンドの位置を記憶し、実行時にこれを引きます。
これはデフォルトで有効になっています。
.TP 8
.B \-k
.\"O All arguments in the form of assignment statements
.\"O are placed in the environment for a command, not just
.\"O those that precede the command name.
代入文の形式を持つ全ての引き数を、コマンドに対する環境に追加します。
環境変数となるのは、コマンド名の前にあるものに限りません。
.TP 8
.B \-m
.\"O Monitor mode.  Job control is enabled.  This option is on
.\"O by default for interactive shells on systems that support
.\"O it (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B JOB CONTROL
.\"O above).  Background processes run in a separate process
.\"O group and a line containing their exit status is printed
.\"O upon their completion.
監視モード。ジョブ制御は有効になります。ジョブ制御 (前述の
.SM
.B ジョブ制御
セクションを参照) をサポートしているシステム上の対話的シェルでは、
このオプションはデフォルトで有効です。
別のプロセスグループで実行されたバックグラウンドプロセスと、
これらの終了ステータスが書かれた行が、プロセスの終了時に表示されます。
.TP 8
.B \-n
.\"O Read commands but do not execute them.  This may be used to 
.\"O check a shell script for syntax errors.  This is ignored by
.\"O interactive shells.
コマンドを読み込みますが実行はしません。
これを使うとシェルスクリプトの文法エラーをチェックできます。
このオプションは対話的シェルでは無視されます。
.TP 8
.B \-o \fIoption\-name\fP
.\"O The \fIoption\-name\fP can be one of the following:
\fIoption\-name\fP には、以下のいずれかを指定できます:
.RS
.TP 8
.B allexport
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-a .
.B \-a
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B braceexpand
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-B .
.B \-B
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B emacs
.\"O Use an emacs-style command line editing interface.  This is enabled
.\"O by default when the shell is interactive, unless the shell is started
.\"O with the
.\"O .B \-\-noediting
.\"O option.
emacs 形式のコマンド行編集インタフェースを使います。
これはシェルが対話的な場合には、デフォルトで有効です。
ただし、
.B \-\-noediting
オプション付きでシェルを実行した場合は除きます。
.TP 8
.B errexit
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-e .
.B \-e
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B hashall
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-h .
.B \-h
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B histexpand
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-H .
.B \-H
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B history
.\"O Enable command history, as described above under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR HISTORY .
.\"O This option is on by default in interactive shells.
コマンド履歴を有効にします。コマンド履歴については
.SM
.B 履歴
セクションで説明しています。
このオプションは、対話的シェルではデフォルトで有効です。
.TP 8
.B ignoreeof
.\"O The effect is as if the shell command
.\"O .if t \f(CWIGNOREEOF=10\fP
.\"O .if n ``IGNOREEOF=10''
.\"O had been executed
.\"O (see
.\"O .B Shell Variables
.\"O above).
効果は、シェルコマンドの
.if t \f(CWIGNOREEOF=10\fP
.if n ``IGNOREEOF=10''
を実行した場合と同様です
(前述の
.B シェル変数
を参照)。
.TP 8
.B keyword
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-k .
.B \-k
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B monitor
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-m .
.B \-m
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B noclobber
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-C .
.B \-C
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B noexec
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-n .
.B \-n
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B noglob
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-f .
.B \-f
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B notify
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-b .
.B \-b
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B nounset
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-u .
.B \-u
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B onecmd
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-t .
.B \-t
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B physical
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-P .
.B \-P
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B posix
.\"O Change the behavior of
.\"O .B bash
.\"O where the default operation differs
.\"O from the POSIX 1003.2 standard to match the standard (\fIposix mode\fP).
.B bash
の動作を変えます。
デフォルトの操作は POSIX 1003.2 標準と異なりますが、
これを標準に準拠するようにします (\fIposix モード\fP)。
.TP 8
.B privileged
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-p .
.B \-p
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B verbose
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-v .
.B \-v
と同じです。
.TP 8
.B vi
.\"O Use a vi-style command line editing interface.
vi 形式のコマンド行編集インタフェースを使います。
.TP 8
.B xtrace
.\"O Same as
.\"O .BR \-x .
.B \-x
と同じです。
.sp .5
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .B \-o
.\"O is supplied with no \fIoption\-name\fP, the values of the current options are
.\"O printed.
.\"O If
.\"O .B +o
.\"O is supplied with no \fIoption\-name\fP, a series of
.\"O .B set
.\"O commands to recreate the current option settings is displayed on
.\"O the standard output.
\fIoption\-name\fP 無しで
.B \-o
オプションを与えた場合、現在のオプションが出力されます。
\fIoption\-name\fP 無しで
.B +o
オプションを与えた場合、現在のオプション設定を再生成する
.B set
コマンドの列が標準出力に出力されます。
.RE
.TP 8
.B \-p
.\"O Turn on
.\"O .I privileged
.\"O mode.  In this mode, the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B $ENV
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B $BASH_ENV
.\"O files are not processed, shell functions are not inherited from the
.\"O environment, and the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELLOPTS
.\"O variable, if it appears in the environment, is ignored.
.I 特権 (privileged)
モードを有効にします。このモードでは
.SM
.B $ENV
と
.SM
.B $BASH_ENV
ファイルは処理されず、シェル関数は環境から継承されず、
.SM
.B SHELLOPTS
環境変数は定義されていても無視されます。
.\"O If the shell is started with the effective user (group) id not equal to the
.\"O real user (group) id, and the \fB\-p\fP option is not supplied, these actions
.\"O are taken and the effective user id is set to the real user id.
シェルを起動した時に実効ユーザ (グループ) ID が
実ユーザ (グループ) ID と異なり、
かつ \fB\-p\fP オプションが与えられていない場合、
これらの動作が行われ、実効ユーザ ID には実ユーザ ID が設定されます。
.\"O If the \fB\-p\fP option is supplied at startup, the effective user id is
.\"O not reset.
起動時に \fB\-p\fP オプションが与えられた場合、
実効ユーザ ID は再設定されません。
.\"O Turning this option off causes the effective user
.\"O and group ids to be set to the real user and group ids.
このオプションを無効にすると、
実効ユーザ ID と実効グループ ID には
実ユーザ ID と 実グループ ID が設定されます。
.TP 8
.B \-t
.\"O Exit after reading and executing one command.
コマンドを 1 つ読み込み、実行してから終了します。
.TP 8
.B \-u
.\"O Treat unset variables as an error when performing
.\"O parameter expansion.  If expansion is attempted on an
.\"O unset variable, the shell prints an error message, and,
.\"O if not interactive, exits with a non-zero status.
パラメータ展開の実行中に、設定が取り消されている変数をエラーとして扱います。
設定が取り消されている変数を展開しようとした場合、
シェルはエラーメッセージを出力します。
シェルが対話的でなければ、0 でないステータスで終了します。
.TP 8
.B \-v
.\"O Print shell input lines as they are read.
シェルの入力行を、読み込んだ際に表示します。
.TP 8
.B \-x
.\"O After expanding each \fIsimple command\fP,
.\"O display the expanded value of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR PS4 ,
.\"O followed by the command and its expanded arguments.
\fI単純なコマンド\fPをそれぞれ展開した後、
.SM
.B PS4
を展開した値を表示し、その後にそのコマンドと展開した引き数を表示します。
.TP 8
.B \-B
.\"O The shell performs brace expansion (see
.\"O .B Brace Expansion
.\"O above).  This is on by default.
シェルはブレース展開 (前述の
.B ブレース展開
を参照) を実行します。これはデフォルトで有効です。
.TP 8
.B \-C
.\"O If set,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O does not overwrite an existing file with the
.\"O .BR > ,
.\"O .BR >& ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B <>
.\"O redirection operators.  This may be overridden when 
.\"O creating output files by using the redirection operator
.\"O .B >|
.\"O instead of
.\"O .BR > .
設定されている場合、
.B bash
はリダイレクト演算子
.BR > ,
.BR >& ,
.B <>
で既存のファイルを上書きしません。
上書きができるのは、リダイレクト演算子
.B >|
を
.B >
の代わりに使った時です。
.TP 8
.B \-H
.\"O Enable
.\"O .B !
.\"O style history substitution.  This option is on by
.\"O default when the shell is interactive.
.B !
形式の履歴置換を有効にします。
このオプションは、シェルが対話的な時にはデフォルトで有効です。
.TP 8
.B \-P
.\"O If set, the shell does not follow symbolic links when executing
.\"O commands such as
.\"O .B cd
.\"O that change the current working directory.  It uses the
.\"O physical directory structure instead.  By default,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O follows the logical chain of directories when performing commands
.\"O which change the current directory.
設定されている場合、
.B cd
のような現在の作業ディレクトリを変更するコマンドを実行する時に、
シェルはシンボリックリンクを辿りません。
代わりに物理的ディレクトリ構造が使われます。
デフォルトでは、
.B bash
がカレントディレクトリを変更するコマンドを実行する際には、
ディレクトリの論理的な接続が辿られます。
.TP 8
.B \-\-
.\"O If no arguments follow this option, then the positional parameters are
.\"O unset.  Otherwise, the positional parameters are set to the
.\"O \fIarg\fPs, even if some of them begin with a
.\"O .BR \- .
このオプションの後に引き数が続いていない場合には、
位置パラメータの設定が取り消されます。
それ以外の場合には、位置パラメータに \fIarg\fP の残りが設定されます。
これらに
.B \-
で始まるものが含まれていても、
オプションではなく位置パラメータとして扱われます。
.TP 8
.B \-
.\"O Signal the end of options, cause all remaining \fIarg\fPs to be
.\"O assigned to the positional parameters.  The
.\"O .B \-x
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-v
.\"O options are turned off.
.\"O If there are no \fIarg\fPs,
.\"O the positional parameters remain unchanged.
オプションの終わりを示します。
残りの \fIarg\fP は全て位置パラメータに代入されます。
.B \-x
オプションと
.B \-v
オプションは無効になります。
\fIarg\fP が無い場合には、位置パラメータの内容は変化しません。
.PD
.PP
.\"O The options are off by default unless otherwise noted.
.\"O Using + rather than \- causes these options to be turned off.
.\"O The options can also be specified as arguments to an invocation of
.\"O the shell.
.\"O The current set of options may be found in
.\"O .BR $\- .
.\"O The return status is always true unless an invalid option is encountered.
特に断らない限り、各オプションはデフォルトで無効になっています。
\- の代わりに + を使うと、これらのオプションは無効になります。
オプションはシェルを起動する際の引き数としても指定できます。
現在のオプションの集合は、
.B $\-
で知ることができます。
不正なオプションが無ければ、終了ステータスは必ず真となります。
.RE
.TP
\fBshift\fP [\fIn\fP]
.\"O The positional parameters from \fIn\fP+1 ... are renamed to
.\"O .B $1
.\"O .B ....
.\"O Parameters represented by the numbers \fB$#\fP
.\"O down to \fB$#\fP\-\fIn\fP+1 are unset.
\fIn\fP+1 ... からの位置パラメータの名前を変え、
.B $1
.B ...
とします。
\fB$#\fP から \fB$#\fP\-\fIn\fP+1 までの数字で表される
パラメータは unset されます。
.\"O .I n
.\"O must be a non-negative number less than or equal to \fB$#\fP.
.\"O If
.\"O .I n
.\"O is 0, no parameters are changed.
.\"O If
.\"O .I n 
.\"O is not given, it is assumed to be 1.
.I n
は 0 以上 \fB$#\fP 以下の数でなければなりません。
.I n
が 0 ならば、どのパラメータも変更されません。
.I n 
が与えられない場合には、1 が指定されたものと見なされます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I n
.\"O is greater than \fB$#\fP, the positional parameters are not changed.
.\"O The return status is greater than zero if
.\"O .I n
.\"O is greater than
.\"O .B $#
.\"O or less than zero; otherwise 0.
.I n
が \fB$#\fP より大きい場合、位置パラメータは変化しません。
.I n
が
.B $#
より大きい場合や 0 より小さい場合には、
返却ステータスは 0 より大きい数になります。
それ以外の場合には 0 になります。
.TP
\fBshopt\fP [\fB\-pqsu\fP] [\fB\-o\fP] [\fIoptname\fP ...]
.\"O Toggle the values of variables controlling optional shell behavior.
.\"O With no options, or with the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option, a list of all settable options is displayed, with
.\"O an indication of whether or not each is set.
.\"O The \fB\-p\fP option causes output to be displayed in a form that
.\"O may be reused as input.
.\"O Other options have the following meanings:
シェルのオプション動作を制御する変数の値をトグルさせます。
オプションが無い場合や、
.B \-p
オプションが指定されている場合には、
設定可能なオプション全てのリストが表示されます。
表示の際には、それぞれが設定されているかどうかも示されます。
\fB\-p\fP オプションが指定されていると、
オプションの表示は、入力として再利用できるフォーマットで行われます。
その他のオプションは、以下の意味を持っています:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Enable (set) each \fIoptname\fP.
\fIoptname\fP をそれぞれ有効にします (設定します)。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Disable (unset) each \fIoptname\fP.
\fIoptname\fP をそれぞれ無効にします (設定解除します)。
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Suppresses normal output (quiet mode); the return status indicates
.\"O whether the \fIoptname\fP is set or unset.
.\"O If multiple \fIoptname\fP arguments are given with
.\"O .BR \-q ,
.\"O the return status is zero if all \fIoptnames\fP are enabled; non-zero
.\"O otherwise.
通常の出力を止めます (静かなモード)。
返却ステータスは \fIoptname\fP が設定されているかどうかを示します。
複数の \fIoptname\fP 引き数と
.B \-q 
が指定されている場合には、
全ての \fIoptnames\fP が有効である時に返却ステータスが 0 となります。
それ以外の時には、0 でない値となります。
.TP
.B \-o
.\"O Restricts the values of \fIoptname\fP to be those defined for the
.\"O .B \-o
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B set
.\"O builtin.
\fIoptname\fP の値を、組み込みコマンド
.B set
の
.B \-o
オプションで定義されているものに制限します。
.PD
.PP
.\"O If either
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O is used with no \fIoptname\fP arguments, the display is limited to
.\"O those options which are set or unset, respectively.
.\"O Unless otherwise noted, the \fBshopt\fP options are disabled (unset)
.\"O by default.
引き数 \fIoptname\fP 無しで
.B \-s
オプションまたは
.B \-u
オプションを使った場合、表示されるものは設定されているもの、
または設定されていないものにそれぞれ制限されます。
特に断らない限り、\fBshopt\fP オプションは
デフォルトで無効 (設定解除) になっています。
.PP
.\"O The return status when listing options is zero if all \fIoptnames\fP
.\"O are enabled, non-zero otherwise.  When setting or unsetting options,
.\"O the return status is zero unless an \fIoptname\fP is not a valid shell
.\"O option.
オプションをリスト表示した時の返却ステータスは、
全ての \fIoptnames\fP が有効になっている場合は 0 となります。
それ以外の場合には 0 でない値となります。
設定または設定取り消しのオプションの時には、
\fIoptname\fP が不正なシェルオプションでなければ、
返却ステータスは 0 となります。
.PP
.\"O The list of \fBshopt\fP options is:
\fBshopt\fP オプションのリストを以下に示します:
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp 1v
.PD 0
.TP 8
.B cdable_vars
.\"O If set, an argument to the
.\"O .B cd
.\"O builtin command that
.\"O is not a directory is assumed to be the name of a variable whose
.\"O value is the directory to change to.
設定されている場合、組み込みコマンド
.B cd
への引き数でディレクトリでないものは変数の名前と見なされ、
その値が変更先のディレクトリとなります。
.TP 8
.B cdspell
.\"O If set, minor errors in the spelling of a directory component in a
.\"O .B cd
.\"O command will be corrected.
設定されている場合、
.B cd
コマンドのディレクトリ要素におけるスペルのちょっとした誤りは修正されます。
.\"O The errors checked for are transposed characters,
.\"O a missing character, and one character too many.
チェックされる誤りは、文字の入れ替わり・文字の欠け・
1 文字余分にあることです。
.\"O If a correction is found, the corrected file name is printed,
.\"O and the command proceeds.
.\"O This option is only used by interactive shells.
訂正できた場合には、訂正後のファイル名が表示され、
コマンドは続けて実行されます。
このオプションが使われるのは対話的シェルだけです。
.TP 8
.B checkhash
.\"O If set, \fBbash\fP checks that a command found in the hash
.\"O table exists before trying to execute it.  If a hashed command no
.\"O longer exists, a normal path search is performed.
設定されている場合、
\fBbash\fP はハッシュ表で見つけたコマンドを実行する前に
実際に存在するかどうかをチェックします。
ハッシュされているコマンドが既に無くなっている場合、
通常のパス検索が行われます。
.TP 8
.B checkwinsize
.\"O If set, \fBbash\fP checks the window size after each command
.\"O and, if necessary, updates the values of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B LINES
.\"O and
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR COLUMNS .
設定されている場合、\fBbash\fP
はコマンドの実行後に毎回ウィンドウの大きさをチェックし、
必要に応じて
.SM
.B LINES
と
.SM
.B COLUMNS
の値を更新します。
.TP 8
.B cmdhist
.\"O If set,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O attempts to save all lines of a multiple-line
.\"O command in the same history entry.  This allows
.\"O easy re-editing of multi-line commands.
設定されている場合、
.B bash
は複数行に分かれているコマンドの全ての行を、
同じ履歴エントリに保存しようとします。
これを使うと、複数行に分かれているコマンドの再編集が容易になります。
.TP 8
.B dotglob
.\"O If set, 
.\"O .B bash
.\"O includes filenames beginning with a `.' in the results of pathname
.\"O expansion.
設定されている場合、
.B bash
は `.' で始まるファイル名をパス名展開の結果に含めます。
.TP 8
.B execfail
.\"O If set, a non-interactive shell will not exit if
.\"O it cannot execute the file specified as an argument to the
.\"O .B exec
.\"O builtin command.  An interactive shell does not exit if
.\"O .B exec
.\"O fails.
設定されている場合、
組み込みコマンド
.B exec
への引き数として指定されたファイルが実行できなくても、
対話的でないシェルが終了しません。
対話的シェルは
.B exec
に失敗しても終了しません。
.TP 8
.B expand_aliases
.\"O If set, aliases are expanded as described above under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR ALIASES .
.\"O This option is enabled by default for interactive shells.
設定されている場合、エイリアスが前述の
.SM
.B エイリアス
セクションで説明したように展開されます。
このオプションは、対話的なシェルではデフォルトで有効です。
.TP 8
.B extglob
.\"O If set, the extended pattern matching features described above under
.\"O \fBPathname Expansion\fP are enabled.
設定されている場合、拡張されたパターンマッチング機能が有効になります。
これについては、前述の\fBパス名展開\fPで説明しています。
.TP 8
.B histappend
.\"O If set, the history list is appended to the file named by the value
.\"O of the
.\"O .B HISTFILE
.\"O variable when the shell exits, rather than overwriting the file.
設定されている場合、シェルの終了時に履歴リストが変数
.B HISTFILE
の値で指定しているファイルに追加されます。
ファイルへの上書きは行われなくなります。
.TP 8
.B histreedit
.\"O If set, and
.\"O .B readline
.\"O is being used, a user is given the opportunity to re-edit a
.\"O failed history substitution.
この変数が設定されており、かつ
.B readline
が使われている場合、ユーザは失敗した履歴置換を再編集できます。
.TP 8
.B histverify
.\"O If set, and 
.\"O .B readline
.\"O is being used, the results of history substitution are not immediately
.\"O passed to the shell parser.  Instead, the resulting line is loaded into
.\"O the \fBreadline\fP editing buffer, allowing further modification.
この変数が設定されており、かつ
.B readline
が使われている場合、履歴置換の結果は即座にはシェルのパーザに渡されません。
その代わり、結果として得られた行は
\fBreadline\fP の編集バッファに読み込まれ、さらに修正できます。
.TP 8
.B hostcomplete
.\"O If set, and
.\"O .B readline
.\"O is being used, \fBbash\fP will attempt to perform hostname completion when a
.\"O word containing a \fB@\fP is being completed (see
.\"O .B Completing
.\"O under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B READLINE
.\"O above).
.\"O This is enabled by default.
この変数が設定されており、かつ
.B readline
が使われている場合、\fBbash\fP は
\fB@\fP を含む単語を補完する時にホスト名補完を実行しようとします
(前述の
.SM
.B READLINE ライブラリ
のセクションにおける
.B 補完
を参照)。
これはデフォルトで有効になっています。
.TP 8
.B huponexit
.\"O If set, \fBbash\fP will send
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGHUP
.\"O to all jobs when an interactive login shell exits.
設定されている場合、\fBbash\fP は対話的なログインシェルを終了する時に、
全てのジョブに
.SM
.B SIGHUP
を送ります。
.TP 8
.B interactive_comments
.\"O If set, allow a word beginning with
.\"O .B #
.\"O to cause that word and all remaining characters on that
.\"O line to be ignored in an interactive shell (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B COMMENTS
.\"O above).  This option is enabled by default.
設定されている場合、
.B #
で始まる単語について、その単語とその行の残りの文字を
対話的シェルに無視させることができます
(前述の
.SM
.B コメント
セクションを参照)。
このオプションはデフォルトで有効になっています。
.TP 8
.B lithist
.\"O If set, and the
.\"O .B cmdhist
.\"O option is enabled, multi-line commands are saved to the history with
.\"O embedded newlines rather than using semicolon separators where possible.
設定されており、かつ
.B cmdhist
オプションが有効ならば、
複数行に分かれているコマンドは (セミコロンで区切られるのではなく)
できる限り途中に改行を埋め込むことで履歴に保存されます。
.TP 8
.B mailwarn
.\"O If set, and a file that \fBbash\fP is checking for mail has been  
.\"O accessed since the last time it was checked, the message ``The mail in
.\"O \fImailfile\fP has been read'' is displayed.
設定されており、かつ \fBbash\fP がメールをチェックするファイルが
前回のチェック以降にアクセスされている場合、
メッセージ ``The mail in \fImailfile\fP has been read'' が表示されます。
.TP 8
.B no_empty_cmd_completion
.\"O If set, and
.\"O .B readline
.\"O is being used,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O will not attempt to search the \fBPATH\fP for possible completions when
.\"O completion is attempted on an empty line.
設定されており、かつ
.B readline
が使われている場合、
空行に対してコマンド補完をさせようとしたときに、
.B bash
は補完用の \fBPATH\fP 検索を行いません。
.TP 8
.B nocaseglob
.\"O If set,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O matches filenames in a case\-insensitive fashion when performing pathname
.\"O expansion (see
.\"O .B Pathname Expansion
.\"O above).
設定されている場合、
.B bash
はパス名展開 (前述の
.B パス名展開
を参照) を行う時に、
ファイル名の大文字と小文字を区別せずにマッチングを行います。
.TP 8
.B nullglob
.\"O If set,
.\"O .B bash
.\"O allows patterns which match no
.\"O files (see
.\"O .B Pathname Expansion
.\"O above)
.\"O to expand to a null string, rather than themselves.
設定されている場合、
.B bash
はどのファイルにもマッチしないパターン (前述の
.B パス名展開 
を参照) を、その文字列自身ではなく、空文字列に展開します。
.TP 8
.B progcomp
.\"O If set, the programmable completion facilities (see
.\"O \fBProgrammable Completion\fP above) are enabled.
.\"O This option is enabled by default.
設定されている場合、プログラム補完機能
(前述の\fBプログラム補完\fPを参照) が有効になります。
このオプションはデフォルトで有効になっています。
.TP 8
.B promptvars
.\"O If set, prompt strings undergo variable and parameter expansion after
.\"O being expanded as described in
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PROMPTING
.\"O above.  This option is enabled by default.
設定されている場合、
プロンプト文字列に対して変数展開とパラメータ展開が行われます。
この展開は前述の
.SM
.B プロンプト
セクションで説明した展開が行われた後に行われます。
このオプションはデフォルトで有効になっています。
.TP 8
.B restricted_shell
.\"O The shell sets this option if it is started in restricted mode (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "RESTRICTED SHELL"
.\"O below).
.\"O The value may not be changed.
シェルが制限モードで起動された場合、
このオプションが設定されます (後述の
.SM
.B 制限付きのシェル
セクションを参照)。
この値を変更することはできません。
.\"O This is not reset when the startup files are executed, allowing
.\"O the startup files to discover whether or not a shell is restricted.
これは起動ファイルが実行される時にもリセットされないので、
シェルが制限付きかどうかを起動ファイル内部で知ることができます。
.TP 8
.B shift_verbose
.\"O If set, the
.\"O .B shift
.\"O builtin prints an error message when the shift count exceeds the
.\"O number of positional parameters.
設定されている場合、組み込みコマンド
.B shift
においてシフトの回数が位置パラメータの数を超えると、
エラーメッセージが出力されます。
.TP 8
.B sourcepath
.\"O If set, the
.\"O \fBsource\fP (\fB.\fP) builtin uses the value of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B PATH
.\"O to find the directory containing the file supplied as an argument.
.\"O This option is enabled by default.
設定されている場合、組み込みコマンド \fBsource\fP (\fB.\fP) は
.SM
.B PATH
の値を使って、引き数として与えられたファイルを含むディレクトリを見つけます。
このオプションはデフォルトで有効です。
.TP 8
.B xpg_echo
.\"O If set, the \fBecho\fP builtin expands backslash-escape sequences
.\"O by default.
設定されている場合、
組み込みコマンド \fBecho\fP は
デフォルトでバックスラッシュによるエスケープシーケンスを展開します。
.RE
.TP
\fBsuspend\fP [\fB\-f\fP]
.\"O Suspend the execution of this shell until it receives a
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SIGCONT
.\"O signal.  The
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O option says not to complain if this is 
.\"O a login shell; just suspend anyway.  The return status is 0 unless
.\"O the shell is a login shell and
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O is not supplied, or if job control is not enabled.
.SM
.B SIGCONT
シグナルを受け取るまで、シェルの実行をサスペンドします。
.B \-f
オプションを与えた場合、シェルがログインシェルであっても警告を出しません。
ただし、どちらにせよサスペンドはします。
シェルがログインシェルかつ
.B \-f
が与えられていない場合と、ジョブ制御が有効でない場合とを除いて、
返却ステータスは 0 です。
.TP
.PD 0
\fBtest\fP \fIexpr\fP
.TP
\fB[\fP \fIexpr\fP \fB]\fP
.\"O Return a status of 0 or 1 depending on
.\"O the evaluation of the conditional expression
.\"O .IR expr .
条件式
.IR expr
を評価した結果に基づいて、ステータス 0 または 1 を返します。
.\"O Each operator and operand must be a separate argument.
.\"O Expressions are composed of the primaries described above under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "CONDITIONAL EXPRESSIONS" .
演算子とオペランドそれぞれは別々の引き数でなければなりません。
式は前述の
.SM
.B 条件式
セクションで説明したプライマリで構成されます。
.if t .sp 0.5
.if n .sp 1
.\"O Expressions may be combined using the following operators, listed
.\"O in decreasing order of precedence.
式は次に示す演算子を使って結合できます。
優先度の高い順に示します。
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B ! \fIexpr\fP
.\"O True if
.\"O .I expr
.\"O is false.
.I expr
が偽ならば真になります。
.TP
.B ( \fIexpr\fP )
.\"O Returns the value of \fIexpr\fP.
.\"O This may be used to override the normal precedence of operators.
\fIexpr\fP の値を返します。
これを使うと、通常の演算子の優先度を変更できます。
.TP
\fIexpr1\fP \-\fBa\fP \fIexpr2\fP
.\"O True if both
.\"O .I expr1
.\"O and
.\"O .I expr2
.\"O are true.
.I expr1
と
.I expr2
が両方とも真ならば真になります。
.TP
\fIexpr1\fP \-\fBo\fP \fIexpr2\fP
.\"O True if either
.\"O .I expr1
.\"O or
.\"O .I expr2
.\"O is true.
.I expr1
と
.I expr2
のいずれかが真ならば真になります。
.PD
.PP
.\"O \fBtest\fP and \fB[\fP evaluate conditional
.\"O expressions using a set of rules based on the number of arguments.
\fBtest\fP および \fB[\fP は、
引き数の数に基づいた規則の集合を用いて条件式を評価します。
.if t .sp 0.5
.if n .sp 1
.PD 0
.TP
.\"O 0 arguments
引き数が 0 個
.\"O The expression is false.
この式は偽です。
.TP
.\"O 1 argument
引き数が 1 個
.\"O The expression is true if and only if the argument is not null.
引き数が空でない場合に限り真になります。
.TP
.\"O 2 arguments
引き数が 2 個
.\"O If the first argument is \fB!\fP, the expression is true if and
.\"O only if the second argument is null.
.\"O If the first argument is one of the unary conditional operators listed above
.\"O under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "CONDITIONAL EXPRESSIONS" ,
.\"O the expression is true if the unary test is true.
.\"O If the first argument is not a valid unary conditional operator, the expression
.\"O is false.
最初の引き数が \fB!\fP ならば、
2 番目の引き数が空の場合に限り真になります。
最初の引き数が、既に
.SM
.B 条件式
セクションで説明した単項条件演算子のいずれかであれば、
単項の評価が真の場合に式は真となります。
最初の引き数が正しい単項条件演算子でなければ、式は偽となります。
.TP
.\"O 3 arguments
引き数が 3 個
.\"O If the second argument is one of the binary conditional operators listed above
.\"O under
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR "CONDITIONAL EXPRESSIONS" ,
.\"O the result of the expression is the result of the binary test using
.\"O the first and third arguments as operands.
.\"O If the first argument is \fB!\fP, the value is the negation of
.\"O the two-argument test using the second and third arguments.
.\"O If the first argument is exactly \fB(\fP and the third argument is
.\"O exactly \fB)\fP, the result is the one-argument test of the second
.\"O argument.
.\"O Otherwise, the expression is false.
.\"O The \fB\-a\fP and \fB\-o\fP operators are considered binary operators
.\"O in this case.  
2 番目の引き数が、既に
.SM
.B 条件式
セクションで説明した二値条件演算子のいずれかであれば、
最初と 3 番目の引き数をオペランドとして使った
二値評価の結果が式の結果となります。
最初の引き数が \fB!\fP であれば、2 番目と 3 番目の引き数を使った、
引き数 2 つの評価の結果を否定したものが値となります。
最初の引き数が \fB(\fP であり、3 番目の引き数が \fB)\fP ならば、
2 番目の引き数を使って引き数 1 つの評価を行った値が結果となります。
これら以外の場合には、式は偽となります。
この場合においては、\fB\-a\fP と \fB\-o\fP は二値演算子として扱われます。
.TP
.\"O 4 arguments
引き数が 4 個
.\"O If the first argument is \fB!\fP, the result is the negation of
.\"O the three-argument expression composed of the remaining arguments.
.\"O Otherwise, the expression is parsed and evaluated according to 
.\"O precedence using the rules listed above.
最初の引き数が \fB!\fP ならば、
残りの引き数で作った引き数 3 つの式の値を否定したものが結果となります。
それ以外の場合には、先に挙げた規則を使った優先度に従って
式が展開・評価されます。
.TP
.\"O 5 or more arguments
引き数が 5 個以上
.\"O The expression is parsed and evaluated according to precedence
.\"O using the rules listed above.
先に挙げた規則を使った優先度に従って式が展開・評価されます。
.RE
.PD
.TP
.B times
.\"O Print the accumulated user and system times for the shell and
.\"O for processes run from the shell.  The return status is 0.
シェルとシェルから実行したプロセスについて、
ユーザ時間とシステム時間を加えたものを出力します。
返却ステータスは 0 です。
.TP
\fBtrap\fP [\fB\-lp\fP] [\fIarg\fP] [\fIsigspec\fP ...]
.\"O The command
.\"O .I arg
.\"O is to be read and executed when the shell receives
.\"O signal(s)
.\"O .IR sigspec .
シェルがシグナル
.IR sigspec
を受け取ると、コマンド
.I arg
が読み込まれて、実行されます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I arg
.\"O is absent or
.\"O .BR \- ,
.\"O all specified signals are
.\"O reset to their original values (the values they had
.\"O upon entrance to the shell).
.I arg
が存在しないか、
.B \-
である場合、
指定されているシグナルは全て最初の値
(シェルの起動時に設定されていた値) にリセットされます。
.\"O If 
.\"O .I arg
.\"O is the null string the signal specified by each
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O is ignored by the shell and by the commands it invokes.
.I arg
が空文字列である場合、それぞれの
.I sigspec
で指定されているシグナルは、
シェルとシェルが起動したコマンドから無視されます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I arg
.\"O is not present and
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O has been supplied, then the trap commands associated with each
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O are displayed.
.\"O If no arguments are supplied or if only
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O is given,
.\"O .B trap
.\"O prints the list of commands associated with each signal number.
.I arg
なしで
.B \-p
オプションが与えられた場合、
各
.I sigspec
に対応する trap コマンドが表示されます。
引き数が全く無いか、
.B \-p
だけが与えられた場合、
.B trap
は各シグナル番号に対応するコマンドのリストを出力します。
.\"O Each
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O is either
.\"O a signal name defined in <\fIsignal.h\fP>, or a signal number.
それぞれの
.I sigspec
は、<\fIsignal.h\fP> で定義されているシグナル名またはシグナル番号です。
.\"O If a
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O is
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EXIT
.\"O (0) the command
.\"O .I arg
.\"O is executed on exit from the shell.  If a
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O is
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR DEBUG ,
.\"O the command
.\"O .I arg
.\"O is executed after every \fIsimple command\fP (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B SHELL GRAMMAR
.\"O above).
.I sigspec
が
.SM
.B EXIT
(0) であれば、シェルの終了時にコマンド
.I arg
が実行されます。
.I sigspec
が
.SM
.B DEBUG
であれば、\fI単純なコマンド\fP (前述の
.SM
.B シェルの文法
セクションを参照) が終わるたびにコマンド
.I arg
が実行されます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O option causes the shell to print a list of signal names and
.\"O their corresponding numbers.
.B \-l
オプションを与えると、
シェルはシグナル名とこれに対応する番号のリストを出力します。
.\"O Signals ignored upon entry to the shell cannot be trapped or reset.
.\"O Trapped signals are reset to their original values in a child
.\"O process when it is created.
シェルのエントリで無視されるシグナルは、
トラップもリセットもできません。
トラップされたシグナルはリセットされ、
子プロセスが生成された時の最初の値に戻ります。
.\"O The return status is false if any
.\"O .I sigspec
.\"O is invalid; otherwise
.\"O .B trap
.\"O returns true.
.I sigspec
のいずれかが不正であれば、返却ステータスは偽になります。
それ以外の場合には、
.B trap
は真を返します。
.TP
\fBtype\fP [\fB\-atp\fP] \fIname\fP [\fIname\fP ...]
.\"O With no options, 
.\"O indicate how each
.\"O .I name
.\"O would be interpreted if used as a command name.
オプション無しの場合には、各
.I name
をコマンド名として使ったときに、それがどのように解釈されるかを示します。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O option is used,
.\"O .B type
.\"O prints a string which is one of
.\"O .IR alias ,
.\"O .IR keyword ,
.\"O .IR function ,
.\"O .IR builtin ,
.\"O or
.\"O .I file 
.\"O if
.\"O .I name
.\"O is an alias, shell reserved word, function, builtin, or disk file,
.\"O respectively.
.B \-t
オプションを使うと、
.I name
が、エイリアス・シェルの予約語・関数・
組み込みコマンド・ディスク上のファイルのいずれかの場合、
.B type
はそれぞれに応じて
.IR alias ,
.IR keyword ,
.IR function ,
.IR builtin ,
.I file
という文字列を出力します。
.\"O If the
.\"O .I name
.\"O is not found, then nothing is printed, and an exit status of false
.\"O is returned.
.I name
が見つからない場合は何も出力されず、偽の終了ステータスが返されます。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is used,
.\"O .B type
.\"O either returns the name of the disk file
.\"O that would be executed if
.\"O .I name
.\"O were specified as a command name,
.\"O or nothing if
.\"O .if t \f(CWtype -t name\fP
.\"O .if n ``type -t name''
.\"O would not return
.\"O .IR file .
.B \-p
オプションを使うと、
.B type
は
.I name
をコマンド名として指定した場合に実行されるディスクファイルの名前、
または空文字列を返します。
空文字列が返されるのは、
.if t \f(CWtype -t name\fP
.if n ``type -t name''
が
.I file
を返さない場合です。
.\"O If a command is hashed,
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O prints the hashed value, not necessarily the file that appears
.\"O first in 
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR PATH .
コマンドがハッシュされている場合、
.B \-p
はハッシュされている値を表示します。
表示されるのは、必ずしも
.SM
.BR PATH
中で最初に現われるファイルとは限りません。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option is used, 
.\"O .B type
.\"O prints all of the places that contain
.\"O an executable named 
.\"O .IR name .
.B \-a
オプションを使うと、
.B type
は
.IR name
が示す実行ファイルがある場所を全て出力します。
.\"O This includes aliases and functions,
.\"O if and only if the 
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is not also used.
.B \-p
オプションが同時に使われていない場合に限り、
エイリアスや関数も出力されます。
.\"O The table of hashed commands is not consulted
.\"O when using
.\"O .BR \-a .
.\"O .B type
.\"O returns true if any of the arguments are found, false if
.\"O none are found.
.B \-a
を使う時には、ハッシュされているコマンドの表は参照されません。
.B type
は、引き数のいずれかが見つかれば真を返し、
どれも見つからなければ偽を返します。
.TP
\fBulimit\fP [\fB\-SHacdflmnpstuv\fP [\fIlimit\fP]]
.\"O Provides control over the resources available to the shell and to
.\"O processes started by it, on systems that allow such control.  The
.\"O value of
.\"O .I limit
.\"O can be a number in the unit specified for the resource, or the
.\"O value
.\"O .BR unlimited .
これを使うと、シェルおよびシェルが起動するプロセスが
利用できるリソースを制御できます。
ただし、このような制御ができるシステムの場合に限ります。
.I limit
の値はリソースに対して指定されている単位の数、または
.B unlimited
です。
.\"O The \fB\-H\fP and \fB\-S\fP options specify that the hard or soft limit is
.\"O set for the given resource.  A hard limit cannot be increased once it
.\"O is set; a soft limit may be increased up to the value of the hard limit.
.\"O If neither \fB\-H\fP nor \fB\-S\fP is specified, both the soft and hard
.\"O limits are set.
\fB\-H\fP オプションと \fB\-S\fP オプションは、
それぞれ与えられたリソースに対する
強い (hard) 制限と弱い (soft) 制限を設定します。
強い制限は一度設定すると増やせません。
弱い制限は強い制限の値までは増やせます。
\fB\-H\fP と \fB\-S\fP がどちらも指定されていない場合、
強い制限と弱い制限がどちらも設定されます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I limit
.\"O is omitted, the current value of the soft limit of the resource is
.\"O printed, unless the \fB\-H\fP option is given.  When more than one
.\"O resource is specified, the limit name and unit are printed before the value.
.\"O Other options are interpreted as follows:
.I limit
を省略すると、リソースの弱い制限の現在値が表示されます。
ただし、\fB\-H\fP が与えられている場合は除きます。
複数のリソースが指定されている時は、制限名と単位が値の前に出力されます。
他のオプションは以下のように解釈されます:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O All current limits are reported
現在の制限を全て報告する
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O The maximum size of core files created
生成されるコアファイル (core) の最大サイズ
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O The maximum size of a process's data segment
プロセスのデータセグメントの最大サイズ
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O The maximum size of files created by the shell
シェルが生成できるファイルの最大サイズ
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O The maximum size that may be locked into memory
メモリにロックできる最大サイズ
.TP
.B \-m
.\"O The maximum resident set size
常駐セットサイズの最大値
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O The maximum number of open file descriptors (most systems do not
.\"O allow this value to be set)
オープンできるファイル・ディスクリプターの最大数
(ほとんどのシステムでは、この値を設定することはできません)
.TP
.B \-p
.\"O The pipe size in 512-byte blocks (this may not be set)
512 バイトブロック単位でのパイプのサイズ
(これは設定できないかもしれません)
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O The maximum stack size
最大スタックサイズ
.TP
.B \-t
.\"O The maximum amount of cpu time in seconds
CPU 時間の最大量 (秒単位)
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O The maximum number of processes available to a single user
1 人のユーザが使用できる最大のプロセス数
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O The maximum amount of virtual memory available to the shell
シェルが使用できる最大の仮想メモリ量
.PD
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I limit
.\"O is given, it is the new value of the specified resource (the
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option is display only).
.I limit
が与えられている場合、これは指定されたリソースの新しい値となります
.RB ( \-a
は表示専用です)。
.\"O If no option is given, then
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O is assumed.  Values are in 1024-byte increments, except for
.\"O .BR \-t ,
.\"O which is in seconds,
.\"O .BR \-p ,
.\"O which is in units of 512-byte blocks,
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O and
.\"O .BR \-u ,
.\"O which are unscaled values.  The return status is 0
.\"O unless an invalid option is encountered, a non-numeric argument
.\"O other than \fBunlimited\fP is supplied as \fIlimit\fP, or an
.\"O error occurs while setting a new limit.
オプションが全く与えられなかった場合は、
.B \-f
が指定されたものと見なされます。
値は 1024 バイト単位で増えますが、例外として
.B \-t
は秒単位、
.B \-p
512 バイトブロック単位、
.B \-n
および
.B \-u
は単位無しの値です。
返却ステータスは基本的に 0 ですが、
不正なオプションがある場合、
\fBunlimited\fP 以外の数字でない引き数が \fIlimit\fP に指定された場合、
新しい制限を設定する際にエラーが起きた場合は除きます。
.RE
.TP
\fBumask\fP [\fB\-p\fP] [\fB\-S\fP] [\fImode\fP]
.\"O The user file-creation mask is set to 
.\"O .IR mode .
ユーザのファイル生成マスクに
.IR mode
を設定します。
.\"O If
.\"O .I mode
.\"O begins with a digit, it
.\"O is interpreted as an octal number; otherwise
.\"O it is interpreted as a symbolic mode mask similar
.\"O to that accepted by
.\"O .IR chmod (1).
.I mode
が数字で始まる場合には、これは 10 進数と解釈されます。
それ以外の場合には、
.IR chmod (1)
に指定するのと同様のシンボリックなモードマスクと解釈されます。
.\"O If
.\"O .I mode
.\"O is omitted, the current value of the mask is printed.
.I mode
が省略されると、現在のマスクの値が出力されます。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-S
.\"O option causes the mask to be printed in symbolic form; the
.\"O default output is an octal number.
.B \-S
オプションを指定すると、マスクはシンボリックな形式で表示されます。
デフルトの出力は 10 進の数値です。
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option is supplied, and
.\"O .I mode
.\"O is omitted, the output is in a form that may be reused as input.
.\"O The return status is 0 if the mode was successfully changed or if
.\"O no \fImode\fP argument was supplied, and false otherwise.
.B \-p
オプションが指定され、かつ
.I mode
が省略された場合、入力として再利用できる形式で出力が行われます。
モードが正常に変更できた場合や、
\fImode\fP 引き数が全く与えられなかった場合には、
返却ステータスは 0 となります。
それ以外の場合には偽となります。
.TP
\fBunalias\fP [\-\fBa\fP] [\fIname\fP ...]
.\"O Remove each \fIname\fP from the list of defined aliases.  If
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O is supplied, all alias definitions are removed.  The return
.\"O value is true unless a supplied
.\"O .I name
.\"O is not a defined alias.
\fIname\fP を定義されているエイリアスのリストから削除します。
.B \-a
が与えられている場合には、エイリアス定義は全て削除されます。
与えられた
.I name
が定義されているエイリアスであれば、返却ステータスは真になります。
.TP
\fBunset\fP [\-\fBfv\fP] [\fIname\fP ...]
.\"O For each
.\"O .IR name ,
.\"O remove the corresponding variable or function.
.IR name
それぞれについて、対応する変数や関数を削除します。
.\"O If no options are supplied, or the
.\"O .B \-v
.\"O option is given, each
.\"O .I name
.\"O refers to a shell variable.
オプションが全く与えられていない場合や、
.B \-v
オプションが与えられた場合は、各
.I name
はシェル変数を参照します。
.\"O Read-only variables may not be unset.
読み込み専用の変数の設定を消すことはできません。
.\"O If
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O is specifed, 
.\"O each
.\"O .I name
.\"O refers to a shell function, and the function definition
.\"O is removed.
.B \-f
が指定されている場合、各
.I name
はシェル関数を参照し、その関数の定義が削除されます。
.\"O Each unset variable or function is removed from the environment
.\"O passed to subsequent commands.
設定が消された変数や関数は全て、
それ以降のコマンドに渡される環境変数からも削除されます。
.\"O If any of
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR RANDOM ,
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR SECONDS ,
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR LINENO ,
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR HISTCMD ,
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR FUNCNAME ,
.\"O .SM
.\"O .BR GROUPS ,
.\"O or
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B DIRSTACK
.\"O are unset, they lose their special properties, even if they are
.\"O subsequently reset.  The exit status is true unless a
.\"O .I name
.\"O does not exist or is readonly.
.SM
.BR RANDOM ,
.SM
.BR SECONDS ,
.SM
.BR LINENO ,
.SM
.BR HISTCMD ,
.SM
.BR FUNCNAME ,
.SM
.BR GROUPS ,
.SM
.B DIRSTACK
のいずれかの設定を消した場合、これらの特殊な特性も無くなります。
これは後で再設定しても元に戻ることはありません。
.I name
が存在しないか、読み込み専用の場合以外には、
終了ステータスは真となります。
.TP
\fBwait\fP [\fIn\fP]
.\"O Wait for the specified process and return its termination
.\"O status.
指定されたプロセスを wait し、その終了ステータスを返します。
.\"O .I n
.\"O may be a process
.\"O ID or a job specification; if a job spec is given, all processes
.\"O in that job's pipeline are waited for.  If
.\"O .I n
.\"O is not given, all currently active child processes
.\"O are waited for, and the return status is zero.  If
.\"O .I n
.\"O specifies a non-existent process or job, the return status is
.\"O 127.  Otherwise, the return status is the exit status of the last
.\"O process or job waited for.
.I n
はプロセス ID またはジョブ指定です。
ジョブ指定を与えた場合、そのジョブのパイプラインに含まれる
全てのプロセスを wait します。
.I n
が与えられていない場合には、現在アクティブな全ての子プロセスを wait し、
返却ステータスは 0 となります。
.I n
が存在しないプロセスやジョブを指定している場合、
返却ステータスは 127 になります。
それ以外の場合、返却ステータスは
wait していた最後のプロセスまたはジョブの終了ステータスとなります。
.\" bash_builtins
.if \n(zZ=1 .ig zZ
.\"O .SH "RESTRICTED SHELL"
.SH "制限付きのシェル(RESTRICTED SHELL)"
.\"O .\" rbash.1
.zY
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .B bash
.\"O is started with the name
.\"O .BR rbash ,
.\"O or the
.\"O .B \-r
.\"O option is supplied at invocation,
.\"O the shell becomes restricted.
.\"O A restricted shell is used to
.\"O set up an environment more controlled than the standard shell.
.B bash
を
.BR rbash
という名前で起動した場合や、起動時に
.B \-r
オプションを指定した場合には、シェルは制限された状態になります。
制限付きのシェルは、
標準のシェルよりも細かく制御された環境を設定したいときに用います。
.\"O It behaves identically to
.\"O .B bash
.\"O with the exception that the following are disallowed or not performed:
制限付きのシェルは
.B bash
と全く同じように動作しますが、
以下のようなことが許可されなかったり実行されなかったりします:
.IP \(bu
.\"O changing directories with \fBcd\fP
\fBcd\fP を使ってディレクトリを変更すること
.IP \(bu
.\"O setting or unsetting the values of
.\"O .BR SHELL ,
.\"O .BR PATH ,
.\"O .BR ENV ,
.\"O or
.\"O .B PATH
.BR SHELL ,
.BR PATH ,
.BR ENV ,
.B BASH_ENV
の値の設定や設定取り消しを行なうこと
.IP \(bu
.\"O specifying command names containing
.\"O .B /
.B /
を含むコマンド名を指定すること
.IP \(bu
.\"O specifying a file name containing a
.\"O .B /
.\"O as an argument to the
.\"O .B .
.\"O builtin command
組み込みコマンド
.B .
の引き数として
.B /
を含むファイル名を指定すること
.IP \(bu
.\"O Specifying a filename containing a slash as an argument to the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B hash
.\"O builtin command
.\" motoki: -p オプション自体が使用できないはずでは。
組み込みコマンド
.B hash
に対するオプション
.B \-p
の引数として
.B /
を含むファイル名を指定すること
.IP \(bu
.\"O importing function definitions from the shell environment at startup
起動時にシェル環境から関数定義をインポートすること
.IP \(bu
.\"O parsing the value of \fBSHELLOPTS\fP from the shell environment at startup
起動時にシェル環境から \fBSHELLOPTS\fP の値を展開すること
.IP \(bu
.\"O redirecting output using the >, >|, <>, >&, &>, and >> redirection operators
リダイレクション演算子 >, >|, <>, >&, &>, >> を使ってリダイレクトを行
なうこと
.IP \(bu
.\"O using the
.\"O .B exec
.\"O builtin command to replace the shell with another command
組み込みコマンド
.B exec
を用いて、シェルを別のコマンドに置き換えること
.IP \(bu
.\"O adding or deleting builtin commands with the
.\"O .B \-f
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-d
.\"O options to the
.\"O .B enable
.\"O builtin command
組み込みコマンド
.B enable
に対する
.B \-f
オプションと
.B \-d
オプションを使って、組み込みコマンドを追加・削除すること
.IP \(bu
.\"O specifying the
.\"O .B \-p
.\"O option to the
.\"O .B command
.\"O builtin command
組み込みコマンド
.B command
に
.B \-p
オプションを指定すること
.IP \(bu
.\"O turning off restricted mode with
.\"O \fBset +r\fP or \fBset +o restricted\fP.
\fBset +r\fP や \fBset +o restricted\fP を用いて制限モードを解除すること
.PP
.\"O These restrictions are enforced after any startup files are read.
これらの制限は、何らかの起動ファイルを読み込んだ後に適用されます。
.PP
.\"O When a command that is found to be a shell script is executed (see
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B "COMMAND EXECUTION"
.\"O above),
.\"O .B rbash
.\"O turns off any restrictions in the shell spawned to execute the
.\"O script.
シェルスクリプトであると判明したファイルが実行された時 (前述の
.SM
.B コマンドの実行
を参照) には、
.B rbash
はスクリプト実行用に立ち上げたシェルでは制限を全て無効にします。
.\"O .\" end of rbash.1
.if \n(zY=1 .ig zY
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.PD 0
.TP
\fIBash Reference Manual\fP, Brian Fox and Chet Ramey
.TP
\fIThe Gnu Readline Library\fP, Brian Fox and Chet Ramey
.TP
\fIThe Gnu History Library\fP, Brian Fox and Chet Ramey
.TP
\fIPortable Operating System Interface (POSIX) Part 2: Shell and Utilities\fP, IEEE
.TP
\fIsh\fP(1), \fIksh\fP(1), \fIcsh\fP(1)
.TP
\fIemacs\fP(1), \fIvi\fP(1)
.TP
\fIreadline\fP(3)
.PD
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP
.FN /bin/bash
.\"O The \fBbash\fP executable
\fBbash\fP の実行ファイル。
.TP
.FN /etc/profile
.\"O The systemwide initialization file, executed for login shells
システム全体用の初期化ファイル。ログインシェルが実行します。
.TP
.FN ~/.bash_profile
.\"O The personal initialization file, executed for login shells
個人用の初期化ファイル。ログインシェルが実行します。
.TP
.FN ~/.bashrc
.\"O The individual per-interactive-shell startup file
対話シェルごとに実行される、個人用の起動ファイル。
.TP
.FN ~/.bash_logout
.\"O The individual login shell cleanup file, executed when a login shell exits
個人用のログインシェル後処理ファイル。
ログインシェルの終了時に実行されます。
.TP
.FN ~/.inputrc
.\"O Individual \fIreadline\fP initialization file
個人用の \fIreadline\fP 初期化ファイル。
.PD
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Brian Fox, Free Software Foundation
.br
bfox@gnu.org
.PP
Chet Ramey, Case Western Reserve University
.br
chet@ins.CWRU.Edu
.\"O .SH BUG REPORTS
.SH バグ報告
.\"O If you find a bug in
.\"O .B bash,
.\"O you should report it.  But first, you should
.\"O make sure that it really is a bug, and that it appears in the latest
.\"O version of
.\"O .B bash
.\"O that you have.
.B bash
のバグを見つけたら必ず報告してください。
ただし報告の前には、それが本当にバグであることと、
バグが最新版の
.B bash
で起こることを確かめてください。
.PP
.\"O Once you have determined that a bug actually exists, use the
.\"O .I bashbug
.\"O command to submit a bug report.
.\"O If you have a fix, you are encouraged to mail that as well!
.\"O Suggestions and `philosophical' bug reports may be mailed
.\"O to \fIbug-bash@gnu.org\fP or posted to the Usenet
.\"O newsgroup
.\"O .BR gnu.bash.bug .
本当にバグがあると判断した場合には、
.I bashbug
コマンドを使ってバグ報告を行います。
バグを修正してくださった場合には、
ぜひその内容も一緒にメールしてください!
提案や「哲学上の」バグ報告は、\fIbug-bash@gnu.org\fP にメールしたり、
ニュースグループの
.BR gnu.bash.bug
に投稿してくださっても構いません。
.PP
.\"O ALL bug reports should include:
バグ報告には必ず以下のことを書いてください:
.PP
.PD 0
.TP 20
.\"O The version number of \fBbash\fR
\fBbash\fR のバージョン
.TP
.\"O The hardware and operating system
ハードウェアとオペレーティングシステム
.TP
.\"O The compiler used to compile
コンパイルに使ったコンパイラ
.TP
.\"O A description of the bug behaviour
バグ動作の説明
.TP
.\"O A short script or `recipe' which exercises the bug
バグを再現できる簡単なシェルスクリプトまたは「レシピ」
.PD
.PP
.\"O .I bashbug
.\"O inserts the first three items automatically into the template
.\"O it provides for filing a bug report.
.I bashbug
コマンドは、バグ報告を送るために用意されているテンプレートに、
最初の 3 項目を自動的に書き込みます。
.PP
.\"O Comments and bug reports concerning
.\"O this manual page should be directed to
.\"O .IR chet@ins.CWRU.Edu .
このオンラインマニュアルに関するコメントやバグ報告は
.IR chet@ins.CWRU.Edu
宛にお願いします。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.PP
.\"O It's too big and too slow.
.B bash
は大きすぎるし、遅すぎます。
.PP
.\"O There are some subtle differences between 
.\"O .B bash
.\"O and traditional versions of
.\"O .BR sh ,
.\"O mostly because of the
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B POSIX
.\"O specification.
.B bash
と昔ながらのバージョンの
.BR sh
にはちょっとした違いがいくつかあります。この大部分は
.SM
.B POSIX
の仕様のせいで生じたものです。
.PP
.\"O Aliases are confusing in some uses.
使い方によっては、エイリアスは混乱の元になります。
.PP
.\"O Shell builtin commands and functions are not stoppable/restartable.
シェル組み込みコマンドとシェル関数は停止・再実行できません。
.PP
.\"O Compound commands and command sequences of the form `a ; b ; c'
.\"O are not handled gracefully when process suspension is attempted.
.\"O When a process is stopped, the shell immediately executes the next
.\"O command in the sequence.
.\"O It suffices to place the sequence of commands between
.\"O parentheses to force it into a subshell, which may be stopped as
.\"O a unit.
複合コマンドや `a ; b ; c' の形式のコマンド列は、
プロセスのサスペンドを行う際に綺麗に扱うことができません。
プロセスを停止すると、
シェルはコマンド列の次のコマンドを即座に実行するからです。
この問題はコマンド列を括弧の中に置いて
サブシェルに実行させることで解決できます。
こうすれば、ひとまとまりのものとして停止できます。
.PP
.\"O Commands inside of \fB$(\fP...\fB)\fP command substitution are not
.\"O parsed until substitution is attempted.  This will delay error
.\"O reporting until some time after the command is entered.
\fB$(\fP...\fB)\fP  を使ったコマンド置換の内部にあるコマンドは、
置換が実行される時まで展開されません。
これにより、コマンドを入力してしばらく経つまでエラー出力が遅れます。
.PP
.\"O Array variables may not (yet) be exported.
配列変数は (まだ) エクスポートできません。
.zZ
.zY
