.\" MAN PAGE COMMENTS to
.\"
.\"     Chet Ramey
.\"     Case Western Reserve University
.\"     chet@po.cwru.edu
.\"
.\"     Last Change: Tue Apr  3 15:46:30 EDT 2007
.\"
.\" Translated Sun Nov 21 22:37:41 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2011-09-11, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH BASHBUG 1 "1998 July 30" "GNU Bash-4.0"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O bashbug \- report a bug in bash
bashbug \- bash のバグを報告する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBbashbug\fP [\fI--version\fP] [\fI--help\fP] [\fIemail-address\fP]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B bashbug
.\"O is a shell script to help the user compose and mail bug reports
.\"O concerning bash in a standard format.
.B bashbug
は、bash 関連のバグ報告を所定の形式で作成してメールで送付するのを補助
するシェルスクリプトです。
.\"O .B bashbug
.\"O invokes the editor specified by the environment variable
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EDITOR
.\"O on a temporary copy of the bug report format outline. The user must
.\"O fill in the appropriate fields and exit the editor.
.B bashbug
は環境変数
.SM
.B EDITOR
で指定されたエディタを起動し、バグ報告形式の下書きの一時的なコピーを開
きます。ユーザは適切な項目を埋めてエディタを終了しなければなりません。
.\"O .B bashbug
.\"O then mails the completed report to \fIbug-bash@gnu.org\fP, or
.\"O \fIemail-address\fP.  If the report cannot be mailed, it is saved in the
.\"O file \fIdead.bashbug\fP in the invoking user's home directory.
すると
.B bashbug
は完成した報告を \fIbug-bash@gnu.org\fP あるいは \fIemail-address\fP 宛に
メールで送ります。報告をメールで送れない場合、この報告はコマンドを実行
したユーザのホームディレクトリの \fIdead.bashbug\fP というファイルに
保存されます。
.PP
.\"O The bug report format outline consists of several sections.  The first
.\"O section provides information about the machine, operating system, the
.\"O bash version, and the compilation environment.  The second section
.\"O should be filled in with a description of the bug.  The third section
.\"O should be a description of how to reproduce the bug.  The optional
.\"O fourth section is for a proposed fix.  Fixes are encouraged.
バグ報告形式の下書きは、複数の節からできています。最初の節には、
マシン、オペレーティングシステム、bash のバージョン、コンパイル環境が
書かれます。2 番目の節にはバグの説明を書かなければなりません。
3 番目の節にはバグを再現させる方法の説明を書かなければなりません。
4 番目の節(省略可能)は修正方法の提案のためのものです。
修正は歓迎されます。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\"O .B bashbug
.\"O will utilize the following environment variables if they exist:
.B bashbug
は、以下の環境変数が存在していれば、これらを使用します:
.TP
.B EDITOR
.\"O Specifies the preferred editor. If
.\"O .SM
.\"O .B EDITOR
.\"O is not set,
.\"O .B bashbug
.\"O defaults to
.\"O .BR emacs .
好みのエディタを指定します。
.SM
.B EDITOR
が設定されていなければ、
.B bashbug
はデフォルトで
.BR emacs
を使います。
.TP
.B HOME
.\"O Directory in which the failed bug report is saved if the mail fails.
メールでの送信に失敗したバグ報告が保存されるディレクトリ。
.TP
.B TMPDIR
.\"O Directory in which to create temporary files and directories.
一時的なファイルやディレクトリが作成されるディレクトリ。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.TP
\fIbash\fP(1)
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 作者
Brian Fox, Free Software Foundation
.br
bfox@gnu.org
.PP
Chet Ramey, Case Western Reserve University
.br
chet@po.cwru.edu
