.\"$Id: chsh.1,v 1.8 2002/03/09 19:22:29 ankry Exp $
.\" Copyright 1990, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Modified Tue 16 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH CHSH 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O chsh \- change login shell
.SH 名前
chsh \- ログインシェルを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.TP 5
\fBchsh\fR
[\fB-s \fIlogin_shell\fR] [\fIuser\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBchsh\fR changes the user login shell.
.\"O This determines the name of the user's initial login command.
.\"O A normal user may only change the login shell for her own account,
.\"O the super user may change the login shell for any account.
\fBchsh\fR はユーザのログインシェルを変更する。
これによって、ユーザがログインして最初に実行されるコマンドが決まる。
一般ユーザは自分のアカウントのログインシェルのみを変更できる。
スーパーユーザは全てのアカウントのログインシェルを変更できる。
.PP
.\"O The only restrictions placed on the login shell is that the
.\"O command name must be listed in \fI/etc/shells\fR, unless the
.\"O invoker is the super-user, and then any value may be added.
.\"O An account with a restricted login shell may not change
.\"O her login shell.
.\"O For this reason, placing \fB/bin/rsh\fR in \fI/etc/shells\fR
.\"O is discouraged since accidentally changing to a restricted
.\"O shell would prevent the user from every changing her login
.\"O shell back to its original value.
ログインシェルは、
コマンド名が \fI/etc/shells\fR に記載されていればなんでも良い。
スーパーユーザの場合はこの制限はなく、いかなる値でも指定できる。
機能を制限されたログインシェルを用いているアカウントからは、
ログインシェルを変更できないかもしれない。
この理由から、
\fB/bin/rsh\fR は \fI/etc/shells\fR には書かないほうが良い。
誤って機能が制限されたシェルに変更してしまうと、
ログインシェルを元のものに戻せなくなってしまうからである。
.PP
.\"O If the \fB-s\fR option is not selected, \fBchsh\fR operates in an interactive
.\"O fashion, prompting the user with the current login shell.
.\"O Enter the new value to change the shell, or leave the line blank to use
.\"O the current one.
.\"O The current shell is displayed between a pair of \fB[ ]\fR marks.
\fB-s\fR オプションを指定しなかった場合は、
\fBchsh\fR は対話的に動作する。
ユーザの現在のログインシェルを表示し、新しい値の入力を促す。
設定値を変更するなら新しい値を入力し、
現在の値を使うなら空行のままリターンキーを押せばよい。
現在のシェルは \fB[ ]\fR 記号の間に表示される。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/passwd \- user account information
/etc/passwd \- ユーザアカウント情報
.br
.\"O /etc/shells \- list of valid login shells
/etc/shells \- 指定できるログインシェルのリスト
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR chfn (1),
.BR passwd (5)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh <jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com>
