.\"$Id: gpasswd.1,v 1.5 2002/03/09 19:22:29 ankry Exp $
.\" Copyright 1996, Rafal Maszkowski <rzm@pdi.net>
.\" All rights reserved. You can redistribute this man page and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the
.\" License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified 3 Mar 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Tue 16 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH GPASSWD 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O gpasswd \- administer the /etc/group file
.SH 名前
gpasswd \- /etc/groupファイルを管理する
.\"O .br
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBgpasswd \fIgroup\fR
.br
\fBgpasswd -a \fIuser\fR \fIgroup\fR
.br
\fBgpasswd -d \fIuser\fR \fIgroup\fR
.br
\fBgpasswd -R \fIgroup\fR
.br
\fBgpasswd -r \fIgroup\fR
.br
\fBgpasswd\fR [\fB-A \fIuser\fR,...] [\fB-M\fR \fIuser\fR,...] \fIgroup\fR
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B gpasswd
.\"O is used to administer the /etc/group file (and /etc/gshadow
.\"O file if compiled with SHADOWGRP defined). Every group can
.\"O have administrators, members and a password. System
.\"O administrator can use \fB-A\fR option to define group
.\"O administrator(s) and \fB-M\fR option to define members and
.\"O has all rights of group administrators and members.
.B gpasswd
は /etc/group ファイル
(および SHADOWGRP を定義してコンパイルした時は /etc/gshadow ファイル)
の管理に用いられる。
各グループには、管理者・メンバー・パスワードを設定できる。
システム管理者は、
\fB-A\fR オプションを使ってグループ管理者 (複数でも可) を定義したり、
\fB-M\fR オプションを使ってメンバーを定義したりでき、
各グループの管理者・メンバーと同等の特権を持つ。
.PP
.\"O Group administrator can add and delete users using \fB-a\fR
.\"O and \fB-d\fR options respectively. Administrators can use
.\"O \fB-r\fR option to remove group password. When no password 
.\"O is set only group members can use
.\"O .BR newgrp (1)
.\"O to join the group. Option \fB-R\fR disables 
.\"O access to the group through
.\"O .BR newgrp (1)
.\"O command.
グループ管理者は、\fB-a\fR オプションを用いてユーザを追加したり、
\fB-d\fR オプションを用いてユーザを削除したりできる。
管理者は \fB-r\fR オプションを用いてグループパスワードを削除できる。
パスワードが設定されていない時は、
グループのメンバーのみが
.BR newgrp (1)
を用いてグループの一員になれる。
オプション \fB-R\fR を指定すると、
.BR newgrp (1)
コマンドを用いたグループへのアクセスはできなくなる。
.PP
.\"O \fBgpasswd\fR called by a group administrator with group name only prompts
.\"O for the group password. If password is set the members can still
.\"O .BR newgrp (1)
.\"O without a password, non-members must supply the password.
グループの管理者がグループ名のみを指定して
.B gpasswd
コマンドを実行した場合は、
パスワードの入力を求められる。
パスワードが設定されている場合でも、
メンバーはパスワードなしで
.BR newgrp (1)
コマンドを使えるが、
メンバーでない人はパスワードを入力しなくてはならない。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/group \- group information
/etc/group \- グループ情報
.br
.\"O /etc/gshadow \- shadow group information
/etc/gshadow \- shadow されたグループ情報
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR newgrp (1),
.BR groupadd (8),
.BR groupdel (8),
.BR groupmod (8),
.BR grpck (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Rafal Maszkowski <rzm@pdi.net>
