.\"$Id: login.1,v 1.5 2002/09/21 08:12:49 nakano Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 - 1994, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated Fri Jan 12 04:05:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Modified Tue 16 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH LOGIN 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O login \- begin session on the system
login \- システム上でセッションを開く
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBlogin\fR [\fB-p\fR] [\fIusername\fR] [\fIENV=VAR\fR ...]
.br
\fBlogin\fR [\fB-p\fR] [\fB-h \fIhost\fR] [\fB-f \fIusername\fR]
.br
\fBlogin\fR [\fB-p\fR] \fB-r \fIhost\fR
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B login
.\"O is used to establish a new session with the system.
.\"O It is normally invoked automatically by responding to the
.\"O .I login:
.\"O prompt on the user\'s terminal.
.\"O .B login
.\"O may be special to the shell and may not be invoked as a sub-process.
.\"O Typically,
.\"O .B login
.\"O is treated by the shell as \fBexec login\fR which causes the user
.\"O to exit from the current shell.
.\"O Attempting to execute \fBlogin\fR from any shell but the login shell
.\"O will produce an error message.
.B login
はシステムに新たにセッションを開くために用いられる。
通常は、ユーザの端末に表示される
.I login:
というプロンプトに応じる事によって自動的に起動される。
.B login
はシェル専用のものであり、
サブプロセスとして起動することはできない。
通常シェルは
.B login
を
\fBexec login\fR とみなすので、ユーザは現在のシェルから抜けることになる。
ログインシェル以外から \fBlogin\fR を起動しようとすると、
エラーメッセージが表示される。
.PP
.\"O When invoked from the \fIlogin:\fR prompt, the user may enter
.\"O environmental variables after the username.
.\"O These variables are entered in the form \fBNAME=VALUE\fR.
.\"O Not all variables may be set in the fashion, notably \fBPATH\fR,
.\"O \fBHOME\fR and \fBSHELL\fR.
.\"O Additionally, \fBIFS\fR may be inhibited if the user\'s login
.\"O shell is \fB/bin/sh\fR.
\fIlogin:\fRプロンプトから起動した際は、
ユーザ名に続いて環境変数を入力する事もできる。
それらを入力する場合は \fBNAME=VALUE\fR という書式で行う。
この方法で全ての変数を設定できるわけではない。
例えば
\fBPATH\fR, \fBHOME\fR, \fBSHELL\fR
などは設定できない。
さらにログインシェルが \fB/bin/sh\fR の場合は
\fBIFS\fR も設定もできない。
.PP
.\"O The user is then prompted for a password, where appropriate.
.\"O Echoing is disabled to prevent revealing the password.
.\"O Only a small number of password failures are permitted before
.\"O \fBlogin\fR exits and the communications link is severed.
次いで、必要な場合には、ユーザはパスワードを入力するよう促される。
パスワードを表示してしまわないよう、エコーは行われない。
数回以上パスワード入力に失敗すると
\fBlogin\fR は終了し、通信の接続は切断されてしまう。
.PP
.\"O If password aging has been enabled for your account, you may be
.\"O prompted for a new password before proceeding.
.\"O You will be forced to provide your old password and the new
.\"O password before continuing.
.\"O Please refer to \fBpasswd\fR(1) for more information.
アカウントに対してパスワードの有効期限が設定されている場合は、
先に進む前に新しいパスワードの設定を促されることもある。
セッションを続けるためには古いパスワードと
新しいパスワードを入力しなくてはならない。
詳しい情報は \fBpasswd\fR(1) を参照すること。
.PP
.\"O After a successful login,
.\"O you will be informed of any system messages and the presence
.\"O of mail.
.\"O You may turn off the printing of the system message file,
.\"O \fI/etc/motd\fR, by creating a zero-length file \fI.hushlogin\fR
.\"O in your login directory.
.\"O The mail message will be one of "\fBYou have new mail.\fR",
.\"O "\fBYou have mail.\fR", or "\fBNo Mail.\fR" according to
.\"O the condition of your mailbox.
ログインに成功すると、システムメッセージやメールの有無が表示される。
ログインディレクトリに長さ 0 のファイル \fI.hushlogin\fR を作っておけば、
システムメッセージファイルである
\fI/etc/motd\fR の表示を無効にできる。
メールに関するメッセージは、メールボックスの状態によって
"\fBYou have new mail.\fR",
"\fBYou have mail.\fR",
"\fBNo Mail.\fR"
のいずれかになる。
.PP
.\"O Your user and group ID will be set according to their values in
.\"O the \fI/etc/passwd\fR file.
.\"O The value for \fB$HOME\fR, \fB$SHELL\fR, \fB$PATH\fR, \fB$LOGNAME\fR,
.\"O and \fB$MAIL\fR are set according to the appropriate fields in the
.\"O password entry.
.\"O Ulimit, umask and nice values may also be set according to
.\"O entries in the GECOS field.
ユーザ ID とグループの ID は
\fI/etc/passwd\fR ファイル中に記載されている値に従って設定される。
\fB$HOME\fR, \fB$SHELL\fR, \fB$PATH\fR, \fB$LOGNAME\fR, \fB$MAIL\fR
の値は、パスワードエントリのそれぞれのフィールドに従って設定される。
ulimit, umask, nice 値が、
GECOS フィールドのエントリーによって設定されることもある。
.PP
.\"O On some installations, the environmental variable \fB$TERM\fR will be
.\"O initialized to the terminal type on your tty line, as specified in
.\"O \fI/etc/ttytype\fR.
インストール時の設定によっては、
\fI/etc/ttytype\fR の指定に従って、
環境変数\fB$TERM\fRが tty 接続の端末の型 (terminal type)
に初期化されることもある。
.PP
.\"O An initialization script for your command interpreter may also be
.\"O executed.
.\"O Please see the appropriate manual section for more information on
.\"O this function.
コマンドインタプリタの初期化スクリプトが実行されることもある。
この機能についての詳しい情報は適当なマニュアルセクションを参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O A subsystem login is indicated by the presense of a "*" as the first
.\"O character of the login shell. The given home directory will be used as
.\"O the root of a new filesystem which the user is actually logged into.
サブシステムログインでは、
ログインシェルの最初の文字に "*" を置く。
渡されたホームディレクトリは、
ユーザが実際にログインする新しいファイルシステムのルートとして扱われる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -p
.\"O Preserve environment.
環境を保存する。
.TP
.B -f
.\"O Do not perform authentication, user is preauthenticated.
ユーザはすでに認証されているものとして、認証動作を行なわない。
.TP
.B -h
.\"O Name of the remote host for this login.
このログインのリモートホストの名前。
.TP
.B -r
.\"O Perform autologin protocol for rlogin.
rlogin の自動ログインプロトコルを実行する。
.PP
.\"O The \fB-r\fP, \fB-h\fP and \fB-f\fP options are only used when \fBlogin\fP is
.\"O invoked by root.
\fB-r\fP, \fB-h\fP, \fB-f\fP オプションは、
root が \fBlogin\fP を起動した場合にのみ用いる。
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O This version of \fBlogin\fR has many compilation options, only some of which
.\"O may be in use at any particular site.
この版の \fBlogin\fR には多くのコンパイル時オプションがあるが、
サイトによってはこのうちの一部しか使われていないかもしれない。
.PP
.\"O The location of files is subject to differences in system configuration.
システム設定の違いによって上記ファイルの置き場所は変わる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .br
.\"O /etc/utmp \- list of current login sessions
/etc/utmp \- 現在のログインセッションのリスト
.br
.\"O /etc/wtmp \- list of previous login sessions
/etc/wtmp \- 過去のログインセッションのリスト
.br
.\"O /etc/passwd \- user account information
/etc/passwd \- ユーザアカウント情報
.br
.\"O /etc/shadow \- encrypted passwords and age information
/etc/shadow \- 暗号化パスワードと有効期限情報
.br
.\"O /etc/motd \- system message file
/etc/motd \- システムメッセージファイル
.br
.\"O /etc/nologin \- prevent non-root users from logging in
/etc/nologin \- root 以外のユーザのログインを禁止する
.br
.\"O /etc/ttytype \- list of terminal types
/etc/ttytype \- 端末の型のリスト
.br
.\"O $HOME/.profile \- initialization script for default shell
$HOME/.profile \- デフォルトシェルの初期化スクリプト
.br
.\"O $HOME/.hushlogin \- suppress printing of system messages
$HOME/.hushlogin \- システムメッセージの表示を抑制する
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR mail (1),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR sh (1),
.BR su (1),
.\" .BR d_passwd (5),
.BR login.defs (5),
.BR nologin (5),
.BR passwd (5),
.BR getty (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh <jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com>
