.\"$Id: passwd.1,v 1.13 2002/03/09 19:22:30 ankry Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 - 1994, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated 2 Mar 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Tue 16 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PASSWD 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O passwd \- change user password
.SH 名前
passwd \- ユーザパスワードを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBpasswd\fR [\fB-f\fR|\fB-s\fR] [\fIname\fR]
.br
\fBpasswd\fR [\fB-g\fR] [\fB-r\fR|\fB-R\fR] \fIgroup\fR
.br
\fBpasswd\fR [\fB-x \fImax\fR] [\fB-n \fImin\fR]
[\fB-w \fIwarn\fR] [\fB-i \fIinact\fR] \fIlogin\fR
.br
\fBpasswd\fR {\fB-l\fR|\fB-u\fR|\fB-d\fR|\fB-S\fR|\fB-e\fR} \fIlogin\fR
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBpasswd\fR changes passwords for user and group accounts.
.\"O A normal user may only change the password for his/her own account,
.\"O the super user may change the password for any account.
.\"O The administrator of a group may change the password for the group.
.\"O \fBpasswd\fR also changes account information, such as the full name
.\"O of the user, user's login shell, or password expiry date and interval.
\fBpasswd\fR はユーザアカウント・グループアカウントのパスワードを変更する。
一般ユーザは自分のアカウントのパスワードしか変更できない。
スーパーユーザはいかなるアカウントのパスワードも変更できる。
グループの管理者はグループのパスワードを変更できる。
\fBpasswd\fR によって、ユーザのフルネーム・ログインシェル・
パスワードの期限切れの日付・
有効期間といったアカウント情報を変更することもできる。
.PP
.\"O The \fB-s\fR option makes passwd call chsh to change the user's shell. The
.\"O \fB-f\fR option makes passwd call chfn to change the user's gecos
.\"O information. These two options are only meant for compatiblity, since the
.\"O other programs can be called directly.
.B -s
オプションを指定すると
.BR passwd " は " chsh
を呼び出してユーザのシェルを変更する。
.B -f
オプションを指定すると
.BR passwd " は " chfn
を呼び出してユーザの GECOS 情報を変更する。
これらの 2 つのオプションは互換性のためだけにある。
chsh や chfn を直接呼び出しても構わない。
.\"O .SS Password Changes
.SS パスワードの変更
.\"O The user is first prompted for his/her old password, if one is present.
.\"O This password is then encrypted and compared against the
.\"O stored password.
.\"O The user has only one chance to enter the correct password.
.\"O The super user is permitted to bypass this step so that forgotten
.\"O passwords may be changed.
パスワードが既にある場合は、まず古いパスワードを入力するよう促される。
入力されたパスワードは暗号化され、記録されているものと照合される。
正しいパスワードを 1 回で入力しなくてはならない。
スーパーユーザは、パスワードを忘れてしまった際の変更も行なえる様に、
このステップを省略できる。
.PP
.\"O After the password has been entered, password aging information
.\"O is checked to see if the user is permitted to change the password
.\"O at this time.
.\"O If not, \fBpasswd\fR refuses to change the password and exits.
パスワードが入力された後、パスワード有効期限の情報を調べ、
現在パスワードの変更が許されているか検査する。
もし許可されていない場合は、
\fBpasswd\fR は変更を拒否して終了する。
.PP
.\"O The user is then prompted for a replacement password.
.\"O This password is tested for complexity.
.\"O As a general guideline,
.\"O passwords should consist of 6 to 8 characters including
.\"O one or more from each of following sets:
次にユーザは、置き換えるパスワードを入力するよう促される。
入力されたパスワードは、充分複雑かどうか検査される。
一般的な指針としては、
パスワードは以下の集合それぞれから一つ以上の文字を使った
6 から 8 文字のものにすべきである。
.IP "" .5i
.\"O Lower case alphabetics
小文字のアルファベット
.IP "" .5i
.\"O Upper case alphabetics
大文字のアルファベット
.IP "" .5i
.\"O Digits 0 thru 9
0 から 9 までの数字
.IP "" .5i
.\"O Punctuation marks
句読点
.PP
.\"O Care must be taken not to include the system default erase
.\"O or kill characters.
.\"O \fBpasswd\fR will reject any password which is not suitably
.\"O complex.
システムのデフォルトの消去文字や
kill 文字を含めないように注意すること。
\fBpasswd\fR はあまりに単純なパスワードへの変更は拒否する。
.PP
.\"O If the password is accepted,
.\"O \fBpasswd\fR will prompt again and compare the second entry
.\"O against the first.
.\"O Both entries are required to match in order for the password
.\"O to be changed.
入力したパスワードが受け入れられた場合、
\fBpasswd\fR はもう一度入力を促し、
二番目に入力したものを最初のものと比較する。
パスワード変更が受け入れられるためには、
この両者が合致しなくてはならない。
.\"O .SS Group passwords
.SS グループパスワード
.\"O When the \fB-g\fR option is used, the password for the named
.\"O group is changed.
.\"O The user must either be the super user, or a group administrator
.\"O for the named group.
.\"O The current group password is not prompted for.
.\"O The \fB-r\fR option is used with the \fB-g\fR option to remove
.\"O the current password from the named group.
.\"O This allows group access to all members.
.\"O The \fB-R\fR option is used with the \fB-g\fR option to restrict
.\"O the named group for all users.
\fB-g\fR オプションを用いた場合、
指定したグループのパスワードが変更される。
このオプションはスーパーユーザか指定したグループの管理者しか使えない。
現在のグループパスワードは尋ねてこない。
\fB-g\fR オプションを \fB-r\fR オプションとともに用いると、
指定したグループのパスワードが削除される。
こうすると全てのメンバーがこのグループにアクセスできるようになる。
\fB-R\fR オプションを \fB-g\fR オプションとともに用いると、
全てのユーザに対して指定したグループへのアクセスを禁止できる。
.\"O .SS Password expiry information
.SS パスワードの有効期限情報
.\"O The password aging information may be changed by the super
.\"O user with the \fB-x\fR, \fB-n\fR, \fB-w\fR, and \fB-i\fR options.
.\"O The \fB-x\fR option is used to set the maximum number of days
.\"O a password remains valid.
.\"O After \fImax\fR days, the password is required to be changed.
.\"O The \fB-n\fR option is used to set the minimum number of days
.\"O before a password may be changed.
.\"O The user will not be permitted to change the password until
.\"O \fImin\fR days have elapsed.
.\"O The \fB-w\fR option is used to set the number of days of warning
.\"O the user will receive before his/her password will expire.
.\"O The warning occurs \fIwarn\fR days before the expiration, telling
.\"O the user how many days remain until the password is set to expire.
.\"O The \fB-i\fR option is used to disable an account after the
.\"O password has been expired for a number of days.
.\"O After a user account has had an expired password for \fIinact\fR
.\"O days, the user may no longer sign on to the account.
スーパーユーザは、パスワードの有効期限に関する情報を変更できる。
これには \fB-x\fR, \fB-n\fR, \fB-w\fR, \fB-i\fR などのオプションを用いる。
\fB-x\fR オプションはパスワードが有効な最長日数を設定するのに用いられる。
\fImax\fR 日が過ぎるとパスワードを変更するように求められる。
\fB-n\fR オプションはパスワードが変更可能となるまでの
最短日数を設定するのに用いられる。
ユーザは \fImin\fR 日が経過した後でないとパスワードを変更できない。
\fB-w\fR オプションはパスワードの使用期限が来る前に
何日間警告を与えるかを設定するために用いられる。
期限切れの \fIwarn\fR 日前から注意が開始され、
パスワードが期限切れになるまであと何日残っているかが示される。
\fB-i\fR オプションは、
パスワードの期限が切れてから何日間経過したら、
そのアカウントを使用不能の状態にするかを設定するのに用いる。
\fIinact\fR 日間アカウントをパスワード期限切れ状態のままにすると、
ユーザはそのアカウントに入れなくなる。
.PP
.\"O If you wish to immediately expire an account's password, you can use the
.\"O \fB-e\fR option. This in effect can force a user to change his/her password at
.\"O the user's next login. You can also use the \fB-d\fR option to delete a user's
.\"O password (make it empty). Use caution with this option since it can make an
.\"O account not require a password at all to login, leaving your system open to
.\"O intruders.
あるアカウントのパスワードを直ちに期限切れにしたい場合は、
\fB-e\fR オプションを用いればよい。
するとそのユーザは次にログインする際にパスワードを変更するよう強制される。
\fB-d\fR オプションを使って、ユーザのパスワードを削除することもできる
(パスワードが空になる)。このオプションは注意して使うこと。
これを使うと、そのアカウントはログインにパスワードを全く必要としなくなり、
システムが侵入者に対してオープンになってしまう。
.\"O .SS Account maintenance
.SS アカウントの保守
.\"O User accounts may be locked and unlocked with the \fB-l\fR and
.\"O \fB-u\fR flags.
.\"O The \fB-l\fR option disables an account by changing the password to a
.\"O value which matches no possible encrypted value.
.\"O The \fB-u\fR option re-enables an account by changing the password
.\"O back to its previous value.
\fB-l\fR フラグと \fB-u\fR フラグを用いると、
ユーザアカウントをロックしたり、そのロックを外したりできる。
\fB-l\fR オプションを用いると、
パスワードフィールドの値は暗号化された如何なる値ともマッチしなくなり、
アカウントは使用不能になる。
\fB-u\fR オプションを用いると、パスワードは以前の値に戻り、
アカウントが再び使用可能となる。
.PP
.\"O The account status may be given with the \fB-S\fR option.
.\"O The status information consists of 6 parts.
.\"O The first part indicates if the user account is locked (L), has no
.\"O password (NP), or has a usable password (P).
.\"O The second part gives the date of the last password change.
.\"O The next four parts are the minimum age, maximum age, warning period,
.\"O and inactivity period for the password.
\fB-S\fR オプションを用いるとアカウントの状態が表示される。
アカウントの状態の情報は 6 つの部分からなる。
最初の部分は、アカウントにロックがかけられている (L)、
パスワードが存在しない (NP)、
もしくは使用可能なパスワードがある (P) といった情報を示す。
2 番目は最後にパスワードが変更された日付を示す。
残りの4つの部分はそれぞれパスワードの最短期限、最長期限、警告期間、
使用不能期間である。
.\"O .SS Hints for user passwords
.SS ユーザパスワードに対するヒント
.\"O The security of a password depends upon the strength of the
.\"O encryption algorithm and the size of the key space.
.\"O The \fB\s-2UNIX\s+2\fR System encryption method is based on
.\"O the NBS DES algorithm and is very secure.
.\"O The size of the key space depends upon the randomness of the
.\"O password which is selected.
パスワードの安全性は暗号化アルゴリズムの強力さとキー空間の大きさに依存する。
\fB\s-2UNIX\s+2\fR のシステム暗号化の方法は
NBS DES アルゴリズムに基づいており、非常に安全性が高い。
キー空間の大きさは選ばれたパスワードのランダムさに依存する。
.PP
.\"O Compromises in password security normally result from careless
.\"O password selection or handling.
.\"O For this reason, you should not select a password which appears in
.\"O a dictionary or which must be written down.
.\"O The password should also not be a proper name, your license
.\"O number, birth date, or street address.
.\"O Any of these may be used as guesses to violate system security.
パスワードの安全性が脅かされるのは、
大抵の場合パスワードの選択や扱いが不注意なためである。
従ってパスワードとしては、
辞書に載っているものや書き留めなければならないものは
避けるべきである。
また、固有名詞・免許証番号・誕生日・自宅の住所などを
パスワードにするのも避けるべきである。
これらはいずれもシステムセキュリティを破る際に、
推量情報に用いられる可能性があるからである。
.PP
.\"O Your password must easily remembered so that you will not
.\"O be forced to write it on a piece of paper.
.\"O This can be accomplished by appending two small words together
.\"O and separating each with a special character or digit.
.\"O For example, Pass%word.
パスワードは紙片に書き留めておく必要が無いよう、
簡単に思い出せるものにしなくてはならない。
これは例えば、
短い二つの単語をくっつけて、
その間に特殊記号や数字を挟み込むことによって作れる。
例えば Pass%word など。
.PP
.\"O Other methods of construction involve selecting an easily
.\"O remembered phrase from literature and selecting the first
.\"O or last letter from each word.
.\"O An example of this is
他の作り方としては、文学作品などから思い出しやすい句を選び出し、
それぞれの単語から最初もしくは最後の文字を抜き出す方法がある。
この方法の例としては、
.IP "" .5i
Ask not for whom the bell tolls.
.PP
.\"O which produces
という句から
.IP "" .5i
An4wtbt.
というパスワードが作り出せる。
.PP
.\"O You may be reasonably sure few crackers will have
.\"O included this in their dictionaries.
.\"O You should, however, select your own methods for constructing
.\"O passwords and not rely exclusively on the methods given here.
クラッカーの辞書には、
こんな語句は載っていなさそうだ、とみなしても良いだろう。
しかし、ここに示した方法だけに頼るのではなく、
自分独自のパスワードの作り方を考え出すべきである。
.\"O .SS Notes about group passwords
.SS グループのパスワードに関する注意
.\"O Group passwords are an inherent security problem since more
.\"O than one person is permitted to know the password.
.\"O However, groups are a useful tool for permitting co-operation
.\"O between different users.
グループパスワードは、一人以上の人間が知ることが許されるものであるから、
本質的にセキュリティ上の問題を抱えている。
しかしグループを使えば別々の人間が共同で作業する事ができるので、
これは便利なツールではある。
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O Not all options may be supported.
.\"O Password complexity checking may vary from site to site.
.\"O The user is urged to select a password as complex as he
.\"O feels comfortable with.
.\"O Users may not be able to change their password on a system if NIS
.\"O is enabled and they are not logged into the NIS server.
全てのオプションが使えるようには設定されていないかもしれない。
パスワードの複雑さの検証はサイトによって異なるだろう。
ユーザはシステムが満足するような、
充分複雑なパスワードを選ぶよう強制される。
NIS が動作していて、
かつ NIS サーバ以外にログインしているユーザは、
パスワードを変更できない。
(訳注: この場合
.BR yppasswd (8)
を用いる。)
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/passwd \- user account information
/etc/passwd \- ユーザアカウント情報
.br
.\"O /etc/shadow \- encrypted user passwords
/etc/shadow \- 暗号化されたユーザパスワード
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR group (5),
.BR passwd (5)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh <jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com>
