.\"   Copyright (C) 1996-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\" this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Xavier Leroy.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (C) 2002-2003 Suzuki Takashi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Dec 31 18:17:59 JST 2002
.\"         by Suzuki Takashi.
.\"
.\"WORD:    calling thread      呼び出しスレッド
.\"WORD:    non-portable        ポータブルでない
.\"WORD:    cancellation state  取り消し状態
.\"WORD:    cancellation type   取り消し型
.\"WORD:    cleanup handler     クリーンアップハンドラ
.\"
.\"
.TH PTHREAD_KILL_OTHER_THREADS_NP 3 LinuxThreads

.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O pthread_kill_other_threads_np \- terminate all threads in program except calling thread
.SH "名前"
pthread_kill_other_threads_np \- 呼び出しスレッドを除くすべてのスレッドを終了させる

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH "書式"
.B #include <pthread.h>

.BI "void pthread_kill_other_threads_np(void);"

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O .B "pthread_kill_other_threads_np"
.\"O is a non-portable LinuxThreads extension.
.\"O It causes all threads in the program to terminate immediately, except
.\"O the calling thread which proceeds normally. It is intended to be
.\"O called just before a thread calls one of the 
.\"O .B "exec"
.\"O functions,
.\"O e.g. 
.\"O .BR "execve" (2).
.SH "説明"
.B "pthread_kill_other_threads_np"
はポータブルでない LinuxThreads の拡張である。
この関数は呼び出しスレッドを除く、プログラム中のすべてのスレッドを
直ちに終了させる。呼び出しスレッドはそのまま実行を継続する。
.B "pthread_kill_other_threads_np"
は、スレッドが
.BR "execve" (2)
などの
.B "exec"
関数のうちの 1 つを呼び出す直前に使われることを想定している。

.\"O Termination of the other threads is not performed through
.\"O .BR "pthread_cancel" (3)
.\"O and completely bypasses the cancellation
.\"O mechanism. Hence, the current settings for cancellation state and
.\"O cancellation type are ignored, and the cleanup handlers are not
.\"O executed in the terminated threads.
他のスレッドの終了は
.BR "pthread_cancel" (3)
を働かせて行なわれるわけではなく、
取り消し機構を完全に迂回する。
すなわち、終了するスレッドの取り消し状態や取り消し型に関する現在の設定は無視され、
クリーンアップハンドラも実行されない。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH "著者"
Xavier Leroy <Xavier.Leroy@inria.fr>

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
.BR "execve" (2),
.BR "pthread_setcancelstate" (3),
.BR "pthread_setcanceltype" (3),
.BR "pthread_cancel" (3).

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH "バグ"

.\"O According to POSIX 1003.1c, a successful 
.\"O .B "exec*"
.\"O in one of the threads
.\"O should terminate automatically all other threads in the program.
.\"O This behavior is not yet implemented in LinuxThreads.
.\"O Calling 
.\"O .B "pthread_kill_other_threads_np"
.\"O before 
.\"O .B "exec*"
.\"O achieves much
.\"O of the same behavior, except that if 
.\"O .B "exec*"
.\"O ultimately fails, then
.\"O all other threads are already killed.
POSIX 1003.1c 規格では、
1 つのスレッドで
.B "exec*"
が成功した場合、
プログラム中の他のスレッドはすべて自動的に
終了されなければならないことになっている。
この振る舞いは LinuxThreads ではまだ実装されていない。
.B "exec*"
の前に
.B "pthread_kill_other_threads_np"
を呼び出すことで、
次の点を除いて
だいたい同じ振る舞いを実現することができる。
それは、結果として
.B "exec*"
が失敗した場合でも、
他のスレッドはすでに終了されているということである。
