.\"
.\" Original manual page is a part of nfs-server package.
.\" Following is a exerpt from README of version 2.2beta47.
.\" 
.\" 7.  Copyright
.\" 
.\" Much of the code in this package was originally  written  by
.\" Mark Shand, and is placed under the following copyright:
.\" 
.\"    This  software may be used for any purpose provided
.\"    the above  copyright  notice  is  retained.  It  is
.\"    supplied  as  is,  with  no warranties expressed or
.\"    implied.
.\" 
.\" Other code, especially that written by Rick Sladkey and some
.\" replacement routines included from the GNU libc, are covered
.\" by the GNU General Public License, version 2,  or  (at  your
.\" option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed 11 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jan 27 17:30:35 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Modified Tue Feb 19 19:06:53 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH MOUNTD 8 "11 August 1997"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O mountd \- NFS mount daemon
.SH 名前
mountd \- NFS マウントデーモン
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.ad l
.B /usr/sbin/rpc.mountd
.B "[\ \-f\ exports-file\ ]"
.B "[\ \-d\ facility\ ]"
.B "[\ \-P\ port\ ]"
.B "[\ \-Dhnprv\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-debug\ facility ]"
.B "[\ \-\-exports\-file=file\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-help\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-allow\-non\-root\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-re\-export\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-no\-spoof\-trace\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-version\ ]"
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O program is an NFS mount daemon. When receiving a MOUNT request from an
.\"O NFS client, it checks the request against the list of exported file
.\"O systems listen in
.\"O .IR /etc/exports .
.I mountd
プログラムは NFS のマウントデーモンである。
.I mountd
は NFS クライアントから MOUNT リクエストを受け取ると、
エクスポートファイル
.I /etc/exports
のリストを参照し、そのリクエストが正当なものかどうかをチェックする。
.\"O If the client is permitted to mount the file system,
.\"O .I mountd 
.\"O creates a file handle for the requested directory, and adds an entry
.\"O .IR /etc/rmtab .
クライアントがそのファイルシステムのマウントを許可されている場合には、
.I mountd
は要求されたディレクトリのファイルハンドルを作成し、
そのエントリを
.I /etc/rmtab
に追加する。
.\"O Upon receipt of an UMOUNT request, it removes the client's entry from
.\"O .IR rmtab .
UMOUNT リクエストを受け取ると、
.I mountd
はクライアントのエントリを
.I rmtab
から削除する。
.\"O Note, however, that a client may still be able to use the file handle
.\"O after the UMOUNT request (for instance, if the client mounts the same
.\"O remote file system on two different mount points). Similarly, if a client
.\"O reboots without notifying
.\"O .IR mountd ,
.\"O a stale entry will remain in
.\"O .IR rmtab .
ただし UMOUNT リクエストの後でも、
クライアントは依然ファイルハンドルを扱うことが可能であることに注意すること
(例えばクライアントが同じリモートファイルシステムを
別々のマウントポイントにマウントしている場合など)。
またクライアントが
.I mountd
に知らせずにリブートすると、
.I rmtab
に古いエントリが残ってしまうことにも注意すること。
.\"O .SS Running from inetd
.SS "inetd からの起動"
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O can be started from
.\"O .I inetd
.\"O rather than at system boot time by adding the following two lines to
.\"O .IR /etc/inetd.conf :
.I mountd
は通常システムのブート時に起動するが、
.I inetd
から起動することもできる。以下の 2 行を
.I /etc/inetd.conf
に追加すればよい:
.PP
.nf
.ta +3i
mount/1-2 dgram  rpc/udp wait  root  /usr/sbin/rpc.mountd rpc.mountd
mount/1-2 stream rpc/tcp wait  root  /usr/sbin/rpc.mountd rpc.mountd
.fi
.PP
.\"O When run from
.\"O .IR inetd ,
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O will terminate after a certain period of inactivity.
.I inetd
から起動した場合には、適当な期間に動作要求がないと
.I mountd
は終了する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.\"O .BR \-f " or " \-\-exports\-file
.BR \-f " または " \\-\-exports\-file
.\"O This option specifies the exports file, listing the clients that this server
.\"O is prepared to serve and parameters to apply to each such mount (see
.\"O exports(5)).
.\"O By default exports are read from
.\"O .IR /etc/exports .
このオプションはエクスポートファイルを指定する。
エクスポートファイルには、このサーバーがサービスを提供するクライアントと、
それぞれのマウントに対して適用されるパラメータがリストされている
.RB ( exports (5)
を見よ)。
デフォルトのエクスポートファイルは
.I /etc/exports
である。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-d " or " \-\-debug
.BR "\-d facility" " または " "\-\-debug facility"
.\"O Log each transaction verbosely to standard error. Valid log facilities
.\"O are
.\"O .I call
.\"O for the logging of all calls, 
.\"O .I auth
.\"O for client authentication, 
.\"O .I fhcache
.\"O for operations of the file handle cache, and
.\"O .I rmtab
.\"O for manipulation of 
.\"O .IR /etc/rmtab .
.\"O By default, log output is sent to
.\"O syslogd unless the daemon runs in the foreground.
それぞれのトランザクションに対する詳細な内容を、
標準エラー出力にログ表示する。
\fIfacility\fP に指定できるのは、
.I call
(すべてのコールを記録)、
.I auth
(クライアントの認証)、
.I fhcache
(ファイルハンドルのキャッシュ操作)、
.I rmtab
.RI ( /etc/rmtab
の操作) である。
デフォルトでは、デーモンがフォアグラウンドで実行されなければ、
ログ出力は syslogd に送られる。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-F " or " \-\-foreground
.BR \-F " または " \-\-foreground
.\"O Unlike normal in operation,
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O will not detach from the terminal when given this option. When debugging is
.\"O requested, it will be sent to standard error.
通常
.I mountd
は端末から分離 (detach) するが、このオプションが与えられると分離しない。
debug 情報は標準エラー出力に表示される。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-h " or " \-\-help
.BR \-h " または " \-\-help
.\"O Provide a short help summary.
ヘルプの短い要約を表示する。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-n " or " \-\-allow\-non\-root
.BR \-n " または " \-\-allow\-non\-root
.\"O Allow incoming mount requests to be honored even if they do not
.\"O originate from reserved IP ports.  Some older NFS client implementations
.\"O require this.  Some newer NFS client implementations don't believe
.\"O in reserved port checking.
IP の特権ポート以外から来たマウント要求も許可する。
NFS クライアントの古い実装では、この指定が必要な場合がある。
逆に新しい実装には、特権ポートのチェックを信頼しないものがある。
.TP
.\"O .BR "\-P portnum" " or " "\-\-port portnum"
.BR "\-P portnum" " または " "\-\-port portnum"
.\"O Makes 
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O listen on port
.\"O .B portnum
.\"O instead of some random port. By default,
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O will listen on the mount/udp port specified in
.\"O .IR /etc/services ,
.\"O or, if that is undefined, on some arbitrary port number below 1024.
.I mountd
に
.B portnum
ポートを監視させる。
デフォルトでは、
.I mountd
は
.I /etc/services
で指定されている mount/udp ポートを監視する
(あるいはこれが指定されていないと 1024 以下の任意のポートを監視する)。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-p " or " \-\-promiscuous
.BR \-p " または " \-\-promiscuous
.\"O Put the server into promiscuous mode where it will serve any host
.\"O on the network.
サーバを「無制限 (promiscuous)」モードにする。
ネットワーク上のすべてのホストに対してサービスを提供する。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-r " or " \-\-re\-export
.BR \-r " または " \-\-re\-export
.\"O Allow imported NFS or SMB file-systems to be exported.  This can be used to
.\"O turn a machine into an NFS/SMB multiplier.  Caution should be used when
.\"O re-exporting loopback mounts because re-entering the mount point
.\"O will result in deadlock between the client file system code and the server.
インポートした NFS や SMB ファイルシステムの再エクスポートを許す。
これにより、マシンは NFS/SMB の中継器となる。
ループバックマウントを再エクスポートするときには特に注意すること。
マウントポイントに再入すると、クライアントファイルシステムのコードと
サーバーはデッドロックしてしまう。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-t " or " \-\-no\-spoof\-trace
.BR \-t " または " \-\-no\-spoof\-trace
.\"O By default,
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O logs every access by unauthorized clients. This option turns off logging
.\"O of such spoof attempts for all hosts listed explicitly in the
.\"O .I exports
.\"O file.
デフォルトでは、
.I mountd
は権限のないクライアントからの全てのアクセスをログに記録する。
このオプションを使うと、
.I exports
ファイルに明示的にリストされている全てのホストについて、
このような成りすまし行為をログに記録しない。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-v " or " \-\-version
.BR \-v " または " \-\-version
.\"O Report the current version number of the program.
プログラムの現在のバージョン番号を表示する。
.\"O .SS Access Control
.SS アクセス制御
.\"O For enhanced security, access to
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O can be limited via the TCP wrapper library that's part of Wietse
.\"O Venema's tcp_wrappers package. Support for this option must be selected
.\"O at compile time. In order to restrict access to all hosts on
.\"O your local network (say 192.168.1.0), you would add the following
.\"O lines to your
.\"O .I /etc/hosts.allow
.\"O file:
セキュリティを強化するため、
.I mountd
へのアクセスは TCP wrapper ライブラリで制限することができる。
同ライブラリは Wietse Venema の tcp_wrappers パッケージの一部である。
このオプションをサポートするかどうかはコンパイル時に指定できる。
ローカルなネットワーク (例として 192.168.1.0 としよう) だけに
アクセスを許可したい場合は、以下のような行を
.I /etc/hosts.allow
ファイルに追加すればよい:
.PP
.nf
.ta +3i
.I "rpc.mountd : 192.168.1. : allow
.I "rpc.mountd : ALL        : deny
.fi
.PP
'ne 9v
.\"O This example assumes your TCP wrapper library was compiled with
.\"O options support (which I highly recommend). If it has been compiled
.\"O without options support, you need to add the following two lines
.\"O to
.\"O .I /etc/hosts.allow " and " /etc/hosts.deny,
.\"O respectively:
この例は、TCP wrapper ライブラリが
オプションをサポートしてコンパイルされた場合に有効である
(筆者はオプションのサポートを強くすすめる)。
オプションをサポートしないようにコンパイルされた場合は、
以下の 2 行を
.IR /etc/hosts.allow " と " /etc/hosts.deny
とにそれぞれ追加する必要がある:
.PP
.nf
.ta +3i
.I "# hosts.allow:
.I "rpc.mountd : 192.168.1
.I "# hosts.deny
.I "rpc.mountd : ALL
.fi
.PP
.\"O When changing this information, you must restart
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O for these changes to take effect, either by killing and restarting, or
.\"O by sending it the HUP signal.
ここの情報を変更したら、変更を有効にするには
.I mountd
を再起動する必要がある。一度 kill して再起動するか、
HUP シグナルを送れば良い。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The information in
.\"O .I /etc/rmtab
.\"O is inaccurate more often than not.
.I /etc/mtab
の情報は不正確であることのほうが多い。
.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O When receiving a SIGHUP, 
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O will re-read the
.\"O .I exports
.\"O file and any access restrictions defined in the
.\"O .I /etc/hosts.allow and /etc/hosts.deny
.\"O file. Note that to make export changes take effect, you have to send
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O a SIGHUP as well.
SIGHUP を受け取ると、
.I mountd
は
.I exports
ファイルと、
.IR /etc/hosts.allow " および " /etc/hosts.deny
ファイルで定義されているすべてのアクセス制限を読みなおす。
エクスポートの変更を有効にするには、
.I nfsd
にも SIGHUP を送る必要があることに注意せよ。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/exports
.br
.I /etc/rmtab
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O exports(5), nfsd(8), ugidd(8C), showmount(8).
.SH 関連項目
exports(5), nfsd(8), ugidd(8C), showmount(8)
