.\"
.\" Original manual page is a part of nfs-server package.
.\" Following is a exerpt from README of version 2.2beta47.
.\" 
.\" 7.  Copyright
.\" 
.\" Much of the code in this package was originally  written  by
.\" Mark Shand, and is placed under the following copyright:
.\" 
.\"    This  software may be used for any purpose provided
.\"    the above  copyright  notice  is  retained.  It  is
.\"    supplied  as  is,  with  no warranties expressed or
.\"    implied.
.\" 
.\" Other code, especially that written by Rick Sladkey and some
.\" replacement routines included from the GNU libc, are covered
.\" by the GNU General Public License, version 2,  or  (at  your
.\" option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed 11 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Jan 27 17:30:35 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Modified Tue Feb 19 19:06:53 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH NFSD 8 "11 August 1997"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O nfsd \- NFS service daemon
.SH 名前
nfsd \- NFS サービスデーモン
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.ad l
.B /usr/sbin/rpc.nfsd
.B "[\ \-f\ exports-file\ ]"
.B "[\ \-d\ facility\ ]"
.B "[\ \-P\ port\ ]"
.B "[\ \-R\ dirname\ ]"
.B "[\ \-Fhlnprstv\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-debug\ facility\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-exports\-file=file\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-foreground\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-help\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-allow\-non\-root\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-re\-export\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-public\-root\ dirname\ ]"
.\".B "[\ \-\-synchronous\-writes\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-no\-spoof\-trace\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-port\ port\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-log-transfers\ ]"
.B "[\ \-\-version\ ]"
.\" TN.B "[ numservers ]"
.B "[ numcopies ]"
.ad b
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O program is an NFS service daemon that handles client filesystem requests.
.\"O Unlike on some other systems,
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O operates as a normal user-level process.
.\"O The server also differs from other NFS server implementations
.\"O in that it mounts an entire file hierarchy
.\"O not limited by the boundaries of physical file-systems.
.\"O The implementation allows the clients read-only or
.\"O read-write access to the file hierarchy of the server machine.
.I nfsd
プログラムは NFS サービスデーモンであり、クライアントからの
ファイルシステム要求を取り扱う。
他のシステムと異なり、この
.I nfsd
は普通のユーザーレベルプロセスとして動作する。
またこのサーバーは、ファイルシステムの物理的な境界に制限されず、
ファイル階層すべてをマウントさせる点でも、他のシステムとは異なっている。
この実装では、サーバーマシンのファイルシステム階層に対して、
クライアントによる read-only アクセス、read-write アクセスのいずれも
行えるようになっている。
.LP
.\"O The
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O program starts an ancillary user-level mount daemon.
.I mountd
プログラムは、補助的な役割をするユーザーレベルの
mount デーモンを起動する。
.LP
.\"O .SS Running from inetd
.SS "inetd からの起動"
.\"O Usually,
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O will be started at system boot time. However, you may also invoke it from
.\"O .I inetd
.\"O by adding the following two lines to
.\"O .IR /etc/inetd.conf :
通常
.I nfsd
はシステムのブート時に起動されるが、
.I inetd
から起動することもできる。
それには以下の 2 行を
.I /etc/inetd.conf
に追加する。
.PP
.nf
.ta +3i
nfs/2 dgram  rpc/udp wait root /usr/sbin/rpc.nfsd rpc.nfsd
nfs/2 stream rpc/tcp wait root /usr/sbin/rpc.nfsd rpc.nfsd
.fi
.PP
.\"O When run from
.\"O .IR inetd ,
.\"O .i nfsd
.\"O will terminate after a certain period of inactivity.
.I ientd
から起動した場合には、適当な期間に動作要求がないと
.I nfsd
は終了する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.\"O .BR \-f " or " \-\-exports\-file
.BR \-f " または " \-\-exports\-file
.\"O This option specifies the exports file, listing the clients that this server
.\"O is prepared to serve and parameters to apply to each such mount (see
.\"O exports(5)).
.\"O By default exports are read from
.\"O .IR /etc/exports .
このオプションはエクスポートファイルを指定する。
エクスポートファイルには、このサーバーがサービスを提供するクライアント
と、それぞれのマウントに対して適用されるパラメータがリストされている
(exports (5) を見よ)。
デフォルトのエクスポートファイルは
.I /etc/exports
である。
.TP
.\"O .BR "\-d facility" " or " "\-\-debug facility"
.BR "\-d facility" " または " "\-\-debug facility"
.\"O Log operations verbosely. Legal values for
.\"O .I facility
.\"O are currently
.\"O .I call
.\"O for the logging of RPC calls and arguments, 
.\"O .I fhcache
.\"O for the file handle cache operation,
.\"O .I auth
.\"O for the authentication routines, and
.\"O .I ugid
.\"O for the uid mapping code, if used. Debug messages will be logged to
.\"O .IR syslog (8)
.\"O unless the daemon runs in the foreground.
それぞれのトランザクションに対する詳細な内容を標準エラー出力にログ表示する。
\fIfacility\fP に指定できるのは、
.I call
(すべてのコールを記録)、
.I auth
(クライアントの認証)、
.I fhcache
(ファイルハンドルのキャッシュ操作)、
.I rmtab
.RI ( /etc/rmtab
の操作) である。
デフォルトでは、デーモンがフォアグラウンドで実行されなければ、
ログ出力は syslogd に送られる。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-F " or " \-\-foreground
.BR \-F " または " \-\-foreground
.\"O Unlike in normal operation,
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O will not detach from the terminal when given this option. When debugging
.\"O is requested, it will be sent to standard error.
通常
.I nfsd
は端末から分離 (detach) するが、このオプションが与えられると分離しない。
このとき debug 情報は標準エラー出力に表示される。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-h " or " \-\-help
.BR \-h " または " \-\-help
.\"O Provide a short help summary.
ヘルプの短い要約を表示する。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-l " or " \-\-log-transfers
.BR \-l " または " \-\-log-transfers
.\"O Tries to catch all files retrieved from and written the NFS server. This
.\"O is mainly for the benefit of anonymous NFS exports and is intended to
.\"O mimick the
.\"O .B xferlog
.\"O file supported by some FTP daemons. For each file store or retrieve,
.\"O a single line is written to the system log daemon containing the
.\"O client's IP address, and the file name. The log level of these
.\"O transfer records is
.\"O .BR daemon.info .
NFS サーバーから取り出されたファイル、あるいはサーバへ書き込まれた
ファイルをすべてログに書き込もうとする。
これは主として anonymous NFS エクスポートに有用で、
ある種の FTP デーモンによってサポートしている
.B xferlog
をまねするためのものである。
ファイルが書き込み・取り出しされるたび、
syslog デーモンに一行の情報が送られ、
そこにはクライアントの IP アドレスとファイル名が書き込まれる。
この転送記録のログレベルは
.B daemon.info
である。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-n " or " \-\-allow\-non\-root
.BR \-n " または " \-\-allow\-non\-root
.\"O Allow incoming NFS requests to be honored even if they do not
.\"O originate from reserved IP ports.  Some older NFS client implementations
.\"O require this.  Some newer NFS client implementations don't believe
.\"O in reserved port checking. This check can be turned off for individual hosts
.\"O by specifying the
.\"O .I insecure
.\"O export option in
.\"O .IR /etc/exports .
IP の特権ポート以外から来たマウント要求も許可する。
NFS クライアントの古い実装では、この指定が必要な場合がある。
逆に新しい実装には、特権ポートのチェックを信頼しないものがある。
このチェックはホスト単位で外すこともできる。
.I /etc/exports
のエクスポートオプションに
.I insecure
を指定すればよい。
.TP
.\"O .BR "\-P portnum" " or " "\-\-port portnum"
.BR "\-P portnum" " または " "\-\-port portnum"
.\"O Makes 
.\"O .I nfsd 
.\"O listen on port
.\"O .B portnum
.\"O instead of the default port 2049. By default,
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O will listen on the nfs/udp port specified in
.\"O .IR /etc/services ,
.\"O or, if that is undefined, on port 2049.
.B nfsd
に
.B portnum
ポートを監視するようにさせる。
デフォルトでは、
.I mountd
は
.I /etc/services
で指定されている nfs/udp ポートを監視する
(あるいはこれが指定されていないと 2049 番のポートを監視する)。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-p " or " \-\-promiscuous
.BR \-p " または " \-\-promiscuous
.\"O Put the server into promiscuous mode where it will serve any host
.\"O on the network.
サーバを「無制限 (promiscuous)」モードにする。
ネットワーク上のすべてのホストに対してサービスを提供する。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-r " or " \-\-re\-export
.BR \-r " または " \-\-re\-export
.\"O Allow remotely mounted file-systems to be exported.  This can be used to
.\"O turn a machine into a multiplier for NFS or Novell servers. Caution
.\"O should be used when re-exporting loopback NFS mounts because re-entering
.\"O the mount point will result in deadlock between the NFS client and the
.\"O NFS server.
インポートしたファイルシステムの再エクスポートを許す。
これにより、マシンは NFS や Novel サーバの中継器となる。
ループバックマウントを再エクスポートするときには特に注意すること。
マウントポイントに再入すると、クライアントファイルシステムのコードと
サーバーはデッドロックしてしまう。
.IP
.\"O It should be noted that (on Linux)
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O looks at the major device number of the file system to find out whether
.\"O it is a remote volume; if the major number is not 0, it assumes the file
.\"O system is local. However, not only remote file systems use major number 0,
.\"O also procfs does. If you choose to re-export NFS file systems, beware
.\"O that this potentially includes
.\"O .IR /proc
.\"O if you have the file system root exported. This poses a security problem,
.\"O and you should avoid this situation if possible.
(Linux では) 以下も注意しておきたい。
.I nfsd
はファイルシステムのメジャーデバイス番号を見て、
それがリモートのボリュームであるかどうかを判別する。
もしメジャー番号が 0 でなければ、
.I nfsd
はファイルシステムがローカルなものであると判断する。
しかし、リモートファイル以外にもメジャー番号 0 を利用するものがある。
procfs である。
NFS ファイルシステムを再エクスポートすることにした場合、
ファイルシステムの root をエクスポートした場合には
.I /proc
も含まれてしまうことに注意すること。
これはセキュリティ上の問題となることがある。
できればこのような状況は避けるべきである。
.\".TP
.\"O .\".BR \-s " or " \-\-synchronous\-writes
.\".BR \-s " または " \-\-synchronous\-writes
.\"O .\"The NFS protocol specification requires all write operations to the server
.\"O .\".\"to be complete before the call returns. By default, 
.\"O .\".I nfsd
.\"O .\"does not do this. This option turns on synchronous writes.
.\"O .\"--- why would anyone want to turn this off?
.\"NFS プロトコルの仕様では、サーバーに対する全ての書き込み操作は
.\"呼び出しが返る前に完了しなければならない。
.\"デフォルトでは
.\".I nfsd
.\"はこのように動作しない。
.\"このオプションは同期書き込みを有効にする。
.\"-- なぜ、みんなが同期書き込みを無効にしたがるのだろう?
.TP
.\"O .BR \-t " or " \-\-no\-spoof\-trace
.BR \-t " または " \-\-no\-spoof\-trace
.\"O By default, 
.\"O .I nfsd 
.\"O logs every access by unauthorized clients. This option turns off logging
.\"O of such spoof attempts for all hosts listed explicitly in the
.\"O .I exports
.\"O file.
デフォルトでは、
.I nfsd 
は権限のないクライアントからの全てのアクセスをログに記録する。
このオプションを使うと、
.I exports
ファイルに明示的にリストされている全てのホストについて、
このような成りすまし行為をログに記録しない。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-R " or " \-\-public\-root
.BR \-R " または " \-\-public\-root
.\"O Specifies the directory associated with the public file handle. See
.\"O the section on WebNFS below.
ディレクトリを public なファイルハンドルと関連づける。
以下の WebNFS のセクションを参照のこと。
.TP
.\"O .BR \-v " or " \-\-version
.BR \-v " または " \-\-version
.\"O Report the current version number of the program.
プログラムの現在のバージョン番号を表示する。
.TP
.BR numcopies
.\"O This is an experimental feature that lets you run several instances of
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O in parallel. When given a value of 
.\"O .B numcopies
.\"O greater than one, 
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O will fork as many times as specified by this value.
.\"O However, the servers do not share a common file handle
.\"O cache, which makes certain file operations impossible. 
これは実験的な機能であり、
.I nfsd
のいくつかのインスタンスを並行動作させるものである。
.B numcopies
に 1 以上の値を与えると、
.I nfsd
は指定した値の回数だけ fork する。
しかし、サーバーはファイルハンドルキャッシュを共有しないので、
ある種のファイル操作は不可能となる。
.IP
.\"O For this reason,
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O will disallow all write operations when invoked with this option. Although
.\"O this is very limiting, this feature may still prove useful for exporting
.\"O public FTP areas or Usenet News spools.
このため、
.I nfsd
はこのオプションと共に起動されると、すべての書き込み操作を拒否する。
この制限は大きなものではあるが、
それでも公開 FTP 領域や Usenet News のスプールをエクスポートする場合には、
この機能は依然有用であろう。
.\"O .SS WebNFS Support
.SS "WebNFS のサポート"
.\"O WebNFS is an extension to the normal NFS protocol developed by Sun
.\"O that is particularly well-suited for file retrieval over the
.\"O Internet, and is intended to be used (among others) from Web browsers.
WebNFS は Sun によって開発された通常の NFS プロトコルを拡張したもので、
インターネットを通してのファイル取得に特に適している。
また、特に Web ブラウザを通しての利用を意図して作成された。
.P
.\"O Central to the concept is the so-called public file handle. This is
.\"O a special NFS file handle used by the NFS client (i.e. browser) to
.\"O retrieve a file without having to go through the mount protocol.
このコンセプトの中心にあるのは、
「public なファイルハンドル」と呼ばれるものである。
これは特殊な NFS ファイルハンドルで、
これを用いると NFS クライアント (つまりブラウザ) は
MOUNT プロトコルを利用せずにファイルを取得できるようになる。
.\"O This file handle must be associated with a directory on the server
.\"O machine, relative to which it evaluates filenames. This is the
.\"O .IR "public root directory" ,
.\"O which can be specified using the
.\"O .B \-\-public\-root
.\"O option.  A Web server, for instance, would probably use the root of its
.\"O Web server as the public root
.\"O .BR "" "(e.g. " /home/httpd ).
.\"O A Web broser requesting the URL
.\"O .B nfs://foo.bar.edu/zappa.html
.\"O would then be given the file
.\"O .BR /home/httpd/zappa.html .
このファイルハンドルはサーバーマシンのディレクトリに
関連づけられていなければならず、
またこのファイルハンドルによるファイル名の評価は、
そのディレクトリからの相対パスとして行われることになる。
これが
.I "public root ディレクトリ"
であり、
.B \-\-public\-root
オプションを用いて指定できる。
例えば Web サーバなら、ドキュメントの root (例えば \fB/home/httpd/\fP) を
この public root にすると良いだろう。
URL
.B nfs://foo.bar.edu/zappa.html
を要求した Web ブラウザは、ファイル
.B /home/httpd/zappa.html
を与えられることになる。
.\"O For ease of maintenance, the public root directory can also be specified
.\"O using a special entry in the
.\"O .I exports
.\"O file (see
.\"O .IR exports (5)
.\"O for details).
メンテナンスを容易にするため、public root ディレクトリの指定は、
.I exports
で特殊なエントリを用いることによっても可能になっている (詳細は
.IR exports (5)
を参照のこと)。
.P
.\"O Naming a public root does
.\"O .I not
.\"O automatically export it; you still must explicitly do that in
.\"O .B /etc/exports
.\"O in order to actually make the directory accessible.
public root を指定しても、これが自動的にエクスポートされるわけでは\fIない\fP。
このディレクトリを実際にアクセス可能にするためには、依然
.B /etc/exports
で明示する必要がある。
.\"O A useful set of options to export data to WebNFS clients is
.\"O .BR ro,all_squash,insecure .
.\"O Please refer to
.\"O .BR exports (5)
.\"O for a detailed explanation of these flags.
WebNFS クライアントにデータをエクスポートする際に有用なオプションのセットは、
.B ro,all_squash,insecure
である。
これらのフラグの詳細については
.BR exports (5)
を参照してほしい。
.P
.\"O Also note that a WebNFS client can also access files not located below the
.\"O public root directory as long as they are exported to him. In particular,
.\"O if you have
.\"O .B /home/ftp
.\"O exported to the world in addition to the Web server's home directory,
.\"O a web client may be able to access FTP files via
.\"O .BR nfs://foo.bar.edu/../ftp/README .
.\"O Of course, this does not apply to files that are not exported to the client.
WebNFS クライアントは、
public root ディレクトリ下に置かれていないファイルに関しても、
それが自分むけにエクスポートされていれば
アクセスできてしまうことにも注意してほしい。
特に
.B /home/ftp
を Web サーバのホームディレクトリと共に外界にエクスポートしてしまうと、
Web クライアントは FTP ファイルに
.B nfs://foo.bar.edu/../ftp/README
のようにアクセスできてしまう。
もちろんエクスポートされていないクライアントに関しては、
これはあてはまらない。
.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O recognizes the following signals:
.I nfsd
は以下のシグナルを認識する:
.TP
.I SIGHUP
.\"O causes 
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O to re-read the export file and flush the file handle cache. If a public
.\"O root was specified, this will also regenerate the file handle associated
.\"O with the public directory name (useful when exporting a removable
.\"O file system).
このシグナルを受けると、
.I nfsd
は export ファイルを再読み込みし、
ファイルハンドルのキャッシュをフラッシュする。
public root が指定されていると、このシグナルによって
public ディレクトリ名に関連づけられたファイルハンドルが再生成される
(リムーバブルなファイルシステムをエクスポートする場合に便利)。
.TP
.I SIGUSR1
.\"O When 
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O was invoked with debugging options, sending this signal toggles
.\"O generation of debug information.
デバッグオプションを指定して
.I nfsd
起動した場合、このシグナルを与えると
デバッグ情報の生成をオン・オフできる。
.TP
.I SIGIOT
.\"O When compiled with with the -DCALL_PROFILING option, sending a SIGIOT to
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O will cause dump the average execution times per NFS operation into
.\"O .IR /tmp/nfsd.profile .
\-DCALL_PROFILING オプションを指定してコンパイルした場合、
SIGIOT を
.I nfsd
に送ると一回の NFS 操作あたりの平均実行時間が
.I /tmp/nfsd.profile
にダンプされる。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O does not support the retrieval of
.\"O .B index.html
.\"O files when asked to look up a directory file name. This is not an RFC
.\"O requirement, so it's rather a feature absent than a true bug.
.I nfsd
は、ディレクトリのファイル名が問い合わされたときに
.B index.html
ファイルを提供する機能をサポートしていない。
これは RFC の要求にはないので、実際にはバグではなく機能の欠如である。
.P
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-\-log-transfers
.\"O option is not always accurate since there is no equivalent to the UNIX
.\"O file system
.\"O .BR open() " and " close()
.\"O calls in the NFS protocol. Instead,
.\"O .I nfsd
.\"O writes out a transfer record whenever it encounters a READ or WRITE
.\"O request at offset zero.
.B \-\-log\-transfers
オプションは必ずしも正しいログを残さない。
なぜなら UNIX ファイルシステムの
.BR open() " および " close()
コールに対応するものが NFS プロトコルには存在しないからである。
代わりに
.I nfsd
は、READ または WRITE 要求のオフセット 0 に遭遇するたびに転送記録を書き出す。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
exports(5), mountd(8), ugidd(8C)
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O Mark Shand wrote the orignal unfsd.
.\"O Don Becker extended unfsd to support authentication
.\"O and allow read-write access and called it hnfs.
.\"O Rick Sladkey added host matching, showmount -e support,
.\"O mountd authentication, inetd support, and all of the
.\"O portability and configuration code.
.\"O Olaf Kirch fixed one or two security holes and other bugs, added
.\"O the uid mapping and a couple of other things.
Mark Shand がオリジナルの unfsd を書いた。
Don Becker は unfsd を拡張し、認証機能と read-write 機能を
サポートして、これを hnfs と名づけた。
Rick Sladkey はホストマッチ、showmount \-e のサポート、
mountd の認証、inetd のサポート、移植性の向上や設定に
必要なコードなどを追加した。
Olaf Kirch は一つ二つのセキュリティホールと、その他のバグを
修正し、uid マッピングとその他いくつかの機能を追加した。
