.\"
.\" Original manual page is a part of nfs-server package.
.\" Following is a exerpt from README of version 2.2beta37.
.\" 
.\" 7.  Copyright
.\" 
.\" Much of the code in this package was originally  written  by
.\" Mark Shand, and is placed under the following copyright:
.\" 
.\"    This  software may be used for any purpose provided
.\"    the above  copyright  notice  is  retained.  It  is
.\"    supplied  as  is,  with  no warranties expressed or
.\"    implied.
.\" 
.\" Other code, especially that written by Rick Sladkey and some
.\" replacement routines included from the GNU libc, are covered
.\" by the GNU General Public License, version 2,  or  (at  your
.\" option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed 11 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH UGIDD 8 "11 August 1997"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ugidd \- uid/gid mapping daemons
.SH 名前
ugidd \- uid/gid マッピングデーモン
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B /usr/sbin/rpc.ugidd
.\".LP
.\"or from SunOS inetd(8):
.\".B rpc udp /usr/etc/rpc.ugidd 545580417 1
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.IX  "uid/gid mapping daemons"  "ugidd daemon"  ""  "\fLugidd\fP daemon"
.\"O .I ugidd
.\"O starts a
.\"O daemon that handles rpc requests to map uid/gids to string names and vice versa.
.\"O It is called by the \fInfsd\fP(8) server when the client and server do
.\"O not share the same passwd file.
.I ugidd
は、 uig/gid から名前文字列へのマップ要求や、その逆のマップ要求を
扱うデーモンを起動する。
このデーモンは、クライアントとサーバーが同じパスワードファイルを
共有していない場合に \fInfsd\fP(8) サーバから呼ばれる。
.P
.\"O This version allows you to restrict access to the server through the
.\"O \fIhosts_access\fP(5) files when compiled with the -DHOSTS_ACCESS option.
.\"O Otherwise, \fIugidd\fP could be used by anyone in the Internet to obtain
.\"O a list of all valid usernames on the client machine. For instance, to 
.\"O restrict access to hosts on your class C IP network, you could add the 
.\"O following lines to \fIhosts.allow\fP and \fIhosts.deny\fP:
このバージョンでは、サーバーへのアクセスを \fIhosts_access\fP(5)
にあるファイル群を用いて制限することができる。これには \-DHOSTS_ACCESS
オプションをコンパイル時に指定する。これを指定しないと、
.I ugidd
はインターネットの誰からもアクセスでき、クライアントホストで
有効なすべてのユーザー名のリストが入手できてしまう。例えば、
アクセスを利用しているクラス C の IP ネットワーク上のホストに
制限するには、以下の行を
.IR hosts.allow " と " hosts.deny
に追加すればよい:
.PP
.nf
.I "# /etc/hosts.allow
.I "rpc.ugidd:     192.168.1.
.I "# /etc/hosts.deny
.I "rpc.ugidd:     ALL
.fi
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
exports(5), inetd(8), hosts_access(5)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The rpc program number is legal in that it lies in the 0x20000000
.\"O to 0x3fffffff ``Defined by user'' range, but is completely arbitrary.
rpc プログラム番号は 0x20000000 から 0x3fffffff の間、「ユーザー定義」
領域にあるどれを使ってもかまわないが、この選択は完全に任意なものに
なってしまっている。
