.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998,2000,2001 Free Software Foundation, Inc.              *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_color.3x,v 1.17 2001/09/01 21:04:33 tom Exp $
.TH curs_color 3X ""
.SH 名前
\fBstart_color\fR,
\fBinit_pair\fR,
\fBinit_color\fR,
\fBhas_colors\fR,
\fBcan_change_color\fR,
\fBcolor_content\fR,
\fBpair_content\fR,
.\"O \fBCOLOR_PAIR\fR - \fBcurses\fR color manipulation routines
\fBCOLOR_PAIR\fR - \fBcurses\fR カラー操作関数群
.SH 書式
\fB# include <curses.h>\fR
.br
\fBint start_color(void);\fR
.br
\fBint init_pair(short pair, short f, short b);\fR
.br
\fBint init_color(short color, short r, short g, short b);\fR
.br
\fBbool has_colors(void);\fR
.br
\fBbool can_change_color(void);\fR
.br
\fBint color_content(short color, short *r, short *g, short *b);\fR
.br
\fBint pair_content(short pair, short *f, short *b);\fR
.br
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBcurses\fR support color attributes on terminals with that capability.
.\"O  To use these routines \fBstart_color\fR must be called,
.\"O  usually right after \fBinitscr\fR.
.\"O  Colors are always used in pairs (referred to as color-pairs).
.\"O A color-pair consists of a foreground color (for characters)
.\"O  and a background color (for the blank field on which the characters
.\"O  are displayed).
.\"O  A programmer initializes a color-pair with the routine \fBinit_pair\fR.
.\"O  After it has been initialized,
.\"O \fBCOLOR_PAIR\fR(\fIn\fR), a macro defined in \fB<curses.h>\fR,
.\"O  can be used as a new video attribute.
.\"O 

\fBcurses\fRは端末のカラー属性をサポートする。
これらの関数を使用するには、＼fBstart_color\fRが呼ばれなければならず、
たいてい \fBinitscr\fRの直後である。
色は常に一組みのもの(カラーペア)として使われる。
カラーペアは前景色(文字用)と背景色(文字が描画されていない領域用)
とからなっている。
プログラマは \fBinit_pair\fR関数によりカラーペアを初期化する。
初期化の後には \fB<curses.h>\fRで定義されている
 \fBCOLOR_PAIR\fR(\fIn\fR)マクロを新属性の設定に使用可能である。

.\"O If a terminal is capable of redefining colors, the programmer can use 
.\"O the routine \fBinit_color\fR to change the definition of a color.
.\"O The routines \fBhas_colors\fR and \fBcan_change_color\fR return 
.\"O  \fBTRUE\fR or \fBFALSE\fR,
.\"O depending on whether the terminal has color capabilities and whether the
.\"O programmer can change the colors.  The routine \fBcolor_content\fR 
.\"O allows a programmer to extract the amounts of red, green, and blue 
.\"O components in an initialized color.
.\"O The routine \fBpair_content\fR allows a programmer to find out
.\"O  how a given color-pair is currently defined.
もし端末のカラー属性を再定義可能ならば、プログラマは
 \fBinit_color\fR関数を色の定義を変更するために使用する事が出来る。
\fBhas_colors\fRおよび \fBcan_change_color\fR関数は \fBTRUE\fR または
\fBFALSE\fRを返し、この値は端末がカラー描画可能か、
プログラマが色を変更可能かに依存する。
\fBcolor_content\fR関数はプログラマに初期化されたRGB値の取得を許容する。
プログラマは \fBpair_content\fR関数を
与えられたカラーペアが現在定義されているかを知るために使う。

.SS 関数の説明
.\"O The \fBstart_color\fR routine requires no arguments.  It must be
.\"O called if the programmer wants to use colors, and before any other
.\"O color manipulation routine is called.  It is good practice to call
.\"O this routine right after \fBinitscr\fR.  \fBstart_color\fR initializes
.\"O eight basic colors (black, red, green, yellow, blue, magenta, cyan,
.\"O and white), and two global variables, \fBCOLORS\fR and
.\"O \fBCOLOR_PAIRS\fR (respectively defining the maximum number of colors
.\"O and color-pairs the terminal can support).  It also restores the
.\"O colors on the terminal to the values they had when the terminal was
.\"O just turned on.
.\"O 
\fBstart_color\fR関数は引数を要求しない。
色を使用したいなら、この関数が呼ばれなければならず、
(その順序は)他のどんなカラー操作関数よりも先である。
よって \fBinitscr\fRの直後にこの関数を呼び出すのは良い習慣である。
\fBstart_color\fRは手始めに8つの基本色を初期化する。
(基本色とは black, red, green, yellow, blue, magenta, cyan,
そして whiteである。)
それに加え、＼fBCOLORS\fR と \fBCOLOR_PAIRS\fR という2つのグローバル変数を
定義する。
(それぞれ、端末がサポートする使用色の上限、カラーペアの上限を意味する。)
これは、端末上の色数を起動時の値へと戻す。

.\"O The \fBinit_pair\fR routine changes the definition of a color-pair.
.\"O  It takes three arguments:
.\"O the number of the color-pair to be changed, the foreground
.\"O color number, and the background color number.
.\"O For portable applications:
\fBinit_pair\fR関数はカラーペアの定義を変更する。
この関数は3つの引数をとる:
変更するカラーペアの数、前景色、背景色である。
移植性の高いアプリケーションのためには:

.TP 5
-
.\"O The value of the first argument
.\"O must be between \fB1\fR and \fBCOLOR_PAIRS-1\fR.
最初の引数の値は \fB1\fR から \fBCOLOR_PAIRS-1\fRの間でなければならない。
.TP 5
-
.\"O The value of the second and
.\"O third arguments must be between 0 and \fBCOLORS\fR (the 0 color pair is
.\"O wired to white on black and cannot be changed).
第二引数の値、および第三引数の値は、0から \fBCOLORS\fRでなければならない。
(カラーペア 0は前景色が白、背景色が黒となっており変更できない。)

.PP
.\"O If the color-pair was previously
.\"O initialized, the screen is refreshed and all occurrences of that 
.\"O color-pair are changed to the new definition.
カラーペアが前もって初期化されていた場合、
スクリーンは更新されすべての該当するカラーベアは新たな定義へと変更される。
 
.\"O As an extension, ncurses allows you to set color pair 0 via
.\"O the \fBassume_default_colors\fR routine, or to specify the use of
.\"O default colors (color number \fB-1\fR) if you first invoke the
.\"O \fBuse_default_colors\fR routine.
.\"O 
拡張として、ncursesは \fBassume_default_colors\fR関数経由でカラーペア
 0 を変更するか、(\fBuse_default_colors\fR 関数を最初に実行していれば)
デフォルト(\fB-1\fR)を指定することが許される。
 
.\"O The \fBinit_color\fR routine changes the definition of a color.
.\"O  It takes four arguments:
.\"O the number of the color to be changed followed by three RGB values
.\"O (for the amounts of red, green, and blue components).
.\"O  The value of the first argument must be between \fB0\fR and
.\"O \fBCOLORS\fR.
.\"O  (See the section \fBColors\fR for the default color index.)
.\"O  Each of the last three arguments must be a value between 0 and 1000.
.\"O  When \fBinit_color\fR is used, all occurrences of that color 
.\"O on the screen immediately change to the new definition.
.\"O 
\fBinit_color\fR 関数は色の定義を変更する。
この関数は4つの引数をとる:
以下の3つのRGB値(red, green, blue)によって変更される色番号。
第一引数の値は \fB0\fR から \fBCOLORS\fR でなければならない。
(デフォルトカラーインデックスのための \fBColors\fR セクションを参照すること。)
3つの引数のそれぞれは 0 から 1000の間でなければならない。
\fBinit_color\fR が使用される際、
すべてのスクリーン上の色属性はすぐさま新規の定義へと変更される。
 
.\"O The \fBhas_colors\fR routine requires no arguments.
.\"O  It returns \fBTRUE\fR if the terminal can manipulate colors;
.\"O otherwise, it returns \fBFALSE\fR.  This routine facilitates 
.\"O writing terminal-independent programs.  For example, a programmer 
.\"O can use it to decide whether to use color or some other video
.\"O attribute.
.\"O 
\fBhas_colors\fR 関数は引数を要求しない。
この関数は端末が色を扱える際には \fBTRUE\fR を返す。
そうでないなら、＼fBFALSE\fR を返す。
この関数は端末に依存しないプログラムを書くことを容易にする。
例えば、プログラマは色を使用するかどうか、他の属性を使用するかの決定に
使用する事ができる。
 
.\"O The \fBcan_change_color\fR routine requires no arguments.
.\"O \fBTRUE\fR if the terminal supports colors and can change 
.\"O their definitions;
.\"O other, it returns \fBFALSE\fR.  This routine facilitates writing
.\"O terminal-independent programs.
.\"O 
\fBcan_change_color\fR 関数は引数を要求しない。
もし端末が色をサポートするならば、＼fBTRUE\fR を返し定義を変更する。
一方で \fBFALSE\fR を返す。
この関数は端末に依存しないプログラムを書くことを容易にする。
 
.\"O The \fBcolor_content\fR routine gives programmers a way 
.\"O to find the intensity
.\"O of the red, green, and blue (RGB) components in a color.
.\"O  It requires four arguments:
.\"O the color number, and three addresses of \fBshort\fRs for storing
.\"O the information about the amounts of red, green,
.\"O and blue components in the given color.
.\"O  The value of the first argument must be between 0 and \fBCOLORS\fR.
.\"O  The values that are stored at the addresses pointed to by the
.\"O last three arguments are between 0 (no component) and 1000 
.\"O (maximum amount of component).
.\"O 
\fBcolor_content\fR 関数はプログラマにRGB値による色を知る方法を与える。
4つの引数が要求される。
色番号、与えられた色のRGB値を格納するための3つの \fBshort\fRs 
型のアドレスである。
第一引数は 0 から \fBCOLORS\fR でなければならない。
残りの3つの引数によって指し示されているアドレスに格納された値は、
0 (最小値) から 1000 (最大値)の間でなければならない。
 
.\"O The \fBpair_content\fR routine allows programmers to find out 
.\"O what colors a given color-pair consists of.
.\"O It requires three arguments: the color-pair number,
.\"O  and two addresses of \fBshort\fRs for storing the foreground and 
.\"O the background color numbers.
.\"O  The value of the first argument must be between 1 and 
.\"O \fBCOLOR_PAIRS-1\fR.  The values that are stored at the addresses 
.\"O pointed to by the second and third arguments are between 0 
.\"O and \fBCOLORS\fR.
.\"O .SS Colors
.\"O In \fB<curses.h>\fR the following macros are defined.
.\"O  These are the default colors.
.\"O  \fBcurses\fR also assumes that \fBCOLOR_BLACK\fR is the default
.\"O background color for all terminals.
.\"O 
\fBpair_content\fR 関数でプログラマは与えられたカラーペアが何色で
構成されているかがわかる。
この関数は引数を3つ必要とする:
カラーペア番号、前景色と背景色番号を保持する \fBshort\fRs のアドレスである。
最初の引数の値は 1から \fBCOLOR_PAIRS-1\fR でなければならない。
第二、第三引数によって指し示されたアドレスに保持された値は 0 から \fBCOLORS\fR
である。
.SS Colors
\fB<curses.h>\fR ファイルで以下のマクロが定義されている。
これらはデフォルト色である。
\fBcurses\fR は \fBCOLOR_BLACK\fR をすべての端末のデフォルト背景色とみなす。
 
.nf
       \fBCOLOR_BLACK\fR
       \fBCOLOR_RED\fR
       \fBCOLOR_GREEN\fR
       \fBCOLOR_YELLOW\fR
       \fBCOLOR_BLUE\fR
       \fBCOLOR_MAGENTA\fR
       \fBCOLOR_CYAN\fR
       \fBCOLOR_WHITE\fR
.fi
.SH 返り値
.\"O The routines \fBcan_change_color()\fR and \fBhas_colors()\fR 
.\"O return \fBTRUE\fR or \fBFALSE\fR.
\fBcan_change_color()\fR及び \fBhas_colors()\fR関数は \fBTRUE\fR
あるいは \fBFALSE\fRを返す。
 
.\"O All other routines return the integer \fBERR\fR upon failure 
.\"O and an \fBOK\fR (SVr4 specifies only "an integer value other than
.\"O  \fBERR\fR") upon successful completion.
他のすべての関数は失敗時には \fBERR\fRを、成功時には \fBOK\fR
(SVr4 では "\fBERR\fR以外の整数値") を返す。

.SH 注意
.\"O In the \fIncurses\fR implementation, there is a separate color activation
.\"O flag,
.\"O color palette, color pairs table, and associated COLORS and COLOR_PAIRS
.\"O counts for each screen; 
.\"O the \fBstart_color\fR function only affects the current screen.
.\"O  The SVr4/XSI interface is not really designed with this in mind, and
.\"O historical implementations may use a single shared color palette.
.\"O 
\fIncurses\fR の実装においては、個々にフラグ、パレット、カラーペアテーブルが存在し、
それぞれのスクリーンへと COLORS と COLOR_PAIRS カウント値が関連づけられている。
\fBstart_color\fR 関数はカレントスクリーンへと影響を与えるのみである。
SVr4/XSI インタフェースは実際にこのような設計されてはいない。
過去の実装では単一のカラーパレットを共有しているかもしれない。
 
.\"O Note that setting an implicit background color via a color pair
.\"O affects only character cells that a character write operation 
.\"O explicitly touches.
.\"O  To change the background color used when parts of a window are blanked
.\"O by erasing or scrolling operations, see \fBcurs_bkgd\fR(3X).
.\"O 
カラーペア経由で異なる背景色を設定することは、文字領域のみに影響することに
注意すること。
スクロール操作あるいは消去により、ウィンドウの一部が欠けた時に背景色を変える
には、＼fBcurs_bkgd\fR(3X)を参照すること。
 
.\"O Several caveats apply on 386 and 486 machines with VGA-compatible
.\"O graphics:
いくつかの警告が、VGA互換のグラフィックスを備えた386および486マシンに
当てはまる。

.TP 5
-
.\"O COLOR_YELLOW is actually brown.  To get yellow, use COLOR_YELLOW 
.\"O combined with
.\"O the \fBA_BOLD\fR attribute.
COLOR_YELLOW は実際には茶色である。
黄色を取得するには、COLOR_YELLOWを \fBA_BOLD\fR 属性と共に使用すること。
.TP 5
-
.\"O The A_BLINK attribute should in theory cause the background to go bright.
.\"O  This often fails to work, and even some cards for which
.\"O it mostly works (such as the Paradise and compatibles)
.\"O do the wrong thing when you try to set a bright "yellow" background 
.\"O (you get a blinking yellow foreground instead).
A_BLINK 属性は理屈からすれば背景色を明るくすべきである。
これはしばしば正しく動作せず、大抵うまく動くカード(Paradiseとその互換カード)
でさえも明るい黄色を背景色として設定しようと試みた時には誤動作する。
(かわりに前景色が輝くことだろう。)
.TP 5
-
.\"O Color RGB values are not settable.
RGB値は設定不可。

.SH 移植性
.\"O This implementation satisfies XSI Curses's minimum maximums
.\"O for \fBCOLORS\fR and \fBCOLOR_PAIRS\fR.
この実装は XSI Cursesの最低限 \fBCOLORS\fR と \fBCOLOR_PAIRS\fRを満たす。
.PP

.\"O The \fBinit_pair\fP routine accepts negative values of foreground
.\"O and background color to support the \fBuse_default_colors\fP extension,
.\"O but only if that routine has been first invoked.
 \fBinit_pair\fP関数は＼fBuse_default_colors\fP 拡張をサポートするために、
前景色、背景色について負数を受けとるが、この関数が最初に実行されたときのみである。
.PP

.\"O The assumption that \fBCOLOR_BLACK\fR is the default
.\"O background color for all terminals can be modified using the
.\"O \fBassume_default_colors\fP extension,
.\"O ..
すべての端末において \fBCOLOR_BLACK\fRがデフォルトの背景色であるという仮定は
\fBassume_default_colors\fP 拡張を使うことで変わる。
..
.SH 関連項目
\fBcurses\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_initscr\fR(3X),
\fBcurs_attr\fR(3X),
\fBdefault_colors\fR(3X)
.\"#
.\"# The following sets edit modes for GNU EMACS
.\"# Local Variables:
.\"# mode:nroff
.\"# fill-column:79
.\"# End:
