.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 2006 by Theodore Ts'o.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This file may be copied under the terms of the GNU Public License.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2008 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2008-11-01 by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>, v1.39
.\"
.\"WORD:        stanza	節
.\"
.TH e2fsck.conf 5 "May 2006" "E2fsprogs version 1.39"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O e2fsck.conf \- Configuration file for e2fsck
e2fsck.conf \- e2fsck の設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I e2fsck.conf
.\"O is the configuration file for 
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8).  
.I e2fsck.conf
は
.BR e2fsck (8)
の設定ファイルである。
.\"O It controls the default parameters used by 
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8)
.\"O when it is creating ext2 or ext3 filesystems.
このファイルにより、
.BR e2fsck (8)
が ext2 または ext3 ファイルシステムを作成するときに使用する
デフォルトのパラメータを設定する。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .I e2fsck.conf
.\"O file uses an INI-style format.  Stanzas, or top-level sections, are 
.\"O delimited by square braces: [ ].  Within each section, each line 
.\"O defines a relation, which assigns tags to values, or to a subsection,
.\"O which contains further relations or subsections.   
.I e2fsck.conf
ファイルでは INI 形式のフォーマットが使用される。
節 (stanza) または最上位のセクションは、角括弧: [ ] で区切られる。
各セクション内では、各行でリレーションが定義され、
タグに値を割り当てたり、タグにサブセクションを割り当てたりする。
サブセクションには、更にリレーションとサブセクションが含まれる。
.\" Tags can be assigned multiple values
.\"O An example of the INI-style format used by this configuration file 
.\"O follows below:
この設定ファイルで使用される INI 方式のフォーマットの例は、以下の通り:
.P
	[section1]
.br
		tag1 = value_a
.br
		tag1 = value_b
.br
		tag2 = value_c
.P
	[section 2]
.br
		tag3 = {
.br
			subtag1 = subtag_value_a
.br
			subtag1 = subtag_value_b
.br
			subtag2 = subtag_value_c
.br
		}
.br
		tag1 = value_d
.br
		tag2 = value_e
.br
	}
.P
.\"O Comments are delimited by a semicolon (';') or a hash ('#') character 
.\"O at the beginning of the comment, and are terminated by the end of 
.\"O line character.
コメントは、先頭のセミコロン (';') または
ハッシュ ('#') 文字で区切られ、行末文字で終わる。
.P
.\"O Tags and values must be quoted using double quotes if they contain
.\"O spaces.  Within a quoted string, the standard backslash interpretations 
.\"O apply: "\en" (for the newline character), 
.\"O "\et" (for the tab character), "\eb" (for the backspace character), 
.\"O and "\e\e" (for the backslash character).
タグと値にスペースが含まれる場合は、ダブルクォートで括らなければならない。
ダブルクォートで括った文字列内では、
標準的なバックスラッシュの解釈が適用される:
"\en" (改行文字), "\et" (タブ文字), "\eb" (バックスペース文字), 
"\e\e" (バックスラッシュ文字)。
.P
.\"O The following stanzas are used in the 
.\"O .I e2fsck.conf
.\"O file.  They will be described in more detail in future sections of this
.\"O document.
以下の節が
.I e2fsck.conf
ファイルで使用されている。
これらの節は、このドキュメントの後のセクションでより詳しく説明される。
.TP 
.I [options]
.\"O This stanza contains general configuration parameters for 
.\"O .BR e2fsck 's
.\"O behavior.
この節には
.B e2fsck
の動作についての一般的な設定パラメータが含まれる。
.TP
.I [problems]
.\"O This stanza allows the administrator to reconfigure how e2fsck handles
.\"O various filesystem inconsistencies.
この節では、e2fsck が様々なファイルシステムの
不整合をどのように扱うかを、管理者が再設定できる。
.\"O .SH THE [options] STANZA
.SH [options] 節
.\"O The following relations are defined in the 
.\"O .I [options]
.\"O stanza.
以下のリレーションが
.I [options]
節で定義できる。
.TP
.I allow_cancellation
.\"O If this relation is set to a boolean value of true, then if the user 
.\"O interrupts e2fsck using ^C, and the filesystem is not explicitly flagged
.\"O as containing errors, e2fsck will exit with an exit status of 0 instead
.\"O of 32.  This setting defaults to false.
このリレーションにブール値 true を設定すると、
ユーザーは ^C で e2fsck を停止することができる。
ファイルシステムには、エラーが含まれていることを示す
フラグが明示的に設定されず、e2fsck は終了する。
終了ステータスは 32 ではなく 0 となる。
この設定はデフォルトでは false である。
.TP 
.I defer_check_on_battery
.\"O This boolean relation controls whether or not the interval between 
.\"O filesystem checks (either based on time or number of mounts) should 
.\"O be doubled if the system is running on battery.  It defaults to 
.\"O true.
このブール値のリレーションにより、システムがバッテリーで動作している時に、
(時間またはマウント回数に基づいた) ファイルシステムの検査の周期を
2 倍にするか否かを設定できる。
デフォルトは true である。
.\"O .SH THE [problems] STANZA
.SH [problems] 節
.\"O Each tag in the
.\"O .I [problems] 
.\"O stanza names a problem code specified with a leading "0x" followed by
.\"O six hex digits.   
.I [problems] 
節の各タグには、先頭に "0x" を付けた 6 個の 16 進数で、問題コードを指定する。
.\"O The value of the tag is a subsection where the relations in that
.\"O subsection override the default treatment of that particular problem 
.\"O code.
タグの値はサブセクションである。
そのサブセクションにおけるリレーションは、
指定した問題コードのデフォルトの処理を上書きする。
.P
.\"O Note that inappropriate settings in this stanza may cause 
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O to behave incorrectly, or even crash.  Most system administrators should
.\"O not be making changes to this section without referring to source code.
この節の設定が不適切であると、
.B e2fsck
の動作が不正になったり、クラッシュすることもある。
大部分の管理者は、ソースコードを参照せずに、この節を変更すべきではない。
.P
.\"O Within each problem code's subsection, the following tags may be used:
問題コードのサブセクションでは、以下のタグが使用される:
.TP
.I description
.\"O This relation allows the message which is printed when this filesystem
.\"O inconsistency is detected to be overridden.
このリレーションは、ファイルシステムの不整合が
検出された時に表示されるメッセージを上書きする。
.TP
.I preen_ok
.\"O This boolean relation overrides the default behavior controlling 
.\"O whether this filesystem problem should be automatically fixed when
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O is running in preen mode.
このブール値のリレーションは、
.B e2fsck
を修復 (preen) モードで動作させているときに、
ファイルシステムの問題を自動的に修復するかについての
デフォルトの動作を上書きする。
.TP
.I no_ok
.\"O This boolean relation overrides the default behavior determining
.\"O whether or not the filesystem will be marked as inconsistent if the user
.\"O declines to fix the reported problem.
このブール値のリレーションは、
報告された問題の修正をユーザーが拒否した場合に、
ファイルシステムに不整合のマークを付けるかについての
デフォルトの動作を上書きする。
.TP
.I no_default
.\"O This boolean relation overrides whether the default answer for this 
.\"O problem (or question) should be "no".
このブール値のリレーションは、
問題 (または質問) のデフォルトの答えを "no" に上書きする。
.TP 
.I preen_nomessage
.\"O This boolean relation overrides the default behavior controlling 
.\"O whether or not the description for this filesystem problem should
.\"O be suppressed when
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O is running in preen mode.
このブール値のリレーションは、
.B e2fsck
を修復 (preen) モードで動作させているときに、
ファイルシステムの問題の説明を非表示にするかについての
デフォルトの動作を上書きする。
.TP
.I no_nomsg
.\"O This boolean relation overrides the default behavior controlling 
.\"O whether or not the description for this filesystem problem should
.\"O be suppressed when
.\"O .B e2fsck
.\"O is run with the
.\"O .B -n
.\"O option.
このブール値のリレーションは、
.B e2fsck
を
.B -n
オプションで動作させているときに、
ファイルシステムの問題の説明を非表示にするかについての
デフォルトの動作を上書きする。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O The following recipe will prevent e2fsck from aborting during the boot
.\"O process when a filesystem contains orphaned files.  (Of course, this is
.\"O not always a good idea, since critical files that are needed for the
.\"O security of the system could potentially end up in lost+found, and
.\"O starting the system without first having a system administrator check
.\"O things out may be dangerous.)
以下の例では、ファイルシステムに孤立したファイルがある場合に、
ブートプロセスで e2fsck がアボートしないようにする。
(もちろん、これが常に良い考えという訳ではない。
システムのセキュリティに必要で非常に重要なファイルが、
lost+found に置かれているような場合に、
システム管理者が初めにチェックせずにシステムを開始してしまうのは、
危険だろう。)
.P
.br
	[problems]
.br
		0x040002 = {
.br
			preen_ok = true
.br
			description = "@u @i %i.  "
.br
		}
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.I /etc/e2fsck.conf
.\"O The configuration file for 
.\"O .BR e2fsck (8).
.BR e2fsck (8)
の設定ファイル。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR e2fsck (8)
