.\" $Id: afpd.conf.5.tmpl,v 1.3 2002/05/03 22:51:34 jmarcus Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Mar 13 01:02:08 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Sep  8 17:49:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Nov 10 02:44:55 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	clear text	平文
.\"
.TH afpd.conf 5 "28 September 2000" "netatalk 1.5"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O afpd.conf \- Configuration file used by \fBafpd\fR(8)
.\"O to determine the setup of its file sharing services
afpd.conf \- afpd(8) によって使われる設定ファイル。ファイル共有サービスの設定する

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fB/etc/netatalk/afpd.conf\fR is the configuration file used
.\"O by afpd to determine the behavior and configuration of the different
.\"O virtual file servers that it provides.
\fB/etc/netatalk/afpd.conf\fR は afpd によって使われる設定ファイルで、
それを提供する個々の仮想ファイルサーバーの動作と設定を決定する。

.\"O Any line not prefixed with \fB#\fR is interpreted. The configuration lines
.\"O are composed like:
\fB#\fR が先頭にない行が解釈される。
設定ファイルの行は以下のように構成される:

.RS
.sp
.I server name
.B [
.I options
.B ]

.sp
.RE
.\"O If a \fB-\fR is used instead of a server name, the default server is
.\"O specified. Server names must be quoted if they contain spaces.
server name の代わりに \fB-\fR が使われた場合、
デフォルトのサーバーが指定される。
server name がスペースを含む場合は、クォートしなければならない。

.\"O The path name must be a fully qualified path name, or a path name using
.\"O either the \fB~\fR shell shorthand or any of the substitution variables,
.\"O which are listed 
path は、完全なフルパス名・シェルの省略形 \fB~\fR を使ったパス名・
以下に示す代入変数のいずれかを使ったパス名、でなければならない。

.\"O The possible options and their meanings are:
指定可能なオプションとその意味を以下に示す:

.TP
.\"O .I AppleVolumes Files
.I AppleVolumes ファイル

.TP
.B -defaultvol [path]
.\"O Specifies path to AppleVolumes.default file (default is 
.\"O \fB/etc/netatalk/AppleVolumes.default\fR).
AppleVolumes.default ファイルのパスを指定する
(デフォルトは \fB/etc/netatalk/AppleVolumes.default\fR)。

.TP
.B -nlspath [path]
.\"O Specifies the path to the code pages (default is \fB/etc/netatalk/nls\fR).
コードページのパスを指定する (デフォルトは \fB/etc/netatalk/nls\fR)。

.TP
.B -systemvol [path]
.\"O Specifies path to AppleVolumes.system file (default is 
.\"O \fB/etc/netatalk/AppleVolumes.system\fR).
AppleVolumes.system ファイルのパスを指定する
(デフォルトは \fB/etc/netatalk/AppleVolumes.system\fR)。

.TP
.B -[no]uservol
.\"O Enables or disables reading of the users' individual volumes file
.\"O entirely.
ユーザー個人のボリュームファイルエントリの読み込みを有効または無効にする。

.TP
.B -[no]uservolfirst
.\"O Enables or disables reading of the users' individual volumes file
.\"O before processing the global \fBAppleVolumes.default\fR file.
システム全体の \fBAppleVolumes.default\fR ファイルを処理する前に行う、
ユーザー個人のボリュームファイルの読み込みを有効または無効にする。

.TP
.\"O .I Authentication Methods
.I 認証法

.TP
.B -uamlist [uams list]
.\"O Comma separated list of UAMs. (The default is
.\"O \fBuams_guest.so,uams_passwd.so,uams_dhx_passwd.so\fR).
.\"O The most commonly used UAMs are:
UAM (訳註: User Authentication Method, ユーザー認証法) を
コンマで区切ってリスト指定する
(デフォルトは \fBuams_guest.so,uams_passwd.so,uams_dhx_passwd.so\fR)。
最も一般に使われる UAM を以下に示す。

.\"O \fBuams_dhx_passwd.so or uams_dhx_pam.so\fR - allows logins
.\"O using Diffie-Hellman eXchange (DHX)
\fBuams_dhx_passwd.so または uams_dhx_pam.so\fR - 
Diffie-Hellman eXchange (DHX) を使ったログインを許可する。

.\"O \fBuams_guest.so\fR - allows guest logins
\fBuams_guest.so\fR - ゲストログインを許可する。

.\"O \fBuams_passwd.so or uams_pam.so\fR - allows logins with clear
.\"O text passwords
\fBuams_passwd.so または uams_pam.so\fR - 
平文パスワードによるログインを許可する。

.\"O \fBuams_randum.so\fR - allows Random Number and Two-Way Random
.\"O Number Exchange for authentication (requires \fB/etc/netatalk/afppaswd\fR
.\"O file)
\fBuams_randum.so\fR - 
乱数と双方向乱数通信による認証を許可する
(\fB/etc/netatalk/afppaswd\fR ファイルが必要である)。

.TP
.B -uampath [path]
.\"O Sets the default path for UAMs for this server (default is 
.\"O /etc/netatalk/uams).
サーバーの UAM のデフォルトパスを設定する
(デフォルトは /etc/netatalk/uams)。

.TP
.\"O .I Password Options
パスワードオプション

.TP
.B -loginmaxmail [number]
.\"O Sets the maximum number of failed logins, if supported by the UAM
UAM でサポートされている場合に、ログイン失敗の最大回数を設定する。

.TP
.B -passwdfile [path]
.\"O Sets the path to the Randnum passwd file for this server (default is
.\"O \fB/etc/netatalk/afppasswd\fR).
サーバーの乱数パスワードファイルのパスを設定する
(デフォルトは \fB/etc/netatalk/afppasswd\fR)。

.TP
.B -passwdminlen [number]
.\"O Sets the minimum password length, if supported by the UAM
UAM でサポートされている場合に、最小のパスワード文字数を設定する。

.TP
.B -[no]savepassword
.\"O Enables or disables the ability of clients to save passwords locally
クライアントがローカルにパスワードを保存することを、許可または不許可にする。

.TP
.B -[no]setpassword
.\"O Enables or disables the ability of clients to change their passwords
クライアントがパスワードを変更することを、許可または不許可にする。


.TP
.\"O .I Transport Protocols
.I 転送プロトコル

.TP
.B -[no]ddp
.\"O Enables or disables AFP-over-Appletalk. If \fB-proxy\fR is specified, you must
.\"O instead use \fB-uamlist ""\fR to prevent DDP connections from working.
AFP-over-Appletalk を有効または無効にする。
\fB-proxy\fR を指定する場合には、
これではなく \fB-uamlist ""\fR を用いて、
DDP 接続が動作しないようにしなければならない。

.TP
.B -[no]tcp
.\"O Enables or disables AFP-over-TCP
AFP-over-TCP を有効または無効にする。

.TP
.\"O .I Transport Options
転送オプション

.TP
.B -admingroup [group]
.\"O Allows users of a certain group to be seen as the superuser when they
.\"O log in. This option is disabled, by default.
指定した特定のグループに属するユーザーがログインした場合、
スーパーユーザーになることを許可する。
このオプションはデフォルトでは無効にされている。

.TP
.B -ddpaddr [ddp address]
.\"O Specifies the DDP address of the server. The default is to auto-assign an
.\"O address (0.0). This is only useful if you are running on a multihomed host.
サーバーの DDP アドレスを指定する。
デフォルトでは自動的に割り当てられたアドレス (0.0) である。
このオプションは、複数のホームがあるホストを稼働させている場合にのみ役立つ。

.TP
.B -fqdn [name:port]
.\"O Specifies a fully-qualified domain name, with an optional port. This is
.\"O discarded if the server cannot resolve it. This option is not honored by
.\"O AppleShare clients <= 3.8.3. This option is disabled by default.
完全なドメイン名を指定する。オプションとしてポートを指定する。
サーバーが名前を解決できなかった場合は、破棄される。
このオプションは、AppleShare クライアント 3.8.3 以前では動作しない。
このオプションは、デフォルトでは無効である。

.TP
.B -ipaddr [ip address]
.\"O Specifies the IP that the server should respond to (the default is the
.\"O first IP address of the system). This option also allows one machine to
.\"O advertise TCP/IP for another machine.
サーバーが応答すべき IP を指定する
(デフォルトはシステムの最初の IP アドレスである)。
このオプションにより、そのマシンが他のマシンに
TCP/IP を広報することも可能になる。

.TP
.B -port [port number]
.\"O Allows a different TCP port to be specified for AFP-over-TCP. The default
.\"O is 548.
AFP-over-TCP で他の TCP ポートを指定する。
デフォルトは 548 である。

.TP
.B -proxy
.\"O Runs an AppleTalk proxy server for the specified AFP-over-TCP server. If
.\"O the address and port aren't given, then the first IP address of the system
.\"O and port 548 will be used. If you don't want the proxy server to act as a
.\"O DDP server as well, set \fB-uamlist ""\fR.
指定された AFP-over-TCP サーバーとして
AppleTalk プロキシサーバーを実行する。
アドレスとポートが指定されない場合、
システムの最初の IP アドレスとポート 548 が使われる。
プロキシサーバーを DDP サーバーとして同時に動作させたくない場合は、
\fB-uamlist ""\fR を設定すること。

.TP
.B -server_quantum [number]
.\"O This specifoes the DSI server quantum. The minimum value is 1 MB. The
.\"O maximum value is 0xFFFFFFFFF. If you specify a value that is out of
.\"O range, the default value will be set (which is the minimum).
DSI サーバーの quantum を設定する。
最小値は 1 MB である。最大値は 0xFFFFFFFFF である。
範囲外の値を指定した場合、デフォルトの値 (最小値) が設定される。

.TP
.B -noslp
.\"O Do not register this server using the Service Location Protocol (if SLP
.\"O support was compiled in).  This is useful if you are running multiple
.\"O servers and want one to be hidden, perhaps because it is advertised elsewhere.
(Service Location Protocol のサポートが組み込まれている場合に)
SLP を使ったサーバーの登録を行わない。
複数のサーバーが稼働しているときは、
このサーバーが他のサーバーに公表されてしまうので、
それを隠したい場合に役立つ。

.TP
.\"O .I Miscellaneous Options
.I その他のオプション

.TP
.B -guestname [name]
.\"O Specifies the user that guests should use (default is \fB"nobody"\fR). The
.\"O name should be quoted.
ゲストが使うべきユーザーアカウントを指定する
(デフォルトは \fB"nobody"\fR である)。
名前はクォートすべきである。

.TP
.B -icon
.\"O Use the platform-specific icon
プラットフォーム固有のアイコンを使う。

.TP
.B -loginmsg [message]
.\"O Sets a message to be displayed when clients logon to the server. The
.\"O message should be quoted.
クライアントがログオンした時に表示されるメッセージを設定する。
メッセージはクォートすべきである。

.TP
.B -nodebug
.\"O Disables debugging
デバッグを無効にする。

.TP
.B -tickleval [number]
.\"O Sets the tickle timeout interval (in seconds).
tickle タイムアウトの間隔を (秒単位で) 設定する。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
afpd(8), AppleVolumes.default(5)
