.\" $Id: AppleVolumes.default.5.tmpl,v 1.2 2001/02/28 16:53:24 rufustfirefly Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Mar 13 01:02:08 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Sep  8 17:49:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	chooser		セレクタ (MacOS 日本語版)
.\"
.TH AppleVolumes.default 5 "20 September 2000" "netatalk 1.5"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O AppleVolumes.default \- Configuration file used by \fBafpd\fR(8)
.\"O to determine the shares made available through Appletalk
AppleVolumes.default \- afpd(8) によって使われる設定ファイル。Appletalk を経由して使用可能な共有を決定する

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fB/etc/netatalk/AppleVolumes.default\fR is the configuration file used
.\"O by afpd to determine what portions of the file system will be shared via
.\"O Appletalk, as well as their behaviors.
\fB/etc/netatalk/AppleVolumes.default\fR は
afpd によって使われる設定ファイルで、
Appletalk を経由してファイルシステムのどの部分を共有するかを決定する。
また、(共有の) 動作も決定する。

.\"O Any line not prefixed with \fB#\fR is interpreted. The configuration lines
.\"O are composed like:
\fB#\fR が先頭にない行が解釈される。
設定ファイルの行は、以下のように構成されている:

.RS
.sp
.I path
.B [
.I chooser name
.B ] [
.I options
.B ]

.sp
.RE
.\"O The path name must be a fully qualified path name, or a path name using
.\"O either the \fB~\fR shell shorthand or any of the substitution variables,
.\"O which are listed below.
path は、完全なフルパス名・シェルの省略形 \fB~\fR を使ったパス名・
以下に示す代入変数のいずれかを使ったパス名、でなければならない。

.\"O The chooser name is the name that appears in the Chooser on Macintoshes
.\"O to represent the appropriate share. If there are spaces in the name, it
.\"O should be in quotes (i.e. \fB"File Share"\fR). The chooser name may not
.\"O exceed 27 characters in length, and cannot contain the \fB:\fR character.
chooser name は、適切な共有を示すために
Macintosh のセレクタに現れる名前である。
名前にスペースがある場合は、
(例えば \fB"File Share"\fR のように) クォートすべきである。
chooser name は 27 文字を超えることはできず、
\fB:\fR 文字を含めることはできない。

.\"O The possible options and their meanings are:
使用可能なオプションとその意味は、以下の通りである:

.TP
.B allow:[users/groups]
.\"O The allow option allows the users and groups that access a share to
.\"O be specified. Users and groups are specified, delimited by commas. Groups
.\"O are designated by a \fB@\fR prefix.
allow オプションは、指定されたユーザーとグループが
共有にアクセスすることを許可する。
ユーザーやグループは、コンマで区切って指定する。
グループは \fB@\fR を前に置くことで明示する。

.\"O \fIExample:\fR \fBallow:user1,user2,@group\fR
\fI例:\fR \fBallow:user1,user2,@group\fR

.TP
.B casefold:[option]
.\"O The casefold option handles how casenames should be mangled. The available
.\"O options are:
casefold オプションは大文字小文字間の変換方法を指定する。
指定可能なオプションは以下の通りである:

.\"O \fBtolower\fR - Lowercases names in both directions.
\fBtolower\fR - (「サーバー」→「クライアント」および
「クライアント」→「サーバー」の両方向で) 大文字を小文字にする。

.\"O \fBtoupper\fR - Uppercases names in both directions.
\fBtoupper\fR - (「サーバー」→「クライアント」および
「クライアント」→「サーバー」の両方向で) 小文字を大文字にする。

.\"O \fBxlatelower\fR - Client sees lowercase, server sees uppercase.
\fBxlatelower\fR - 「サーバー」→「クライアント」では大文字を小文字にする。
「クライアント」→「サーバー」では小文字を大文字にする。

.\"O \fBxlateupper\fR - Client sees uppercase, server sees lowercase.
\fBxlateupper\fR - 「サーバー」→「クライアント」では小文字を大文字にする。
「クライアント」→「サーバー」では大文字を小文字にする。

.TP
.B codepage:[nls file]
.\"O The codepage option loads a specific codepage from the nls directory.
codepage オプションは nls ディレクトリから特定のコードページをロードする。

.TP
.B dbpath:[path]
.\"O Sets the database information to be stored in \fBpath\fR.
指定された \fBpath\fR にデータベース情報を格納する。

.TP
.B deny:[users/groups]
.\"O The deny option specifies users and groups who are not allowed access
.\"O to the share. It follows the same format as the \fBallow\fR option.
deny オプションは、共有へのアクセスを許可しないユーザーとグループを指定する。
このオプションは、\fBallow\fR オプションと同じフォーマットに従う。

.TP
.B options:[option]
.\"O This allows multiple options to be specified in a comma delimited format.
.\"O The available options are:
このオプションは、複数のオプションをコンマで区切ったフォーマットで指定する。
指定可能なオプションは:

.\"O \fBcrlf\fR - Enables crlf translation for TEXT files.
\fBcrlf\fR - テキストファイルの CR/LF 変換を有効にする。

.\"O \fBdropbox\fR - Allows a volume to be declared as being a "dropbox." Note
.\"O that netatalk must be compiled with dropkludge support for this to
.\"O function.
\fBdropbox\fR - ボリュームを "dropbox" として宣言する。
この機能を使うには、netatalk が dropkludge をサポートするように
コンパイルされていなければならない。

.\"O \fBlimitsize\fR - Hack for older Macintoshes using newer Appleshare
.\"O clients to limit the disk size reporting to 2 GB.
\fBlimitsize\fR - 表示されるディスクサイズを 2 GB に制限することで、
古い Macintosh が新しい Appleshare を使えるようにするための仕組みである。

.\"O \fBmswindows\fR - Forces filename restrictions imposed by MS WinXX, and
.\"O invokes the MS default codepage (iso8859-1) if one is not already
.\"O specified.
\fBmswindows\fR - MS WinXX で強要されるファイル名に強制的に制限する。
コードページが既に指定されていない場合は、
MS のデフォルトのコードページ (iso8859-1) を起動する。

.\"O \fBnoadouble\fR - Forces afpd to not create .AppleDouble unless a resource
.\"O fork needs to be created.
\fBnoadouble\fR - リソースフォークが必要としない限り、
afpd に .AppleDouble を作成させない。

.\"O \fBnohex\fR - Disables :hex translations for anything except dot files.
.\"O This option makes the \fB/\fR character illegal.
\fBnohex\fR - ドットファイル以外に対して :hex 変換を無効にする。
このオプションは \fB/\fR 文字を不正な文字とする。

.\"O \fBprodos\fR - Provides compatibility with Apple II clients.
\fBprodos\fR - Apple II クライアントとの互換性を提供する。

.\"O \fBro\fR - Specifies the share as being read only for all users.
\fBro\fR - 全てのユーザーに対して共有を読み込みだけ (read only) に指定する。

.\"O \fBusedots\fR - Don't do :hex translation for dot files. This makes all
.\"O files such as .Parent, .Apple* illegal. Dot files created on the server
.\"O side will be invisible to the client.
\fBusedots\fR - ドットファイルに対して :hex 変換をしない。
このオプションは .Parent, .Apple* のような全てのファイルを
不正なファイルとする。
サーバー側で作成されたドットファイルはクライアント側から見えない。

.TP
.B password:[password]
.\"O This option allows you to set a volume password, which can be a maximum
.\"O of 8 characters long.
このオプションによりボリュームに対してパスワードを設定できる。
パスワードは最大 8 文字の長さである。

.TP
.B rolist:[users/groups]
.\"O Allows certain users and groups to have read-only access to a share.
.\"O This follows the \fBallow\fR option format.
特定のユーザーやグループに対して、共有への読み込みだけのアクセスを許可する。
このオプションは \fBallow\fR オプションのフォーマットに従う。

.TP
.B rwlist:[users/groups]
.\"O Allows certain users and groups to have read/write access to a share.
.\"O This follows the \fBallow\fR option format.
特定のユーザーやグループに対して、共有への読み書きのアクセスを許可する。
このオプションは \fBallow\fR オプションのフォーマットに従う。

.P
.\"O The variables which can be used for subsitutions are:
代入に使われる変数を以下に示す:

.TP
.B $c
.\"O client's ip or appletalk address
クライアントの IP または appletalk アドレス

.TP
.B $f
.\"O full name (contents of the gecos field in the passwd file)
フルネーム (passwd ファイルの gecos フィールドの内容)

.TP
.B $g
.\"O group name
グループ名

.TP
.B $h
.\"O hostname
ホスト名

.TP
.B $s
.\"O server name (this can be the hostname)
サーバー名 (これはホスト名にもできる)

.TP
.B $u
.\"O user name (if guest, it is the user that guest is running as)
ユーザー名 (ゲストの場合は、ゲストとして実行されているユーザーの名前)

.TP
.B $v
.\"O volume name (either ADEID_NAME or basename of path)
ボリューム名 (ADEID_NAME またはパスのベース名)

.TP
.B $z
.\"O appletalk zone (may not exist)
appletalk ゾーン (存在しないかもしれない)

.TP
.B $$
.\"O prints dollar sign (\fb$\fR)
ドル記号 (\fb$\fR) を表示する

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
afpd(8)
