.\" $Id: atalkd.conf.5.tmpl,v 1.1 2000/09/22 20:01:39 rufustfirefly Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Mar 13 01:02:08 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Sep  8 17:49:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH atalkd.conf 5 "22 September 2000" "netatalk 1.5"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O atalkd.conf \- Configuration file used by \fBatalkd\fR(8)
.\"O to determine the interfaces used by the master Netatalk daemon
atalkd.conf \- atalkd(8) が使う設定ファイル。
マスター Netatalk デーモンが使うインターフェースを決定する。

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fB/etc/netatalk/atalkd.conf\fR  is the configuration file used
.\"O by atalkd to configure the Appletalk interfaces and their behavior
\fB/etc/netatalk/atalkd.conf\fR は atalkd が使う設定ファイルで、
Appletalk インターフェースとその動作を設定する。

.\"O Any line not prefixed with \fB#\fR is interpreted. The configuration lines
.\"O are composed like:
\fB#\fR が先頭にない行が解釈される。
設定ファイルの行は以下のように構成される:

.RS
.sp
.I interface
.B [
.I options
.B ]

.sp
.RE
.\"O The simplest case is to have either no atalkd.conf, or to have one that
.\"O has no active lines. In this case, atalkd should auto-discover the local
.\"O interfaces on the machine. Please note that you cannot split lines.
最も簡単なケースは、atalkd.conf がない場合や、
このファイルに有効な行がない場合である。
この場合、atalkd はマシンのローカルインターフェースを自動的に検出する。
なお、行を途中で分割できないことに注意。

.\"O The interface is the network interface that this to work over, such as
.\"O \fBeth0\fR for Linux, or \fBle0\fR for Sun.
interface は atalkd が (その上で) 動作する
ネットワークインターフェースであり、
Linux では \fBeth0\fR, Sun では \fBle0\fR といったものである。

.\"O The possible options and their meanings are:
指定可能なオプションとその意味を以下に示す:

.TP
.B -addr net.node
.\"O Allows specification of the net and node numbers for this interface,
.\"O specified in Appletalk numbering format 
インターフェースのネット番号・ノード番号を指定する。
Appletalk の番号付けフォーマットで指定する
(例: \fI-addr 66.6\fR)。

.TP
.B -dontroute
.\"O Disables Appletalk routing. It is the opposite of 
Appletalk の経路制御を無効にする。
\fB-router\fR の反対である。

.TP
.B -net first[-last]
.\"O Allows the available net to be set, optionally as a range.
使用可能なネット番号を設定する。
範囲として設定することもできる。

.TP
.B -phase ( 1 | 2 )
.\"O Specifies the Appletalk phase that this interface is to use (either Phase
.\"O 1 or Phase 2).
そのインターフェースが使う Appletalk のフェーズを指定する
(フェーズ 1 またはフェーズ 2 のどちらかを指定する)。

.TP
.B -router
.\"O Like \fB-seed\fR, but allows single interface routing. It is the opposite
.\"O of \fB-dontroute\fR.
\fB-seed\fR と似ているが、1 つのインターフェースでの経路制御を許可する。
\fB-dontroute\fR の反対である。

.TP
.B -seed
.\"O The seed option only works if you have multiple interfaces. It also causes
.\"O all missing arguments to be automagically configured from the network.
seed オプションは複数のインターフェースがある場合にのみ動作する。
指定されない引き数は、ネットワークから自動的に設定する。

.TP
.B -zone zonename
.\"O Specifies a specific zone that this interface should appear on (example:
.\"O \fI-zone "Parking Lot"\fR). Please note that zones with spaces and other
.\"O special characters should be enclosed in parentheses.
インターフェースが現れる特定のゾーンを指定する
(例: \fI-zone "Parking Lot"\fR)。
スペースや特殊文字の入ったゾーン名は、引用符 (") で括らなければならない。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
atalkd(8)
