.\" $Id: netatalk.conf.5.tmpl,v 1.2 2000/09/28 16:49:21 rufustfirefly Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar 10 01:15:01 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Sep  8 17:49:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH netatalk.conf 5 "28 September 2000" "netatalk 1.5"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O netatalk.conf \- Configuration file used by \fBnetatalk\fR(8)
.\"O to determine its general configuration
netatalk.conf \- netatalk(8) が使う設定ファイル。一般的な設定をする

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fB/etc/netatalk/netatalk.conf\fR is the configuration file used
.\"O by afpd to determine what portions of the file system will be shared via
.\"O Appletalk, as well as their behaviors.
\fB/etc/netatalk/netatalk.conf\fR は afpd が使う設定ファイルで、
Appletalk 経由でファイルシステムのどの部分を共有するかを決定する。
さらに、その動作も決定する。

.\"O Any line not prefixed with \fB#\fR is interpreted. The configuration lines
.\"O are composed like:
\fB#\fR が先頭にない行が解釈される。
設定ファイルの行は以下のように構成される:

.RS
.sp
.I option
.B =
.I value

.sp
.RE
.\"O The possible options and their meanings are:
指定可能なオプションとその意味を以下に示す:

.TP
.B AFPD_GUEST
.\"O Sets the id of the guest user to a local user on the system.
ゲストユーザーのシステム上でのローカルユーザー ID を設定する。

.TP
.B AFPD_MAX_CLIENTS
.\"O Sets the maximum number of clients that can simultaneously connect to
.\"O the server.
サーバーに同時に接続できる最大のクライアント数を設定する。

.TP
.B AFPD_RUN
.\"O Enables the afpd daemon if set to "yes". This should be enabled if you
.\"O are planning on using netatalk as a file server.
このオプションを "yes" に設定すると、afpd デーモンが有効になる。
netatalk をファイルサーバーにしようとする場合は、
このオプションを有効にすべきである。

.TP
.B AFPD_UAM_LIST
.\"O Sets the default UAMs for afpd (and papd, if printer authentication is
.\"O compiled in) to use.
afpd で使われるデフォルトの UAM 
(訳註: User Authentication Method, ユーザー認証法) を設定する
(プリンタの認証が組み込まれている場合は、papd も含めた認証法を設定する)。

.\"O \fIExample:\fR
\fI例:\fR
\fBAFPD_UAMLIST\fR=\fB"-U uams_guest.so,uams_randnum.so"\fR

.TP
.B ATALK_BGROUND
.\"O "yes" will set netatalk to initialize in the background, and "no" will
.\"O cause normal initialization.
"yes" にした場合は、netatalk の初期化をバックグラウンド行う。
"no" にした場合は普通に初期化する。

.TP
.B ATALK_NAME
.\"O Sets the machines' Appletalk name.
マシンの Appletalk 名を設定する。

.TP
.B ATALK_ZONE
.\"O Sets the machines' Appletalk zone.
マシンの Appletalk ゾーンを設定する。

.TP
.B ATALKD_RUN
.\"O Enables the atalkd daemon if set to "yes". This should be enabled if
.\"O you are planning on providing Appletalk services.
このオプションを "yes" に設定すると、afpd デーモンが有効になる。
Appletalk サービスを提供しようとする場合は、
このオプションを有効にすべきである。

.TP
.B PAPD_RUN
.\"O Enables the papd daemon if set to "yes". This should be enabled if you
.\"O are planning on using netatalk as a print server.
このオプションを "yes" に設定すると、papd デーモンが有効になる。
netatalk をプリンタサーバーにしようとする場合は、
このオプションを有効にすべきである。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
atalkd(8), atalkd.conf(5)
