.\" $Id: papd.conf.5.tmpl,v 1.2 2002/03/19 23:23:53 morgana Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar 10 01:19:33 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Sep  8 17:49:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Wed Feb 11 17:08:28 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	chooser		セレクタ (MacOS 日本語版)
.\"
.TH papd.conf 5 "26 September 2000" "netatalk 1.5"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O papd.conf \- Configuration file used by \fBpapd\fR(8)
.\"O to determine the configuration of printers used by the Netatalk printing
.\"O daemon
papd.conf \- papd(8) が使う設定ファイル。Netatalk 印刷デーモンが使うプリンタを設定する

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fB/etc/netatalk/papd.conf\fR is the configuration file used
.\"O by papd to configure the printing services offered by netatalk. Please note
.\"O that papd must be enabled in \fB/etc/netatalk/netatalk.conf\fR for this to take
.\"O any effect. \fBpapd\fR shares the same defaults as lpd on many systems, but not
.\"O Solaris.
\fB/etc/netatalk/papd.conf\fR は papd が使う設定ファイルであり、
netatalk が提供する印刷サービスを設定する。
これを有効にするためには、papd が \fB/etc/netatalk/netatalk.conf\fR で
有効にされていなければならない点に注意すること。
\fBpapd\fR のデフォルトは、多くのシステムで lpd と同様である
(ただし Solaris では異なる)。

.\"O Any line not prefixed with \fB#\fR is interpreted. The configuration lines
.\"O are composed like:
\fB#\fR が先頭にない行が解釈される。
設定ファイルの行は以下のように構成される:

.RS
.sp
.I printername:[options]

.sp
.RE
.\"O The simplest case is to have either no papd.conf, or to have one that
.\"O has no active lines. In this case, atalkd should auto-discover the local
.\"O printers on the machine. Please note that you can split lines by using
.\"O \fB\\\fR.
最も簡単なケースは、papd.conf がない場合や、
このファイルの有効な行がない場合である。
この場合、atalkd はマシンのローカルプリンタを自動的に検出する。
\fB\\\fR を使えば、行の途中で分割できる点に注意すること。

.\"O printername may be just a name (\fBPrinter 1\fR), or it may be a full name
.\"O in nbp_name format (\fBPrinter 1:LaserWriter@My Zone\fR).  If more than 15
.\"O printers are defined, you should explicitly define the zone for each printer.
.\"O Otherwise, the Mac Chooser not show all the printers.
printername は (\fBPrinter 1\fR) のような名前でも、
nbp_name フォーマットの
(\fBPrinter 1:LaserWriter@My Zone\fR) のような完全な名前でもよい。
16 台以上のプリンタを定義する場合は、
各プリンタのゾーンを明示的に定義すべきである。
さもないと Mac のセレクタは全てのプリンタを表示することができない。

.\"O The possible options are colon delimited (\fB:\fR), and lines must be
.\"O terminated with colons. The possible options and flags are:
指定可能なオプションはコロン (\fB:\fR) で区切られ、
行はコロンで終らなければならない。
指定可能なオプションとフラグを以下に示す:

.TP
.\"O .B am=(uams list)
.\"O The \fBam\fR option allows specific UAMs to be specified for a particular
.\"O printer. It has no effect if the \fBau\fR flag is not present or if papd
.\"O authentication was not built into netatalk.
.B am=(uam のリスト)
\fBam\fR は、特定のプリンタに対して UAM を指定することを可能にする。
\fBau\fR フラグが指定されていない場合や、
papd 認証が netatalk に組み込まれていない場合、何も影響を及ぼさない。

.TP
.B au
.\"O If present, this flag enables authentication for the printer. Please note
.\"O that papd authentication must be built into netatalk for this to take
.\"O effect.
このフラグが存在する場合、プリンタを使うための認証が有効にされる。
このフラグが有効になるためには、papd 認証が netatalk に組み込まれて
いなければならない点に注意すること。

.TP
.\"O .B op=(operator)
.\"O This specifies the operator name, for lpd spooling.
.B op=(オペレータ)
lpd にスプールするためのオペレータ名を指定する。

.TP
.\"O .B pa=(appletalk address)
.\"O Allows specification of Appletalk addresses. Usually not needed.
.B pa=(appletalk アドレス)
Appletalk アドレスの指定する。通常は必要ない。

.TP
.\"O .B pd=(path to ppd file)
.\"O Specifies a particular PPD (printer description file) to associate with
.\"O the selected printer.
.B pd=(ppd ファイルのパス)
選択されたプリンタに関連した
特定の PPD (プリンタ記述ファイル) を指定する。

.TP
.\"O .B pr=(lpd printer name)
.\"O Sets the \fBlpd\fR printer that this is spooled to.
.B pr=(lpd プリンタ名)
スプールする \fBlpd\fR プリンタを設定する。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
papd(8), atalkd.conf(5), lpd(8)
