.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 2003 Matthew Wilcox
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel is constantly changing, this manual page may
.\" be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no responsibility
.\" for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the
.\" information contained herein.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Feb  3 03:08:49 JST 2005
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH KSOFTIRQD 9 2003-08-24 "Linux 2.6.0" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ksoftirqd \- Softirq daemon
ksoftirqd \- softirq デーモン
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ksoftirqd
.\"O is a per-cpu kernel thread that runs when the machine is under heavy
.\"O soft-interrupt load.
.\"O Soft interrupts are normally serviced on return from
.\"O a hard interrupt, but it's possible for soft interrupts to be triggered
.\"O more quickly than they can be serviced.
.\"O If a soft interrupt is triggered
.\"O for a second time while soft interrupts are being handled, the
.\"O .B ksoftirq
.\"O daemon is triggered to handle the soft interrupts in process context.
.B ksoftirqd
は CPU 毎のカーネルスレッドで、
マシンのソフト割り込み (interrupt) の負荷が高くなったときに実行される。
ソフト割り込みは、通常はハード割り込みから返ったときに処理される。
しかしソフト割り込みは、それが処理されるよりも速く、
トリガしておくことができる。
ソフト割り込みが処理されている間に 2 回目のソフト割り込みがトリガされると、
.B ksoftirq
デーモンがトリガされ、ソフト割り込みがプロセスコンテキストで処理される。
.\"Osato:
.\"Osato: service, trigger の良い訳が思いつかない。
.\"Osato:
.\"O If
.\"O .B ksoftirqd
.\"O is taking more than a tiny percentage of CPU time, this indicates the
.\"O machine is under heavy soft interrupt load.
.B ksoftirqd
が CPU 時間を数 % 以上使っている場合は、
マシンのソフト割り込みの負荷が高いことを表す。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O .B ksoftirqd
.\"O was introduced during the 2.3 development series as part of the
.\"O softnet work by Alexey Kuznetsov and David Miller.
.B ksoftirqd
は 2.3 開発シリーズにおいて、Alexey Kuznetsov と David Miller による
softnet の作成の一部として導入された。
