.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\"
.\" Modified Sun Feb 26 14:52:00 1995 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 23:48:10 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" "
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" This file was generated with po4a. Translate the source file.
.\"
.\"*******************************************************************
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Ueyama Rui
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 21 0:45:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Ueyama Rui <ueyama@campusnet.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Feb 23 JST 2003 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH BCOPY 3 2013\-10\-22 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
bcopy \- バイト列をコピーする
.SH 書式
.nf
\fB#include <strings.h>\fP
.sp
\fBvoid bcopy(const void *\fP\fIsrc\fP\fB, void *\fP\fIdest\fP\fB, size_t \fP\fIn\fP\fB);\fP
.fi
.SH 説明
\fBbcopy\fP()  は \fIsrc\fP から先頭 \fIn\fP バイトを \fIdest\fP にコピーする。 領域が重なっていても、結果は正しいものである。
.SH 返り値
なし。
.SH 属性
.SS "マルチスレッディング (pthreads(7) 参照)"
\fBbcopy\fP() 関数はスレッドセーフである。
.SH 準拠
4.3BSD.  この関数は廃止予定である (POSIX.1\-2001 では 過去の名残 (LEGACY) とされている)。新しいプログラムでは
\fBmemcpy\fP()  や \fBmemmove\fP()  を使用すべきである。 \fBmemcpy\fP()  や \fBmemmove\fP()  では、最初の
2 つの引数の順序が入れ替わっていることに注意すること。 POSIX.1\-2008 では、 \fBbcopy\fP()  の仕様が削除されている。
.SH 関連項目
\fBmemccpy\fP(3), \fBmemcpy\fP(3), \fBmemmove\fP(3), \fBstrcpy\fP(3), \fBstrncpy\fP(3)
.SH この文書について
この man ページは Linux \fIman\-pages\fP プロジェクトのリリース 3.79 の一部
である。プロジェクトの説明とバグ報告に関する情報は
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man\-pages/ に書かれている。
