.\" This page is originally in the SysVinit package.
.\"
.\" Translated Fri 14 Feb 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated Sat  6 May 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Thu 26 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"{{{}}}
.\"{{{  Title
.TH HALT 8 "Nov 6, 2001" "" "Linux System Administrator's Manual"
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Name
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O halt, reboot, poweroff \- stop the system.
.SH 名前
halt, reboot, poweroff \- システムを停止する
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Synopsis
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /sbin/halt
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-w ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.RB [ \-p ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.br
.B /sbin/reboot
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-w ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.br
.B /sbin/poweroff
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-w ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Description
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBHalt\fP notes that the system is being brought down in the file
.\"O \fI/var/log/wtmp\fP, and then either tells the kernel to halt, reboot or
.\"O poweroff the system.
\fBhalt\fPは、システムの終了を \fI/var/log/wtmp\fP ファイルに記録し、
カーネルにシステムの停止 (halt)、再起動 (reboot)、
電源断 (poweroff) のいずれかを行うよう命令する。
(訳注: reboot, poweroff は halt へのリンクであり、
動作はどの名前で起動したかによって決まる。)
.PP
.\"O If \fBhalt\fP or \fBreboot\fP is called when the system is
.\"O \fInot\fP in runlevel \fB0\fP or \fB6\fP, in other words when it's running
.\"O normally, \fBshutdown\fP will be invoked instead (with the \fB-h\fP
.\"O or \fB-r\fP flag). For more info see the \fBshutdown\fP(8)
.\"O manpage.
システムのランレベルが \fB0\fP または \fB6\fP でないときに、
すなわちシステムが通常に動作しているときに
\fBhalt\fP や \fBreboot\fP が呼び出されると、
代わりに \fBshutdown\fP(8) が
(\fB-h\fP や \fB-r\fP オプションを付けて) 起動される。
詳細は
.BR shutdown (8)
の man ページを参照のこと。
.PP
.\"O The rest of this manpage describes the behaviour in runlevels 0
.\"O and 6, that is when the systems shutdown scripts are being run.
この man ページではランレベル 0 および 6、
すなわちシステムのシャットダウンスクリプトが動作中の場合
における振舞いを説明する。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Options
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.IP \fB\-n\fP
.\"O Don't sync before reboot or halt.
再起動または停止する前に sync しない。
.IP \fB\-w\fP
.\"O Don't actually reboot or halt but only write the wtmp record
.\"O (in the \fI/var/log/wtmp\fP file).
実際には再起動または停止せずに、
wtmpレコード (\fI/var/log/wtmp\fP ファイル) への記録のみを行う。
.IP \fB\-d\fP
.\"O Don't write the wtmp record. The \fB\-n\fP flag implies \fB\-d\fP.
wtmpレコードへの記録を行わない。
\fB\-n\fP オプションを指定した場合は、
自動的に \fB\-d\fP オプションも付けられる。
.IP \fB\-f\fP
.\"O Force halt or reboot, don't call \fBshutdown\fP(8).
\fBshutdown\fP(8) を起動せず、強制的に halt または reboot する。
.IP \fB\-i\fP
.\"O Shut down all network interfaces just before halt or reboot.
停止または再起動する直前に
全てのネットワークインターフェースを切断する。
.IP \fB\-h\fP
.\"O Put all harddrives on the system in standby mode just before halt or poweroff.
停止または再起動する直前にシステムのすべてのハードディスクを
standby モードにする。
.IP \fB\-p\fP
.\"O When halting the system, do a poweroff. This is the default when halt is
.\"O called as \fBpoweroff\fP.
システムを停止する時に、電源を切る。
halt が \fBpoweroff\fP という名前で起動された時はこれがデフォルトである。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Diagnostics
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O If you're not the superuser, you will get the message `must be superuser'.
スーパーユーザでない人が用いた場合は `must be superuser'
というメッセージが表示される。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Notes
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Under older \fBsysvinit\fP releases , \fBreboot\fP and \fBhalt\fP should
.\"O never be called directly. From release 2.74 on \fBhalt\fP and \fBreboot\fP
.\"O invoke \fBshutdown\fP(8) if the system is not in runlevel 0 or 6. This
.\"O means that if \fBhalt\fP or \fBreboot\fP cannot find out the current
.\"O runlevel (for example, when \fI/var/run/utmp\fP hasn't been initialized
.\"O correctly) \fBshutdown\fP will be called, which might not be what you want.
.\"O Use the \fB-f\fP flag if you want to do a hard \fBhalt\fP or \fBreboot\fP.
古い版の \fBsysvinit\fP では、
\fBreboot\fP や \fBhalt\fP を直接呼び出してはならなかった。
2.74 版からは、システムのランレベルが 0 か 6 でない場合には
\fBhalt\fP や \fBreboot\fP は \fIshutdown\fP を起動する。 
このため
\fBhalt\fP や \fBreboot\fP が現在のランレベルを認識できない場合
(例えば \fI/var/run/utmp\fP が正しく初期化されていない場合) には
\fBshutdown\fP が起動されることになるが、
これは望む動作とは異なるかもしれない。
強制的に \fBhalt\fP や \fBreboot\fP を実行したい時には
\fB-f\fP オプションを使うこと。
.PP
.\"O The \fB-h\fP flag puts all harddisks in standby mode just before halt
.\"O or poweroff. Right now this is only implemented for IDE drives. A side
.\"O effect of putting the drive in standby mode is that the write cache
.\"O on the disk is flushed. This is important for IDE drives, since the
.\"O kernel doesn't flush the write-cache itself before poweroff.
\fB-h\fP オプションは停止または電源断の直前にすべてのハードディスクを
standby モードにする。
現在ではこの機能は IDE ドライブに対してのみ実装されている。
ハードディスクを standby モードにすると、
副作用としてディスクの write キャッシュがフラッシュされる。
これは IDE ドライブでは重要なことなのである。
カーネル自身は電源断の前に
write キャッシュのフラッシュを行わないからである。
.PP
.\"O The \fBhalt\fP program uses /proc/ide/hd* to find all IDE disk devices,
.\"O which means that /proc needs to be mounted when \fBhalt\fP or
.\"O \fBpoweroff\fP is called or the \fB-h\fP switch will do nothing.
\fBhalt\fP プログラムはすべての IDE ディスクデバイスを検索するため、
/proc/ide/hd* を用いる。
すなわち \fBhalt\fP や \fBpoweroff\fP を呼ぶときには
/proc がマウントされている必要がある。
さもないと \fB-h\fP オプションは何もしない。
.PP
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Author
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  See also
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR shutdown (8),
.BR init (8)
.\"}}}
