.\" This page is originally in the SysVinit package.
.\"
.\" Translated Fri 14 Feb 1997 by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated Wed  3 May 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH RUNLEVEL 8 "May 27, 1997" "" "Linux System Administrator's Manual"
.SH 名前
runlevel \- 現在及び一つ前のランレベルを調べる。
.SH 書式
.B runlevel 
.RI [ utmp ]
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Runlevel
.\"O reads the system
.\"O .I utmp
.\"O file (typically 
.\"O .IR /var/run/utmp )
.\"O to locate the runlevel record, and then
.\"O prints the previous and current system runlevel on its standard output, 
.\"O separated by a single space. If there is no previous system
.\"O runlevel, the letter \fBN\fP will be printed instead.
.B runlevel
はランレベルレコードを調べるためにシステム
.I utmp
ファイル(一般には
.IR /var/run/utmp )
を読み込み、
現在及びその一つ前のシステムのランレベルを、標準出力
に一文字分のスペースを空けて表示する。
一つ前のランレベルが存在しない場合は、代わりに\fBN\fPという文字を表示する。
.PP
.\"O If no
.\"O .I utmp
.\"O file exists, or if no runlevel record can be found,
.\"O .B runlevel
.\"O prints the word \fBunknown\fP and exits with an error.
.I utmp
ファイルがない場合、またはランレベルレコードが見つからない場合、
\fBunknown\fP の文字を出力して、異常終了する。
.PP
.\"O .B Runlevel
.\"O can be used in \fIrc\fP scripts as a substitute for the System-V
.\"O \fBwho -r\fP command. 
.B runlevel
は、\fIrc\fPスクリプトの中でSystem-Vの\fPwho -r\fPコマンドの代わりに
使うことが出来る。
.\"O However, in newer versions of \fBinit\fP(8) this information
.\"O is also available in the environment variables \fBRUNLEVEL\fP and
.\"O \fBPREVLEVEL\fP.
しかし、新しい版の\fBinit\fP(8)を使用している場合は
\fBRUNLEVEL\fP及び\fBPREVLEVEL\fPという環境変数から
これらの情報を得ることも出来る。
.SH オプション
.\"{{{ utmp
.IP \fIutmp\fP 
.\"O The name of the \fIutmp\fP file to read.
読み込む\fIutmp\fPファイルの名前。
.\"}}}
.SH 関連項目
.BR init (8),
.BR utmp (5)
.SH 著者
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl

