.\" This page is originally in the SysVinit package.
.\"
.\" Translated Fri 14 Feb 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated Sun 14 May 2000 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Fri 27 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"{{{}}}
.\"{{{  Title
.TH SHUTDOWN 8 "Juli 31, 2001" "" "Linux System Administrator's Manual"
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Name
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O shutdown \- bring the system down
.SH 名前
shutdown \- システムを終了させる
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Synopsis
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /sbin/shutdown
.RB [ \-t
.IR sec ]
.RB [ \-arkhncfF ]
.I time
.RI [ warning-message ]
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Description
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBshutdown\fP brings the system down in a secure way.  All logged-in users are
.\"O notified that the system is going down, and \fBlogin\fP(1) is blocked.
.\"O It is possible to shut the system down immediately or after a specified delay.
.\"O All processes are first notified that the system is going down by the
.\"O signal \s-2SIGTERM\s0.  This gives programs like \fBvi\fP(1)
.\"O the time to save the file being edited, 
.\"O mail and news processing programs a chance to exit cleanly, etc. 
.\"O \fBshutdown\fP does its job by signalling the \fBinit\fP process, 
.\"O asking it to change the runlevel.
.\"O Runlevel \fB0\fP is used to halt the system, runlevel \fB6\fP is used
.\"O to reboot the system, and runlevel \fB1\fP is used to put to system into
.\"O a state where administrative tasks can be performed; this is the default
.\"O if neither the \fI-h\fP or \fI-r\fP flag is given to \fBshutdown\fP.
.\"O To see which actions are taken on halt or reboot see the appropriate
.\"O entries for these runlevels in the file \fI/etc/inittab\fP.
\fBshutdown\fP はシステムを安全に終了させる。
ログインしている全てのユーザにはシステムが終了する旨が通知され、
新たな \fBlogin\fP(1) プロセスは生成されなくなる。
\fBshutdown\fP はシステムを直ちに終了させることも、
また指定した時間の経過後に終了させることもできる。
実行中の全てのプロセスには、
まず \s-2SIGTERM\s0 シグナルが送信され、
システムの終了が通知される。
これによって、
\fBvi\fP(1) のようなプログラムが現在編集中のファイルを保存するための、
またメールやニュースを扱うプログラムが正常に終了するための余裕が与えられる。
\fBshutdown\fP は、\fBinit\fP プロセスにシグナルを送り、
ランレベルの変更を依頼することによって、システムを終了させる。
ランレベル \fB0\fP はシステムを停止するために、
ランレベル \fB6\fP はシステムをリブートするために用いられる。
ランレベル \fB1\fP はシステムの管理業務が行なえる状態
(シングルユーザモード) にするために用いられる。
\fBshutdown\fP に \fI-h\fP と \fI-r\fP
いずれのオプションも与えられなかった場合は、
デフォルトでランレベル \fB1\fP になる。
システムの停止やリブートの際にどのような動作がなされるかは、
\fI/etc/inittab\fP ファイルのエントリのうち、
それぞれのランレベルに対応するものを参照すること。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Options
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.\"{{{  -a
.IP "\fB\-a\fP
.\"O Use \fB/etc/shutdown.allow\fP.
\fB/etc/shutdown.allow\fP を使う。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -t sec
.IP "\fB\-t\fP \fIsec\fP"
.\"O Tell \fBinit\fP(8) to wait \fIsec\fP seconds between sending processes the 
.\"O warning and the kill signal, before changing to another runlevel.
他のランレベルに移行する際、
警告シグナルを送ってから kill シグナルを送るまでに
\fIsec\fP 秒間待つよう \fBinit\fP(8) に伝える。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -k
.IP \fB\-k\fP
.\"O Don't really shutdown; only send the warning messages to everybody.
実際にはシャットダウンを行なわない。
ログイン中のユーザ全員へのメッセージ送付のみを行なう。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -r
.IP \fB\-r\fP
.\"O Reboot after shutdown.
シャットダウン後リブートする。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -h
.IP \fB\-h\fP
.\"O Halt after shutdown.
シャットダウン後システムを停止する。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -n
.IP \fB\-n\fP
.\"O [DEPRECATED] Don't call \fBinit\fP(8) to do the shutdown but do it ourself.
.\"O The use of this option is discouraged, and its results are not always what
.\"O you'd expect.
[使うべきでない] \fBinit\fP(8) にシャットダウンを依頼するのではなく、
自力でシャットダウンを行う。
このオプションの使用はなるべく避けること。
望んだ結果が得られるとは限らない。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -f
.IP \fB\-f\fP
.\"O Skip fsck on reboot.
リブート時に fsck を行なわない。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -F
.IP \fB\-F\fP
.\"O Force fsck on reboot.
リブート時に必ず fsck を行なう。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  -c
.IP \fB\-c\fP
.\"O Cancel an already running shutdown. With this option it is of course
.\"O not possible to give the \fBtime\fP argument, but you can enter a
.\"O explanatory message on the command line that will be sent to all users.
現在実行中のシャットダウンをキャンセルする。
当然ながら、このオプションと同時に \fBtime\fP を指定することはできない。
しかし、コマンドラインから説明用のメッセージを入力し、
ログイン中の全てのユーザに送る事はできる。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  time
.IP \fItime\fP
.\"O When to shutdown.
いつシャットダウンするか。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  warning-message
.IP \fIwarning-message\fP
.\"O Message to send to all users.
ユーザ全員に送られるメッセージ。
.\"}}}
.PP
.\"O The \fItime\fP argument can have different formats.  First, it can be an
.\"O absolute time in the format \fIhh:mm\fP, in which \fIhh\fP is the hour
.\"O (1 or 2 digits) and \fImm\fP is the minute of the hour (in two digits).
.\"O Second, it can be in the format \fB+\fP\fIm\fP, in which \fIm\fP is the
.\"O number of minutes to wait.  The word \fBnow\fP is an alias for \fB+0\fP.
\fItime\fP 引数は様々な書式で指定できる。
まず、\fIhh:mm\fP という書式で時刻を与える方法がある。
ここで \fIhh\fP は時 (数字 1 つか 2 つ)、
\fImm\fP は分 (数字二つ) である。
二つめは \fB+\fP\fIm\fP という書式で、
\fIm\fP 分待機した後にシャットダウンするよう指示する方法である。
\fBnow\fP は \fB+0\fP のエイリアスである。
.PP
.\"O If shutdown is called with a delay, it creates the advisory file
.\"O .I /etc/nologin
.\"O which causes programs such as \fIlogin(1)\fP to not allow new user
.\"O logins. Shutdown removes this file if it is stopped before it
.\"O can signal init (i.e. it is cancelled or something goes wrong).
.\"O It also removes it before calling init to change the runlevel.
遅延指定付きで起動されると、shutdown は
.I /etc/nologin
ファイルを作成し、
\fIlogin(1)\fP のようなプログラムが
新たなユーザログインを許可しないようにする。
shutdown は、init にシグナルを送る前に停止した場合
(キャンセルされたか、なにか問題があった場合)、このファイルを削除する。
init にランレベルを変更するよう伝える前にも、
shutdown はこのファイルを削除する。
.PP
.\"O The \fB\-f\fP flag means `reboot fast'.  This only creates an advisory
.\"O file \fI/fastboot\fP which can be tested by the system when it comes
.\"O up again.  The boot rc file can test if this file is present, and decide not 
.\"O to run \fBfsck\fP(1) since the system has been shut down in the proper way.  
.\"O After that, the boot process should remove \fI/fastboot\fP.
\fB\-f\fP オプションは `reboot fast' を表す。
このオプションは \fI/fastboot\fP というアドバイス的なファイルを作るだけだが、
このファイルはシステムの再起動時にチェックされる。
ブート rc ファイルは、このファイルが存在すると、
システムが適切な方法でシャットダウンされたので
\fIfsck(1)\fP を起動する必要がないと判断する。
その後には、
ブートプロセスは \fI/fastboot\fP ファイルを削除しなければならない。
.PP
.\"O The \fB\-F\fP flag means `force fsck'.  This only creates an advisory
.\"O file \fI/forcefsck\fP which can be tested by the system when it comes
.\"O up again.  The boot rc file can test if this file is present, and decide
.\"O to run \fBfsck\fP(1) with a special `force' flag so that even properly
.\"O unmounted filesystems get checked.
.\"O After that, the boot process should remove \fI/forcefsck\fP.
\fB\-F\fP オプションは `force fsck' を表す。
このオプションは \fI/forcefsck\fP というアドバイス的なファイルを作るだけだが、
このファイルはシステムの再起動時にチェックされる。
ブート rc ファイルは、このファイルが存在すると、
\fIfsck(1)\fP を特に `force' オプション付きで起動し、
適切にアンマウントされたファイルシステムもチェックさせる。
その後には、
ブートプロセスは \fI/forcefsck\fP ファイルを削除しなければならない。
.PP
.\"O The \fB-n\fP flag causes \fBshutdown\fP not to call \fBinit\fP, 
.\"O but to kill all running processes itself. 
.\"O \fBshutdown\fP will then turn off quota, accounting, and swapping
.\"O and unmount all filesystems.
\fB-n\fP オプションを用いると、
\fBshutdown\fP は \fBinit\fP を呼び出さず、
全てのプロセスを自分自身で kill する。
つづいて \fBshutdown\fP は quota と accounting を停止し、
スワップを停め、全てのファイルシステムを unmount する。
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Files
.\"O .SH ACCESS CONTROL
.SH アクセス制御
.\"O \fBshutdown\fP can be called from \fBinit\fP(8) when the magic keys
.\"O \fBCTRL-ALT-DEL\fP are pressed, by creating an appropriate entry in
.\"O \fI/etc/inittab\fP. This means that everyone who has physical access
.\"O to the console keyboard can shut the system down. To prevent this,
.\"O \fBshutdown\fP can check to see if an authorized user is logged in on
.\"O one of the virtual consoles. If \fBshutdown\fP is called with the \fB-a\fP
.\"O argument (add this to the invocation of shutdown in /etc/inittab),
.\"O it checks to see if the file \fI/etc/shutdown.allow\fP is present.
.\"O It then compares the login names in that file with the list of people
.\"O that are logged in on a virtual console (from \fI/var/run/utmp\fP). Only
.\"O if one of those authorized users \fBor root\fP is logged in, it will
.\"O proceed. Otherwise it will write the message
\fI/etc/inittab\fP 中に適切なエントリを作成しておけば、
特殊なキーシーケンス \fBCTRL-ALT-DEL\fP が押された場合に
\fBinit\fP(8) が \fBshutdown\fP を起動するようにできる。
こうしておくと、
コンソールのキーボードに接触できる人なら、
誰でもシステムをシャットダウンできてしまう。
これを避けるため、
\fBshutdown\fP には、
起動を許可されたユーザが仮想コンソールのいずれかから
ログインしているかどうかチェックする機能がある。
\fBshutdown\fP が \fB-a\fP 引数つきで起動されると
(/etc/inittab の shutdown エントリに追加しておく)、
\fBshutdown\fP は \fI/etc/shutdown.allow\fP
ファイルが存在するかどうかを調べ、
そこに記されたログイン名を仮想コンソールからログインしている人のリスト
(\fI/var/run/utmp\fP から取得する) と比較し、
許可されたユーザのうちの誰か\fBまたは root\fP
がログインしている場合のみシャットダウンを続行する。
そうでない場合は
.sp 1
.nf
\fBshutdown: no authorized users logged in\fP
.fi
.sp 1
.\"O to the (physical) system console. The format of \fI/etc/shutdown.allow\fP
.\"O is one user name per line. Empty lines and comment lines (prefixed by a
.\"O \fB#\fP) are allowed. Currently there is a limit of 32 users in this file.
というメッセージを物理システムコンソールに出力する。
\fI/etc/shutdown.allow\fP ファイルには、一行にユーザを一人記入する。
空行やコメント行 (行頭に \fB#\fP を付ける) があっても良い。
現在はユーザを 32 人までしか記入しておけないという制限がある。
.\"O .sp 1
.PP
.\"O Note that if \fI/etc/shutdown.allow\fP is not present, the \fB-a\fP
.\"O argument is ignored.
\fI/etc/shutdown.allow\fP が存在しない場合は、
\fB-a\fP 引数は無視される。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.nf
/fastboot
/etc/inittab
/etc/init.d/halt
/etc/init.d/reboot
/etc/shutdown.allow
.fi
.\"}}}
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O A lot of users forget to give the \fItime\fP argument
.\"O and are then puzzled by the error message \fBshutdown\fP produces. The
.\"O \fItime\fP argument is mandatory; in 90 percent of all cases this argument
.\"O will be the word \fBnow\fP.
多くのユーザが \fItime\fP 引数を忘れ、
\fBshutdown\fP の出すエラーメッセージに悩んでいる。
\fItime\fP 引数は必ず指定しなければならない。
あらゆるシャットダウンのうちの 90 パーセントまでは、
\fItime\fP 引数は \fBnow\fP でいいだろう。
.PP
.\"O Init can only capture CTRL-ALT-DEL and start shutdown in console mode.
.\"O If the system is running the X window System, the X server processes
.\"O all key strokes. Some X11 environments make it possible to capture
.\"O CTRL-ALT-DEL, but what exactly is done with that event depends on
.\"O that environment.
init はコンソールモードでのみ CTRL-ALT-DEL をキャッチし、
シャットダウンを開始する。システムで X Window System が動作していると、
X サーバがすべてのキーストロークを処理する。
X11 の環境によっては CTRL-ALT-DEL をキャッチすることも可能になっているが、
実際にこのイベントによって何が行われるかはその環境に依存する。
.PP
.\"O Shutdown wasn't designed to be run setuid. /etc/shutdown.allow is
.\"O not used to find out who is executing shutdown, it ONLY checks who
.\"O is currently logged in on (one of the) console(s).
シャットダウンは setuid で動作するようには設計されなかった。
/etc/shutdown.allow は誰が shutdown を実行したかを調べるためのものではなく、
誰が現在コンソール (のどれか) にログインしているかをチェックするための
ものに過ぎない。
.\"{{{  Author
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  See also
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fsck (8),
.BR init (8),
.BR halt (8),
.BR poweroff (8),
.BR reboot (8)
.\"}}}
