.\" This page is originally in the SysVinit package.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat 28 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SULOGIN 8 "11 Sep 2000" "" "Linux System Administrator's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O sulogin -- Single-user login
sulogin \- シングルユーザログイン
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B sulogin
.RB [ " -e " ]
.RB [ " -p " ]
.RB [ " -t timeout " ]
.RB [ " tty-device " ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I sulogin
.\"O is invoked by \fBinit(8)\fP when the system goes into single user mode
.\"O (this is done through an entry in \fIinittab(5)\fP). \fBInit\fP also
.\"O tries to execute \fIsulogin\fP when it is passed the \fB-b\fP flag
.\"O from the bootmonitor (eg, LILO).
.I sulogin
は、システムがシングルユーザモードに入ったときに
.RI ( inittab (5)
のエントリを通して)
.BR init (8)
から起動される。
.B init
は LILO などのブートモニタから
.B -b
フラグを与えられたときにも
.I sulogin
を起動しようとする。
.PP
.\"O The user is prompted
ユーザには以下のようなプロンプトが出される。
.\"O .IP "" .5i
.RS
.sp
.nf
Give root password for system maintenance
.br
(or type Control-D for normal startup):
.fi
.RE
.PP
.\"O \fIsulogin\fP will connected to the current terminal, or to the
.\"O optional device that can be specified on the command line
.\"O (typically \fB/dev/console\fP).
.I sulogin
は現在の端末か、またはコマンドラインから指定されたデバイス
(たいてい
.BR /dev/console )
に接続する。
.PP
.\"O If the \fB-p\fP flag was set, the single-user shell will be invoked
.\"O with a \fIdash\fP as the first character in \fIargv[0]\fP. That will
.\"O cause most shells to behave as a login shell. The default is \fInot\fP
.\"O to do this, so that the shell will \fInot\fP read \fB/etc/profile\fP
.\"O or \fB$HOME/.profile\fP at startup.
.B -p
オプションが与えられると、シングルユーザのシェルは、
.I argv[0]
の最初の文字にダッシュ `-' を付けたかたちで起動される。
これによって、ほとんどのシェルはログインシェルとして動作する。
デフォルトではこれは行われないので、シェルは起動時に
.B /etc/profile
や
.B $HOME/.profile
を読み込まない。
.PP
.\"O After the user exits the single-user shell, or presses control-d at the
.\"O prompt, the system will (continue to) boot to the default runlevel.
ユーザがシングルユーザシェルを終了した後、
あるいはプロンプトに対して Control-d を押した (シェルを起動しなかった) 後には、
システムは (動作を継続して) デフォルトのランレベルにブートする。
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.SH 環境変数
.\"O \fIsulogin\fP looks for the environment variable \fBSUSHELL\fP or
.\"O \fBsushell\fP to determine what shell to start. If the environment variable
.\"O is not set, it will try to execute root's shell from /etc/passwd. If that
.\"O fails it will fall back to \fB/bin/sh\fP.
.I sulogin
は環境変数
.B SUSHELL
または
.B sushell
を探し、起動するシェルを決定しようとする。
これらの環境変数が設定されていないと、
/etc/passwd に書かれている root のシェルを 起動しようとする。
これにも失敗すると、
.B /bin/sh
を起動する。
.PP
.\"O This is very valuable together with the \fB-b\fP flag to init. To boot
.\"O the system into single user mode, with the root file system mounted read/write,
.\"O using a special "failsafe" shell that is statically linked (this example
.\"O is valid for the LILO bootprompt)
.\"O .PP
この機能は、init の
.B -b
オプションと一緒に用いると非常に便利である。
システムをシングルユーザモードで起動し、
ルートファイルシステムを read/write でマウントし、
静的にリンクされた特殊な「フェイルセーフ」シェルを使うには、
次のようにする
(この例は LILO のブートプロンプトに与えることができる)。
.RS
.sp
.nf
boot: linux -b rw sushell=/sbin/sash
.fi
.RE
.\"O .SH FALLBACK METHODS
.SH 探索方法
.\"O \fIsulogin\fP checks the root password using the standard methods first.
.\"O If the \fB-e\fP option was specified,
.\"O \fIsulogin\fP examines the next files to find the root password. If
.\"O they are damaged, or non-existant, it will use fallback methods that
.\"O even go so far as to provide you with a shell prompt without asking
.\"O for the root password if they are irrepairably damaged.
.\"O nakano if 節が 2 つあるのはなんかのまちがい?
.I sulogin
は、まず通常の方法を用いて root のパスワードをチェックする。
.B -e
オプションが指定されると、
.I sulogin
は以下のファイルを調べて root のパスワードを見つけようとする。
これらが壊れていたり、存在しない場合は、
最後の手段として、
root のパスワードを訊ねないままシェルのプロンプトを表示してしまう。
.\"O .PP
.RS
.sp
.nf
/etc/passwd,
.br
.\"O /etc/shadow (if present)
/etc/shadow (存在する場合)
.fi
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Miquel van Smoorenburg <miquels@cistron.nl>
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O init(8), inittab(5).
.BR init (8),
.BR inittab (5)
