.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH register_console 9 "$Date:$" "Linux DDI" "Kernel Functions"
.SH NAME
register_console \- take on kernel console duties
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "extern void register_console(void(*" proc ")(const char*))"
.SH DESCRIPTION
This function registers with the kernel a function to display all the
kernel messages printed by the
.BR printk "(9)"
function.
.PP
This function is normally called once at boot time by the device
driver for the console device, whatever that turns out to be for the
machine. The console procedure is only called to print messages that
are to be printed, the filtering for log level is done already.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
None.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Linux 1.0+
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR printk "(9)"
.PP
.I "/usr/src/linux/kernel/printk.c"
.SH AUTHOR
Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.SH BUGS
Only one console can exist at a time, and there is no way to know if
any other device has registered as a console.
