.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Cyrus Durgin <cider@speakeasy.org>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH SKB_DEQUEUE 9 "November 24, 1997" "Linux DDI" "Networking Functions"
.hlm 0
.na
.SH NAME
__skb_dequeue, skb_dequeue \- remove an sk_buff from the head of a list
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <linux/skbuff.h>
.HP
.BI "struct sk_buff *__skb_dequeue(struct sk_buff_head " *list ");"
.TP
.BI "struct sk_buff *skb_dequeue(struct sk_buff_head " *list ");"
.hlm 1
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBskb_dequeue\fP function removes the head element of an sk_buff_head.
It decrements the list qlen pointer, and cleanly detaches the head from
the queue.  This function should be used instead of performing this task
manually, as it provides a clean, standardized way of manipulating an
sk_buff_head, and provides interrupt disabling (see \fBNOTES\fP below.)
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Returns a pointer to the head element of \fIlist\fP, or \fBNULL\fP if
\fIlist\fP is empty.
.SH NOTES
It is important to note the difference between not only \fB__skb_dequeue\fP
and \fBskb_dequeue\fP, but all the \fB__skb_\fP functions and their
\fBskb_\fP counterparts.  Essentially, the \fB__skb_\fP functions are
non-atomic, and should only be used with interrupts disabled.  As a convenience,
the \fBskb_\fP functions are provided, which perform interrupt disable /
enable wrapper functionality in addition to performing their specific tasks.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Linux 1.0+
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.hlm 0
.na
.BR intro "(9), " skb_unlink "(9), " skb_insert "(9), " skb_queue_head "(9), " skb_queue_tail "(9)"
.ad
.hlm 1
.PP
/usr/src/linux/net/netlink.c /usr/src/linux/net/ax25/af_ax25.c /usr/src/linux/net/core/datagram.c /usr/src/linux/net/ipv4/ipmr.c /usr/src/linux/net/ipv4/tcp.c
.SH AUTHOR
Cyrus Durgin <cider@speakeasy.org>
