.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Cyrus Durgin <cider@speakeasy.org>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH SKB_PEEK 9 "November 24, 1997" "Linux DDI" "Networking Functions"
.hlm 0
.na
.SH NAME
skb_peek \- peek an sk_buff
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <linux/skbuff.h>
.HP
.BI "struct sk_buff *skb_peek(struct sk_buff_head " *list_ ");"
.hlm 1
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBskb_peek\fP function extracts the head element of \fIlist_\fP,
without modifying \fIlist_\fP.  It is important to note that this is
not necessarily a safe operation, as \fIlist_\fP maintains the original
sk_buff, and other operations on \fIlist_\fP may effect it.  To be safe,
either disable interrupts using \fBcli\fP(9), call \fBskb_peek\fP, copy
the data necessary to continue, and re-enable interrupts using
\fBsti\fP(9), or use \fBskb_dequeue\fP(9).
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Returns a pointer to sk_buff if there is a next element on the \fIlist_\fP.
Otherwise, returns NULL.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Linux 1.0+
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.hlm 0
.na
.BR intro "(9), " skb_unlink "(9), " skb_dequeue "(9)"
.ad
.hlm 1
.PP
/usr/src/linux/net/appletalk/ddp.c /usr/src/linux/net/core/datagram.c /usr/src/linux/net/ipv4/tcp.c /usr/src/linux/net/ipv4/udp.c /usr/src/linux/net/unix/af_unix.c
.SH AUTHOR
Cyrus Durgin <cider@speakeasy.org>
