.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Cyrus Durgin <cider@speakeasy.org>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH SKB_QUEUE_HEAD_INIT 9 "November 24, 1997" "Linux DDI" "Networking Functions"
.hlm 0
.na
.SH NAME
skb_queue_head_init \- prepare an sk_buff_head for use
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <linux/skbuff.h>
.HP
.BI "void  skb_queue_head_init(struct sk_buff_head " *list ");"
.hlm 1
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBskb_queue_head_init\fP function prepares an sk_buff_head for
use by the other \fBskb_\fP functions, and should be called after
declaring and allocating memory for any sk_buff_head elements.
Specifically, \fBskb_queue_head_init\fP sets the prev and next
pointers of the \fIlist\fP to point back at the \fIlist\fP itself,
and sets the \fIlist\fP length to 0.  The use of sk_buff_head elements
which have not been initialized with this function is undocumented and
may produce irregular results.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
None.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Linux 1.0+
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.hlm 0
.na
.BR intro "(9)"
.ad
.hlm 1
.PP
/usr/src/linux/net/netlink.c /usr/src/linux/net/appletalk/aarp.c /usr/src/linux/net/ipv4/af_inet.c /usr/src/linux/net/ipx/af_ipx.c /usr/src/linux/net/unix/af_unix.c
.SH AUTHOR
Cyrus Durgin <cider@speakeasy.org>
