.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH skel 9 "$Date:$" "Linux DDI" "Kernel Functions"
.\"
.\" Turn off hyphenation and right justification for the first sections.
.hlm 0
.na
.\" The name should be formatted this way for apropos to work
.SH NAME
skel \- skeleton man page for section 9 entries
.\"
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <linux/linux.h>
.HP
.\"
.\" Turn hyphenation and adjustment back on.
.hlm 1
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
Describe the function(s) and its parameters. This section should not
be considered an introduction to kernel programming, just an english
text description of the function at hand. It is OK to presume some
basic knowledge of driver programming.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Describe the return values. Enumerate all the distinct values and all
the ranges.
.SH AVAILABILITY
List kernel versions, and if restricted to certain architectures, say so.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.hlm 0
.na
.BR man "(1), " man "(7), " intro "(9)"
.ad
.hlm 1
.PP
Also list some source files for the
kernel that implement the functions of the page.
.SH AUTHOR
Who are you?
.SH BUGS
Describe any misfeatures or suprises that the use of these functions
may lead to. The may not be errors, just unfortunate side effects.
