.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH wake_up 9 "$Date:$" "Linux DDI" "Kernel Functions"
.\"
.\" Turn off hyphenation and right justification for the first sections.
.hlm 0
.na
.\" The name should be formatted this way for apropos to work
.SH NAME
wake_up \- wake up sleeping processes
.\"
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <linux/sched.h>
.HP
.BI "void wake_up(struct\ wait_queue**" condition ")"
.\"
.\" Turn hyphenation and adjustment back on.
.hlm 1
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B wake_up
function is the opposite of the
.BR sleep_on "(9)"
function in that it awakens processes that have gone to sleep using
the same condition variable. All the processes sleeping on the given
condition are awakened. If there are no processes sleeping on the
condition, then none are affected.
.PP
Unlike the
.BR sleep_on "(9)"
function,
.B wake_up
does not block and may be called by interrupt handlers. It is in fact
the principle means of synchronizing with interrupt events.
.PP
If the
.I condition
parameter is NULL, or there are no processes sleeping on
.I condition,
the call to
.B wake_up
is a no-op.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
None.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Linux 1+
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.hlm 0
.na
.BR sleep_on "(9)"
.ad
.hlm 1
.PP
.I "/usr/src/linux/kernel/sched.c"
.SH AUTHOR
Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.SH BUGS
