.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar 10 00:45:37 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ATALK 4F "17 Dec 1991" "netatalk 1.2"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O atalk \- AppleTalk protocol family
atalk \- AppleTalk プロトコルファミリー
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <netatalk/at.h>
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The AppleTalk protocol family is a collection of protocols layered
.\"O above the Datagram Delivery Protocol (DDP), and using AppleTalk address
.\"O format. The AppleTalk family may provide SOCK_STREAM (ADSP), SOCK_DGRAM
.\"O (DDP), SOCK_RDM (ATP), and SOCK_SEQPACKET (ASP). Currently, only DDP is
.\"O implemented in the kernel; ATP and ASP are implemented in user level
.\"O libraries; and ADSP is planned.
AppleTalk プロトコルファミリーは、
データグラム配送プロトコル (Datagram Delivery Protocol, DDP) の
上位層のプロトコルの集合で、AppleTalk アドレスフォーマットを使う。
AppleTalk ファミリーは SOCK_STREAM (ADSP), SOCK_DGRAM
(DDP), SOCK_RDM (ATP), SOCK_SEQPACKET (ASP) を提供する。
現在のところカーネルには DDP のみが実装されている。
ATP と ASP はユーザーレベルのライブラリで実装されている。
ADSP の実装も計画されている。
.\"O .SH ADDRESSING
.SH アドレッシング
.\"O AppleTalk addresses are three byte quantities, stored in network
.\"O byte order. The include file
.\"O .RB < netatalk/at.h >
.\"O defines the AppleTalk address format.
AppleTalk アドレスは 3 バイトの大きさで、
ネットワークバイトオーダーで格納される。
インクルードファイル
.RB < netatalk/at.h >
で AppleTalk アドレスフォーマットが定義されている。
.LP
.\"O Sockets in the AppleTalk protocol family use the following address
.\"O structure:
AppleTalk プロトコルファミリーのソケットは、以下のアドレス構造体を使う。
.sp 1
.RS
.nf
struct sockaddr_at {
	short		sat_family;
	u_char		sat_port;
	struct at_addr	sat_addr;
	char		sat_zero[ 8 ];
};
.fi
.RE
.sp 1
.\"O The port of a socket may be set with
.\"O .BR bind (2).
ソケットのポートは
.BR bind (2)
によって設定できる。
.\"O The node for
.\"O .B bind
.\"O must always be
.\"O .BR ATADDR_ANYNODE :
.\"O ``this node.'' 
.B bind
のノードは常に、「そのノード」を表す
.B ATADDR_ANYNODE
でなければならない。
.\"O The net may be
.\"O .B ATADDR_ANYNET
.\"O or
.\"O .BR ATADDR_LATENET .
ネットは
.B ATADDR_ANYNET
または
.B ATADDR_LATENET
である。
.\"O .B ATADDR_ANYNET
.\"O coresponds to the machine's ``primary'' address (the first
.\"O configured).
.B ATADDR_ANYNET
はマシンの (最初に設定される)「プライマリ」アドレスに対応する。
.\"O .B ATADDR_LATENET
.\"O causes the address in outgoing packets to be determined when a packet
.\"O is sent, i.e. determined late.
.B ATADDR_LATENET
になっていると、送信パケットのアドレスは送信時に決定される。
すなわち、後 (late) で決まる。
.\"O .B ATADDR_LATENET
.\"O is equivalent to opening one socket for each network interface.  
.B ATADDR_LATENET
は、各ネットワークインターフェースに対して
ひとつずつソケットをオープンすることと等価である。
.\"O The
.\"O port of a socket and either the primary address or
.\"O .B ATADDR_LATENET
.\"O are returned with
.\"O .BR getsockname (2).
ソケットのポートと、プライマリアドレスまたは
.B ATADDR_LATENET
の一方が
.BR getsockname (2)
によって返される。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\" .BR ddp (4P),
.\" .BR atp (3N),
.\" .BR asp (3N),
.BR bind (2),
.BR getsockname (2),
.BR atalkd (8).
