.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 11:05:58 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Sat Feb 10 16:18:03 1996 by Urs Thuermann (urs@isnogud.escape.de)
.\" Modified Mon Jun 16 20:02:00 1997 by Nicol疽 Lichtmaier <nick@debian.org>
.\" Modified Mon Feb  6 16:41:00 1999 by Nicol疽 Lichtmaier <nick@debian.org>
.\" Modified Tue Feb  8 16:46:45 2000 by Chris Pepper <pepper@tgg.com>
.\" Modified Fri Sep  7 20:32:45 2001 by Tammy Fox <tfox@redhat.com>
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-2000 TACHIBANA Akira
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec 11 02:08:20 JST 1997
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@tky.3web.ne.jp>
.\" Modified Sat Apr  8 02:44:43 JST 2000
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@tky.3web.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Sep 17 20:48:33 JST 2000
.\"         by TACHIBANA Akira <tati@tky.3web.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Sat 29 Dec 2001 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	native language support	母国語サポート
.TH HIER 7  2009-03-30 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O hier \- Description of the file system hierarchy
.SH 名前
hier \- ファイルシステム階層の説明
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O A typical Linux system has, among others, the following directories:
.SH 説明
典型的な Linux system には以下のようなディレクトリがある
(他にもたくさんのディレクトリがあるが):
.TP
.I /
.\"O This is the root directory.
.\"O This is where the whole tree starts.
ルートディレクトリ。ここが階層の起点となる。
.TP
.I /bin
.\"O This directory contains executable programs which are needed in
.\"O single user mode and to bring the system up or repair it.
このディレクトリには、シングルユーザーモードで
システムの起動や修理を行う際に必要な実行形式ファイルが含まれる。
.TP
.I /boot
.\"O Contains static files for the boot loader.
.\"O This directory only holds
.\"O the files which are needed during the boot process.
.\"O The map installer
.\"O and configuration files should go to
.\"O .I /sbin
.\"O and
.\"O .IR /etc .
ブートローダが用いる静的なファイルが含まれている。
このディレクトリにはブートプロセスの間に必要なファイルだけが置かれる。
マップインストーラや設定ファイルは
.I /sbin
や
.I /etc
に置くべきである。
.TP
.I /dev
.\"O Special or device files, which refer to physical devices.
.\"O See
.\"O .BR mknod (1).
物理デバイスを参照している
スペシャルファイルやデバイスファイルの置き場所。
.BR mknod (1)
を参照のこと。
.TP
.I /etc
.\"O Contains configuration files which are local to the machine.
.\"O Some
.\"O larger software packages, like X11, can have their own subdirectories
.\"O below
.\"O .IR /etc .
.\"O Site-wide configuration files may be placed here or in
.\"O .IR /usr/etc .
.\"O Nevertheless, programs should always look for these files in
.\"O .I /etc
.\"O and you may have links for these files to
.\"O .IR /usr/etc .
マシン固有の設定ファイルが置かれる場所。X11 のような
大規模なソフトウェアパッケージでは、
.I /etc
以下に更にパッケージ単位でサブディレクトリが作られることもある。
サイト全体に有効な設定ファイルは、ここではなく
.I /usr/etc
に置かれることもある。
しかし、プログラムからのこれらのファイルの参照先は、常に
.I /etc
にすべきである。
.I /usr/etc
以下のファイルに対しては、それらへのリンクを
.I /etc
に置けばよい。
.TP
.I /etc/opt
.\"O Host-specific configuration files for add-on applications installed
.\"O in
.\"O .IR /opt .
.I /opt
にインストールされたアドオンアプリケーションが使う、
ホスト固有の設定ファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /etc/sgml
.\"O This directory contains the configuration files for SGML and XML (optional).
SGML や XML の設定ファイルの置き場所 (なくてもよい)。
.TP
.I /etc/skel
.\"O When a new user account is created, files from this directory are
.\"O usually copied into the user's home directory.
新たにユーザーアカウントを作る際、
通常このディレクトリにあるファイルが
ユーザーのホームディレクトリにコピーされる。
.TP
.I /etc/X11
.\"O Configuration files for the X11 window system (optional).
X11 window system の設定ファイルの置き場所 (なくてもよい)。
.TP
.I /home
.\"O On machines with home directories for users, these are usually beneath
.\"O this directory, directly or not.
.\"O The structure of this directory
.\"O depends on local administration decisions.
通常、ユーザーのホームディレクトリが、
このディレクトリ直下ないしサブディレクトリの下に作成される。
このディレクトリの構成をどうするかは、
ローカルマシンの管理者が決めることである。
.TP
.I /lib
.\"O This directory should hold those shared libraries that are necessary
.\"O to boot the system and to run the commands in the root file system.
このディレクトリには、システムの起動時に必要な共有ライブラリや、
ルートファイルシステムでコマンドを実行するのに必要な共有ライブラリを置く。
.TP
.I /media
.\"O This directory contains mount points for removable media such as CD
.\"O and DVD disks or USB sticks.
このディレクトリには、
CD/DVD ディスクや USB スティックなどの取り外し可能メディア
(removable media) 用のマウントポイントが置かれる。
.TP
.I /mnt
.\"O This directory is a mount point for a temporarily mounted file system.
.\"O In some distributions,
.\"O .I /mnt
.\"O contains subdirectories intended to be used as mount points for several
.\"O temporary file systems.
このディレクトリは、一時的にマウントするファイルシステム用の
マウントポイントである。
ディストリビューションによっては、一時的にマウントするファイルシステム用の
マウントポイントとして、
.I /mnt
内にサブディレクトリが用意されている場合がある。
.TP
.I /opt
.\"O This directory should contain add-on packages that contain static files.
このディレクトリにはアドオンパッケージの静的なファイルが置かれる。
.TP
.I /proc
.\"O This is a mount point for the
.\"O .I proc
.\"O file system, which provides information about running processes and
.\"O the kernel.
.\"O This pseudo-file system is described in more detail in
.\"O .BR proc (5).
このディレクトリは
.I proc
ファイルシステムのマウントポイントである。
.I proc
ファイルシステムは、実行中プロセスやカーネルの情報を提供する。
この疑似ファイルシステムの詳細は、
.BR proc (5)
で説明されている。
.TP
.I /root
.\"O This directory is usually the home directory for the root user (optional).
通常ここが root ユーザのホームディレクトリになる (なくてもよい)。
.TP
.I /sbin
.\"O Like
.\"O .IR /bin ,
.\"O this directory holds commands needed to boot the system, but which are
.\"O usually not executed by normal users.
.I /bin
と同様に、
このディレクトリにはシステムの起動に必要なコマンドが含まれる。
ただしここには、一般ユーザーは通常実行しないコマンドが置かれる。
.TP
.I /srv
.\"O This directory contains site-specific data that is served by this system.
このディレクトリには、このシステムで提供される
サイト固有のデータが置かれる。
.TP
.I /tmp
.\"O This directory contains temporary files which may be deleted with no
.\"O notice, such as by a regular job or at system boot up.
このディレクトリには、
定期的なジョブによって、またはシステム起動時に、
無条件に削除して構わない一時的なファイルが置かれる。
.TP
.I /usr
.\"O This directory is usually mounted from a separate partition.
.\"O It should hold only sharable, read-only data, so that it can be mounted
.\"O by various machines running Linux.
通常このディレクトリは、独立したパーティションがマウントされる。
ここには、共有可能で読み込み専用のものだけが含まれ、
よっていろいろな Linux マシンからマウントできる。
.TP
.I /usr/X11R6
.\"O The X\-Window system, version 11 release 6 (optional).
X Window System, Version 11 release 6 (なくてもよい)。
.\":tati:X(3) に合わせました
.TP
.I /usr/X11R6/bin
.\"O Binaries which belong to the X\-Window system; often, there is a
.\"O symbolic link from the more traditional
.\"O .I /usr/bin/X11
.\"O to here.
X Window System のバイナリの置き場所。
古いディレクトリである
.I /usr/bin/X11
からここにシンボリックリンクが張られていることが多い。
.TP
.I /usr/X11R6/lib
.\"O Data files associated with the X\-Window system.
X Window System に関連するデータファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/X11R6/lib/X11
.\"O These contain miscellaneous files needed to run X;  Often, there is a
.\"O symbolic link from
.\"O .I /usr/lib/X11
.\"O to this directory.
ここには X の動作に必要な種々のファイルが含まれている。
.I /usr/lib/X11
からここにシンボリックリンクが張られていることが多い。
.TP
.I /usr/X11R6/include/X11
.\"O Contains include files needed for compiling programs using the X11
.\"O window system.
.\"O Often, there is a symbolic link from
.\"O .I /usr/include/X11
.\"O to this directory.
ここには X11 Window System を使ったプログラムをコンパイルするために
必要なインクルードファイルが含まれている。
.I /usr/include/X11
からここにシンボリックリンクが張られていることが多い。
.TP
.I /usr/bin
.\"O This is the primary directory for executable programs.
.\"O Most programs
.\"O executed by normal users which are not needed for booting or for
.\"O repairing the system and which are not installed locally should be
.\"O placed in this directory.
このディレクトリは、実行形式ファイルの主な置き場所である。
システムのブートやシステム復旧には必要とされない、
一般ユーザーが利用するコマンドの多くは、
ローカルにインストールされるのでない限り、
このディレクトリに置くべきである。
.TP
.I /usr/bin/X11
.\"O is the traditional place to look for X11 executables; on Linux, it
.\"O usually is a symbolic link to
.\"O .IR /usr/X11R6/bin .
X11 コマンドの伝統的な置き場所。Linux では、通常
.I /usr/X11R6/bin
にシンボリックリンクが張られている。
.TP
.I /usr/dict
.\"O Replaced by
.\"O .IR /usr/share/dict .
.I /usr/share/dict
に置き換えられた。
.TP
.I /usr/doc
.\"O Replaced by
.\"O .IR /usr/share/doc .
.I /usr/share/doc
に置き換えられた。
.TP
.I /usr/etc
.\"O Site-wide configuration files to be shared between several machines
.\"O may be stored in this directory.
.\"O However, commands should always
.\"O reference those files using the
.\"O .I /etc
.\"O directory.
.\"O Links from files in
.\"O .I /etc
.\"O should point to the appropriate files in
.\"O .IR /usr/etc .
サイト内部の複数のマシンが共有するような設定ファイルが置かれる。
しかしながら、コマンドはそれらのファイルの参照先を、常に
.I /etc
にすべきだろう。
.I /etc
のファイルからリンクを張って、
.I /usr/etc
の適切なファイルを指すようにすべきである。
.TP
.I /usr/games
.\"O Binaries for games and educational programs (optional).
ゲームプログラムや教育用プログラムのバイナリが含まれている (なくてもよい)。
.TP
.I /usr/include
.\"O Include files for the C compiler.
C コンパイラ用のインクルードファイルが含まれている。
.TP
.I /usr/include/X11
.\"O Include files for the C compiler and the X\-Window system.
.\"O This is
.\"O usually a symbolic link to
.\"O .IR /usr/X11R6/include/X11 .
C コンパイラと X Window System 用のインクルードファイルが含まれている。
通常これは
.I /usr/inlcude/X11
へのシンボリックリンクになっている。
.TP
.I /usr/include/asm
.\"O Include files which declare some assembler functions.
.\"O This used to be a
.\"O symbolic link to
.\"O .IR /usr/src/linux/include/asm .
アセンブラ関数の宣言を行うインクルードファイルが含まれている。
このディレクトリは、以前は
.I /usr/src/linux/include/asm
へのシンボリックリンクだった。
.TP
.I /usr/include/linux
.\"O This contains information which may change from system release to
.\"O system release and used to be a symbolic link to
.\"O .I /usr/src/linux/include/linux
.\"O to get at operating system specific information.
ここには、システムのリリースのたびごとに変更されうる情報が含まれる。
ここは以前は
.I /usr/src/linux/include/linux
にシンボリックリンクされており、
オペレーティングシステム固有の情報が得られるようになっていた。

.\"O (Note that one should have include files there that work correctly with
.\"O the current libc and in user space.
.\"O However, Linux kernel source is not
.\"O designed to be used with user programs and does not know anything
.\"O about the libc you are using.
.\"O It is very likely that things will break
.\"O if you let
.\"O .I /usr/include/asm
.\"O and
.\"O .I /usr/include/linux
.\"O point at a random kernel tree.
.\"O Debian systems don't do this
.\"O and use headers from a known good kernel
.\"O version, provided in the libc*-dev package.)
(ここに置くインクルードファイルは、
現在の libc およびユーザ空間で正しく動作するものでなければならない。
しかし Linux のカーネルソースは
ユーザプログラムといっしょに使うようには設計されていないし、
あなたが使っている libc も関知しない。
.I /usr/include/asm
と
.I /usr/include/linux
を適当なカーネルツリーへのリンクにしたりすると、破綻するのは目に見えている。
Debian ではこうせずに、libc*-dev package が提供する、
安定したカーネルバージョンのヘッダファイルを置いている。)
.TP
.I /usr/include/g++
.\"O Include files to use with the GNU C++ compiler.
GNU C++ コンパイラ用のインクルードファイルが含まれている。
.TP
.I /usr/lib
.\"O Object libraries, including dynamic libraries, plus some executables
.\"O which usually are not invoked directly.
.\"O More complicated programs may
.\"O have whole subdirectories there.
オブジェクトライブラリ (ダイナミックライブラリも含む) と、
直接には起動されないような実行形式ファイル少々とが置かれる。
複雑なプログラムでは、更にサブディレクトリがあるかもしれない。
.TP
.I /usr/lib/X11
.\"O The usual place for data files associated with X programs, and
.\"O configuration files for the X system itself.
.\"O On Linux, it usually is
.\"O a symbolic link to
.\"O .IR /usr/X11R6/lib/X11 .
X のプログラムに関連するデータファイルと、
X Window System の設定ファイルの置き場所。
Linux では通常
.I /usr/X11R6/lib/X11
にシンボリックリンクが張られている。
.TP
.I /usr/lib/gcc-lib
.\"O contains executables and include files for the GNU C compiler,
.\"O .BR gcc (1).
GNU C コンパイラ
.BR gcc (1)
用の実行形式ファイルとインクルードファイルが含まれている。
.TP
.I /usr/lib/groff
.\"O Files for the GNU groff document formatting system.
GNU groff 文書整形システムのためのファイルが含まれている。
.TP
.I /usr/lib/uucp
.\"O Files for
.\"O .BR uucp (1).
.BR uucp (1)
のためのファイルが含まれている。
.TP
.I /usr/local
.\"O This is where programs which are local to the site typically go.
このディレクトリは、
サイトローカルなプログラムがインストールされる典型的な場所である。
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin
.\"O Binaries for programs local to the site.
サイトローカルなプログラムが含まれている。
.TP
.I /usr/local/doc
.\"O Local documentation.
サイトローカルなドキュメントが含まれている。
.TP
.I /usr/local/etc
.\"O Configuration files associated with locally installed programs.
サイトローカルにインストールされたプログラムの設定ファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/local/games
.\"O Binaries for locally installed games.
サイトローカルにインストールされたゲームのバイナリの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/local/lib
.\"O Files associated with locally installed programs.
サイトローカルにインストールされたプログラムの関連ファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/local/include
.\"O Header files for the local C compiler.
ローカルな C コンパイラのヘッダファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/local/info
.\"O Info pages associated with locally installed programs.
サイトローカルにインストールされたプログラムの info ページの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/local/man
.\"O Man pages associated with locally installed programs.
サイトローカルにインストールされたプログラムのマニュアルページの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/local/sbin
.\"O Locally installed programs for system administration.
サイトローカルにインストールされたシステム管理コマンドの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/local/share
.\"O Local application data that can be shared among different architectures
.\"O of the same OS.
同じ OS ならアーキテクチャが異なっても共有できる、
ローカルなアプリケーションデータの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/local/src
.\"O Source code for locally installed software.
サイトローカルにインストールされたソフトウェアのソースコードの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/man
.\"O Replaced by
.\"O .IR /usr/share/man .
.I /usr/share/man
に置き換えられた。
.TP
.I /usr/sbin
.\"O This directory contains program binaries for system administration
.\"O which are not essential for the boot process, for mounting
.\"O .IR /usr ,
.\"O or for system repair.
このディレクトリには、システム管理コマンドが含まれる。
ここに置かれるコマンドは、ブートプロセスや
.I /usr
のマウント、システムの修理などに必要なものであってはならない。
.TP
.I /usr/share
.\"O This directory contains subdirectories with specific application data, that
.\"O can be shared among different architectures of the same OS.
.\"O Often one finds stuff here that used to live in
.\"O .I /usr/doc
.\"O or
.\"O .I /usr/lib
.\"O or
.\"O .IR /usr/man .
このディレクトリには、アプリケーションごとに固有なデータ
(同じ OS ならアーキテクチャが違っていても共有できるもの)
がサブディレクトリ単位で置かれる。
以前には
.IR /usr/doc ,
.IR /usr/lib ,
.I /usr/man
などにあった内容が、多くここに置かれている。
.TP
.I /usr/share/dict
.\"O Contains the word lists used by spell checkers.
スペルチェッカ用の単語リストが含まれる。
.TP
.I /usr/share/doc
.\"O Documentation about installed programs.
インストールされたプログラムのドキュメントの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/share/games
.\"O Static data files for games in
.\"O .IR /usr/games .
.I /usr/games
に置かれたゲーム用の静的なデータファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/share/info
.\"O Info pages go here.
info ページが置かれる。
.TP
.I /usr/share/locale
.\"O Locale information goes here.
ロケール (locale) 情報が置かれる。
.TP
.I /usr/share/man
.\"O Manual pages go here in subdirectories according to the man page sections.
マニュアルページ。各ページはセクションに応じたサブディレクトリに置かれる。
.TP
.I /usr/share/man/<locale>/man[1\-9]
.\"O These directories contain manual pages for the
.\"O specific locale in source code form.
.\"O Systems which use a unique language and code set for all manual pages
.\"O may omit the <locale> substring.
これらのディレクトリには、
各ロケールのマニュアルページのソースが置かれている。
すべてのマニュアルページで同じ言語とコードセットを使用するシステムでは、
.I <locale>
は省略されることがある。
.TP
.I /usr/share/misc
.\"O Miscellaneous data that can be shared among different architectures of the
.\"O same OS.
同じ OS ならアーキテクチャが違っていても共有できる、雑多なデータの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/share/nls
.\"O The message catalogs for native language support go here.
母国語サポート (native language support) 用のメッセージカタログの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/share/sgml
.\"O Files for SGML and XML.
SGML や XML のファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/share/terminfo
.\"O The database for terminfo.
terminfo のデータベースが置かれる。
.TP
.I /usr/share/tmac
.\"O Troff macros that are not distributed with groff.
groff と一緒には配布されていない troff マクロの置き場所。
.TP
.I /usr/share/zoneinfo
.\"O Files for timezone information.
タイムゾーン情報のファイルが置かれる。
.TP
.I /usr/src
.\"O Source files for different parts of the system, included with some packages
.\"O for reference purposes.
.\"O Don't work here with your own projects, as files
.\"O below /usr should be read-only except when installing software.
システム上の色々なコンポーネントのソースファイル
(参照用のパッケージも含む) の置き場所。
この場所で自分のプロジェクトの作業をしてはいけない。
/usr 以下のファイルはソフトウェアのインストールの時以外は
読み込み専用になっているべきだからである。
.TP
.I /usr/src/linux
.\"O This was the traditional place for the kernel source.
.\"O Some distributions put here the source for the default kernel they ship.
.\"O You should probably use another directory when building your own kernel.
かつてはカーネルソースの伝統的な置き場所だった。
ディストリビューションによっては、
出荷時のデフォルトのカーネルのソースをここに置いている。
自分でカーネルをビルドするときは別の場所を使うほうがいいだろう。
.TP
.I /usr/tmp
.\"O Obsolete.
.\"O This should be a link
.\"O to
.\"O .IR /var/tmp .
.\"O This link is present only for compatibility reasons and shouldn't be used.
今では用いられなくなった。このディレクトリは
.I /var/tmp
へのリンクにすべきである。
このリンクは互換性のためだけにあり、もはや使うべきでない。
.TP
.I /var
.\"O This directory contains files which may change in size, such as spool
.\"O and log files.
このディレクトリには、スプールファイルやログファイルのような、
サイズが変化するファイルが置かれる。
.TP
.I /var/adm
.\"O This directory is superseded by
.\"O .I /var/log
.\"O and should be a symbolic link to
.\"O .IR /var/log .
このディレクトリは
.I /var/log
に置き換えられた。
ここは
.I /var/log
へのシンボリックリンクにすべきである。
.TP
.I /var/backups
.\"O Reserved for historical reasons.
歴史的な理由からまだ残っている。
.TP
.I /var/cache
.\"O Data cached for programs.
プログラムのためにキャッシュされたデータの置き場所。
.TP
.IR /var/catman/cat[1\-9] " or " /var/cache/man/cat[1\-9]
.\"O These directories contain preformatted manual pages according to their
.\"O man page section.
.\"O (The use of preformatted manual pages is deprecated.)
これらのディレクトリには、整形済みのマニュアルページが、
ページのセクションに従って置かれている。
(整形済みマニュアルページの利用は推奨されていない。)
.TP
.I /var/cron
.\"O Reserved for historical reasons.
歴史的な理由からまだ残っている。
.TP
.I /var/lib
.\"O Variable state information for programs.
プログラムの状態に関する情報のうち、可変なものの置き場所。
.TP
.I /var/local
.\"O Variable data for
.\"O .IR /usr/local .
.I /usr/local
用の可変データの置き場所。
.TP
.I /var/lock
.\"O Lock files are placed in this directory.
.\"O The naming convention for
.\"O device lock files is
.\"O .I LCK..<device>
.\"O where
.\"O .I <device>
.\"O is the device's name in the file system.
.\"O The format used is that of HDU UUCP lock files, that is, lock files
.\"O contain a PID as a 10-byte ASCII decimal number, followed by a newline
.\"O character.
ロックファイルの置き場所。
デバイスのロックファイルの命名は、慣習として
.I LCK..<device>
とされている。ここで
.I <device>
はファイルシステム上でのデバイス名である。
利用されているフォーマットは
HDU UUCP のロックファイルのものである。
すなわち各ロックファイルには
アスキー 10 進数値文字で表記した PID 10 バイトと、
それに続いて改行文字とが含まれている。
.TP
.I /var/log
.\"O Miscellaneous log files.
種々のログファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /var/opt
.\"O Variable data for
.\"O .IR /opt .
.I /opt
用の可変データの置き場所。
.TP
.I /var/mail
.\"O Users' mailboxes.
.\"O Replaces
.\"O .IR /var/spool/mail .
ユーザのメールボックスの置き場所。
.I /var/spool/mail
を置き換えた。
.TP
.I /var/msgs
.\"O Reserved for historical reasons.
歴史的な理由からまだ残っている。
.TP
.I /var/preserve
.\"O Reserved for historical reasons.
歴史的な理由からまだ残っている。
.TP
.I /var/run
.\"O Run-time variable files, like files holding process identifiers (PIDs)
.\"O and logged user information
.\"O .IR (utmp) .
.\"O Files in this directory are usually cleared when the system boots.
実行時の可変ファイルが置かれる。
例えばプロセス識別子 (PID) を保持するファイルや、
ユーザのログイン情報ファイル
.I (utmp)
などである。
ここのファイルは、通常システム起動時に削除される。
.TP
.I /var/spool
.\"O Spooled (or queued) files for various programs.
色々なプログラムのスプールファイル (あるいはキューファイル) の置き場所。
.TP
.I /var/spool/at
.\"O Spooled jobs for
.\"O .BR at (1).
.BR at (1)
のジョブスプール。
.TP
.I /var/spool/cron
.\"O Spooled jobs for
.\"O .BR cron (8).
.BR cron (8)
のジョブスプール。
.TP
.I /var/spool/lpd
.\"O Spooled files for printing.
印刷用のスプールファイルが置かれる。
.TP
.I /var/spool/mail
.\"O Replaced by
.\"O .IR /var/mail .
.I /var/mail
に置き換えられた。
.TP
.I /var/spool/mqueue
.\"O Queued outgoing mail.
キューイングされた送信メールの置き場所。
.TP
.I /var/spool/news
.\"O Spool directory for news.
ニュースのスプールディレクトリ。
.TP
.I /var/spool/rwho
.\"O Spooled files for
.\"O .BR rwhod (8).
.BR rwhod (8)
のスプールファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /var/spool/smail
.\"O Spooled files for the
.\"O .BR smail (1)
.\"O mail delivery program.
メール配送プログラム
.BR smail (1)
のスプールファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /var/spool/uucp
.\"O Spooled files for
.\"O .BR uucp (1).
.BR uucp (1)
のスプールファイルの置き場所。
.TP
.I /var/tmp
.\"O Like
.\"O .IR /tmp ,
.\"O this directory holds temporary files stored for an unspecified duration.
.I /tmp
と似ているが、
このディレクトリに置かれる一時的なファイルは保存期間の制限がない。
.TP
.I /var/yp
.\"O Database files for NIS.
NIS のデータベースファイルの置き場所。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard, Version 2.2 <http://www.pathname.com/fhs/>.
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O This list is not exhaustive; different systems may be configured
.\"O differently.
このリストは網羅的なものではない。
個々のシステムでは異なる部分があるかもしれない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR find (1),
.BR ln (1),
.BR proc (5),
.BR mount (8)

The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard
