.\" This man page is Copyright (C) 1999 Andi Kleen <ak@muc.de>.
.\" Permission is granted to distribute possibly modified copies
.\" of this page provided the header is included verbatim,
.\" and in case of nontrivial modification author and date
.\" of the modification is added to the header.
.\" $Id: icmp.7,v 1.8 2001/01/14 05:30:41 hanataka Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1999-12-06, NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-12-26, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.14
.\"
.\"WORD		destination route	行き先経路
.\"WORD		token packet filter	トークン・パケット・フィルタ
.\"
.TH ICMP 7 2010-02-25 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O icmp, IPPROTO_ICMP \- Linux IPv4 ICMP kernel module.
.SH 名前
icmp, IPPROTO_ICMP \- Linux IPv4 ICMP カーネルモジュール
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This kernel protocol module implements the Internet Control
.\"O Message Protocol defined in RFC\ 792.
.\"O It is used to signal error conditions and for diagnosis.
.\"O The user doesn't interact directly with this module;
.\"O instead it communicates with the other protocols in the kernel
.\"O and these pass the ICMP errors to the application layers.
.\"O The kernel ICMP module also answers ICMP requests.
このカーネルモジュールは RFC\ 792 で定義されている Internet
Control Message Protocol を実装したものである。
このプロトコルはエラー状況を知らせたり診断を行うために用いられる。
ユーザーはこのモジュールとは直接には通信できない。
このモジュールはカーネルの他のプロトコルと通信し、
それらのプロトコルが ICMP エラーをアプリケーションレイヤに渡す。
カーネルの ICMP モジュールは ICMP リクエストに対する応答も行う。
.PP
.\"O A user protocol may receive ICMP packets for all local sockets by opening
.\"O a raw socket with the protocol
.\"O .BR IPPROTO_ICMP .
.\"O See
.\"O .BR raw (7)
.\"O for more information.
.\"O The types of ICMP packets passed to the socket can be filtered using the
.\"O .B ICMP_FILTER
.\"O socket option.
.\"O ICMP packets are always processed by the kernel too, even
.\"O when passed to a user socket.
raw ソケットをプロトコル
.B IPPROTO_ICMP
でオープンすれば、
ユーザープロトコルはローカルなソケット全てに対する
ICMP パケットを受信することができる。
詳細は
.BR raw (7)
を参照のこと。
ソケットに渡される ICMP パケットのタイプは
.B ICMP_FILTER
オプションによってフィルターできる。
ICMP パケットは (たとえユーザーソケットに渡される場合でも)、
常にカーネルによって (も) 処理される。
.LP
.\"O Linux limits the rate of ICMP error packets to each destination.
.\"O .B ICMP_REDIRECT
.\"O and
.\"O .B ICMP_DEST_UNREACH
.\"O are also limited by the destination route of the incoming packets.
Linux では ICMP エラーパケットのレートをそれぞれの送り先に対して
制限している。
.B ICMP_REDIRECT
と
.B ICMP_DEST_UNREACH
も到着したパケットの行き先経路 (destination route) を制限する。
.\"O .SS /proc interfaces
.SS /proc インタフェース
.\"O ICMP supports a set of
.\"O .I /proc
.\"O interfaces to configure some global IP parameters.
.\"O The parameters can be accessed by reading or writing files in the directory
.\"O .IR /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ .
.\"O Most of these parameters are rate limitations for specific ICMP types.
.\"O Linux 2.2 uses a token bucket filter to limit ICMPs.
.\"O .\" FIXME better description needed
.\"O The value is the timeout in seconds until the token bucket filter is
.\"O cleared after a burst.
.\"O A jiffy is a system dependent unit, usually 10ms on i386 and
.\"O about 1ms on alpha and ia64.
ICMP では、いくつかのグローバルパラメータを設定するための
.I /proc
ファイル群が用意されている。
これらのパラメータには、
.I /proc/sys/net/ipv4/
ディレクトリ内のファイルの読み書きでアクセスできる。
これらのパラメータのほとんどは特定の ICMP タイプに対するレート制限
(rate limitation) である。
Linux 2.2 は ICMP の制限にトークン・バケット・フィルタ
(token bucket filter) を用いる。
.\" FIXME better description needed
それぞれの値は、バーストの後にトークン・バケット・フィルタがクリア
されるまでのタイムアウトを秒単位で表したものである。最小単位(jiffy)は
システム依存の単位で i386 システムは通常 10ms、alpha や ia64 では
1ms である。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_destunreach_rate " (Linux 2.2 to 2.4.9)"
.IR icmp_destunreach_rate " (Linux 2.2 から 2.4.9 まで)"
.\" Precisely: from 2.1.102
.\"O Maximum rate to send ICMP Destination Unreachable packets.
.\"O This limits the rate at which packets are sent to any individual
.\"O route or destination.
.\"O The limit does not affect sending of
.\"O .B ICMP_FRAG_NEEDED
.\"O packets needed for path MTU discovery.
ICMP 不達パケット (Destination Unreachable packet) を送る最大レート。
これは特定のルートまたは行き先にパケットを送信するレートを制限する。
この制限は、
path MTU discovery に必要な
.B ICMP_FRAG_NEEDED
パケットの送信には影響しない。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_echo_ignore_all " (since Linux 2.2)"
.IR icmp_echo_ignore_all " (Linux 2.2 以降)"
.\" Precisely: 2.1.68
.\"O If this value is nonzero, Linux will ignore all
.\"O .B ICMP_ECHO
.\"O requests.
この値が非ゼロの場合は、 Linux はすべての
.B ICMP_ECHO
要求を無視する。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_echo_ignore_broadcasts " (since Linux 2.2)"
.IR icmp_echo_ignore_broadcasts " (Linux 2.2 以降)"
.\" Precisely: from 2.1.68
.\"O If this value is nonzero, Linux will ignore all
.\"O .B ICMP_ECHO
.\"O packets sent to broadcast addresses.
この値が非ゼロの場合は、 Linux はブロードキャストアドレスに送られたすべての
.B ICMP_ECHO
要求を無視する。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_echoreply_rate " (Linux 2.2 to 2.4.9)"
.IR icmp_echoreply_rate " (Linux 2.2 から 2.4.9 まで)"
.\" Precisely: from 2.1.102
.\"O Maximum rate for sending
.\"O .B ICMP_ECHOREPLY
.\"O packets in response to
.\"O .B ICMP_ECHOREQUEST
.\"O packets.
.B ICMP_ECHOREQUEST
パケットに応答する
.B ICMP_ECHOREPLY
パケットの最大送信レート。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_errors_use_inbound_ifaddr " (Boolean; default: disabled; since Linux 2.6.12)"
.IR icmp_errors_use_inbound_ifaddr " (Boolean; default: disabled; Linux 2.6.12 以降)"
.\" The following taken from 2.6.28-rc4 Documentation/networking/ip-sysctl.txt
.\"O If disabled, ICMP error messages are sent with the primary address of
.\"O the exiting interface.
これを無効にすると、ICMP エラーメッセージは、
出力インタフェースのプライマリアドレスで送信される。

.\"O If enabled, the message will be sent with the primary address of
.\"O the interface that received the packet that caused the ICMP error.
.\"O This is the behavior that many network administrators will expect from
.\"O a router.
.\"O And it can make debugging complicated network layouts much easier.
これを有効にすると、エラーメッセージは ICMP エラーの原因となったパケットを
受信したインタフェースのプライマアドレスで送信される。
この動作は、多くのネットワーク管理者がルータに対して期待しているものであり、
これにより複雑なネットワークレイアウトのデバッグがより容易になる。

.\"O Note that if no primary address exists for the interface selected,
.\"O then the primary address of the first non-loopback interface that
.\"O has one will be used regardless of this setting.
選択されたインタフェースでプライマリアドレスが存在しない場合は、
この設定に関わらず、最初のループバック以外のインタフェースで、
プライマリアドレスを持つインタフェースのプライマリアドレスが使用される点に
注意すること。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_ignore_bogus_error_responses " (Boolean; default: disabled; since Linux 2.2)"
.IR icmp_ignore_bogus_error_responses " (Boolean; default: disabled; Linux 2.2 以降)"
.\" precisely: since 2.1.32
.\" The following taken from 2.6.28-rc4 Documentation/networking/ip-sysctl.txt
.\"O Some routers violate RFC1122 by sending bogus responses to broadcast frames.
.\"O Such violations are normally logged via a kernel warning.
.\"O If this parameter is enabled, the kernel will not give such warnings,
.\"O which will avoid log file clutter.
ルータの中には、RFC1122 に違反し、ブロードキャストフレームに対して
偽の応答を送信するものがある。
このような違反は通常カーネルの警告としてログに記録される。
このパラメータを有効にすると、カーネルはこのような警告を出さなくなり、
ログファイルに雑音のような情報が記録されるのを避けることができる。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_paramprob_rate " (Linux 2.2 to 2.4.9)"
.IR icmp_paramprob_rate " (Linux 2.2 から 2.4.9 まで)"
.\" Precisely: from 2.1.102
.\"O Maximum rate for sending
.\"O .B ICMP_PARAMETERPROB
.\"O packets.
.\"O These packets are sent when a packet arrives with an invalid IP header.
.B ICMP_PARAMETERPROB
パケットの最大送信レート。
これらのパケットは不正な IP ヘッダを持つパケットが到着した場合に
送信される。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_ratelimit " (integer; default: 1000; since Linux 2.4.10)"
.IR icmp_ratelimit " (integer; default: 1000; Linux 2.4.10 以降)"
.\" The following taken from 2.6.28-rc4 Documentation/networking/ip-sysctl.txt
.\"O Limit the maximum rates for sending ICMP packets whose type matches
.\"O .IR icmp_ratemask
.\"O (see below) to specific targets.
.\"O 0 to disable any limiting,
.\"O otherwise the minimum space between responses in milliseconds.
種別が
.I icmp_ratemask
(下記参照) にマッチした ICMP パケットの、
特定の送信先への送信レートの最大値を制限する。
0 はレート制限を無効にすることを、
0 以外の値は応答間の最小間隔 (ミリ秒単位) を示す。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_ratemask " (integer; default: see below; since Linux 2.4.10)"
.IR icmp_ratemask " (integer; default: 下記参照; Linux 2.4.10 以降)"
.\" The following taken from 2.6.28-rc4 Documentation/networking/ip-sysctl.txt
.\"O Mask made of ICMP types for which rates are being limited.
レート制限を行う ICMP タイプを決めるマスク。

.\"O Significant bits: IHGFEDCBA9876543210
.\"O .br
.\"O Default mask:     0000001100000011000 (0x1818)
有効ビット:       IHGFEDCBA9876543210
.br
デフォルトマスク: 0000001100000011000 (0x1818)

.\"O Bit definitions (see the kernel source file
.\"O .IR include/linux/icmp.h ):
ビット定義 (カーネルソースファイル
.I include/linux/icmp.h
を参照):

.in +4n
.nf
0 Echo Reply
3 Destination Unreachable *
4 Source Quench *
5 Redirect
8 Echo Request
B Time Exceeded *
C Parameter Problem *
D Timestamp Request
E Timestamp Reply
F Info Request
G Info Reply
H Address Mask Request
I Address Mask Reply
.fi
.in

.\"O The bits marked with an asterisk are rate limited by default
.\"O (see the default mask above).
アスタリスク印が付いたビットは、デフォルトでレート制限が有効に
なっている (上記のマスクのデフォルトも参照)。
.TP
.\"O .IR icmp_timeexceed_rate " (Linux 2.2 to 2.4.9)"
.IR icmp_timeexceed_rate " (Linux 2.2 から 2.4.9 まで)"
.\"O Maximum rate for sending
.\"O .B ICMP_TIME_EXCEEDED
.\"O packets.
.\"O These packets are
.\"O sent to prevent loops when a packet has crossed too many hops.
.B ICMP_TIME_EXCEEDED
パケットの最大送信レート。
これらのパケットはパケットがあまりに多くの hop を通過した場合に、
ループを防ぐために送られる。
.\"O .SH VERSIONS
.SH バージョン
.\"O Support for the
.\"O .B ICMP_ADDRESS
.\"O request was removed in 2.2.
.B ICMP_ADDRESS
要求に対するサポートは 2.2 で削除された。
.PP
.\"O Support for
.\"O .B ICMP_SOURCE_QUENCH
.\"O was removed in Linux 2.2.
.B ICMP_SOURCE_QUENCH
は Linux 2.2 で削除された。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O As many other implementations don't support
.\"O .B IPPROTO_ICMP
.\"O raw sockets, this feature
.\"O should not be relied on in portable programs.
他の多くの実装では、
.B IPPROTO_ICMP
raw ソケットがサポートされていない。
この機能は移植性が必要なプログラムでは用いるべきでない。
.\" not really true ATM
.\" .PP
.\" Linux ICMP should be compliant to RFC 1122.
.PP
.\"O .B ICMP_REDIRECT
.\"O packets are not sent when Linux is not acting as a router.
.\"O They are also only accepted from the old gateway defined in the
.\"O routing table and the redirect routes are expired after some time.
Linux がルーターとして動作していないときには、
.B ICMP_REDIRECT
パケットは送信されない。
またこれらが受け取られるのも、発信元がルーティングテーブルに定義されている
古いゲートウェイで、リダイレクト・ルート (redirect route) が
適当な時間の後に期限切れになっている場合に限られる。
.PP
.\"O The 64-bit timestamp returned by
.\"O .B ICMP_TIMESTAMP
.\"O is in milliseconds since the Epoch, 1970-01-01 00:00:00 +0000 (UTC).
.B ICMP_TIMESTAMP
から返される 64 ビットのタイムスタンプは、
紀元 (Epoch) である 1970-01-01 00:00:00 +0000 (UTC)
からの経過時間をミリ秒単位で表したものである。
.PP
.\"O Linux ICMP internally uses a raw socket to send ICMPs.
.\"O This raw socket may appear in
.\"O .BR netstat (8)
.\"O output with a zero inode.
Linux ICMP は ICMP を送るために内部で raw ソケットを用いる。
raw ソケットは
.BR netstat (8)
の出力に 0 inode として出力される。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR ip (7)
.PP
.\"O RFC\ 792 for a description of the ICMP protocol.
.BR RFC\ 792 :
ICMP プロトコルの説明
