.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt
.\" (michael@moria.de), Fri Apr 2 11:32:09 MET DST
.\" 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de) 24 Apr 1993
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:28:08 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1999-11-27, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-12-05, Akihiro MOTOKI, Catch up to LDP man-pages 2.16
.\"
.TH INTRO 7  2007-10-23 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
.\"O intro \- Introduction to overview, conventions, and miscellany section
intro \- 概要、慣習やその他の説明
.SH 説明
.\"O Section 7 of the manual provides overviews on various topics, and
.\"O describes conventions and protocols,
.\"O character set standards, the standard file system layout,
.\"O and miscellaneous other things.
マニュアルの 7 章には様々な事柄の概要が書かれている。
習慣、プロトコル、文字集合の規格、ファイルシステムの構成、
その他の雑多なことについて説明している。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 備考
.\"O .SS Authors and Copyright Conditions
.SS 著者と著作権
.\"O Look at the header of the manual page source for the author(s) and copyright
.\"O conditions.
.\"O Note that these can be different from page to page!
著者と著作権(copyright)に関しては各マニュアル・ページのソースのヘッダを見ること。
これらはページごとに異っている。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR standards (7)
