.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1987 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted
.\" provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
.\" duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation,
.\" advertising materials, and other materials related to such
.\" distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed
.\" by the University of California, Berkeley.  The name of the
.\" University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\" from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)mailaddr.7	6.5 (Berkeley) 2/14/89
.\"
.\" Extensively rewritten by Arnt Gulbrandsen <agulbra@troll.no>.  My
.\" changes are placed under the same copyright as the original BSD page.
.\"
.\" Adjusted by Arnt Gulbrandsen <arnt@gulbrandsen.priv.no> in 2004 to
.\" account for changes since 1995. Route-addrs are now even less
.\" common, etc. Some minor wording improvements. Same copyright.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 HANATAKA Shinya
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-06-03, HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Modified 2005-02-21, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\"
.TH MAILADDR 7 2004-09-15 "Linux" "Linux User's Manual"
.UC 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mailaddr \- mail addressing description
mailaddr \- メール・アドレスの説明
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.nh
.\"O This manual page gives a brief introduction to SMTP mail addresses, as
.\"O used on the Internet.
.\"O These addresses are in the general format
.\"O .PP
.\"O 	user@domain
.\"O .PP
.\"O where a domain is a hierarchical dot-separated list of subdomains.
.\"O These examples are valid forms of the same address:
このマニュアル・ページでは、インターネットで使用される SMTP メール・
アドレスの簡単な紹介を行う。メール・アドレスは一般的には
.PP
	user@domain
.PP
の形である。
domain はサブ・ドメインの階層を ドット (.) で
区切ってつないだものである。
以下の例は全て同じアドレスの正しい表記法である:
.PP
	eric@monet.berkeley.edu
.br
	Eric Allman <eric@monet.berkeley.edu>
.br
	eric@monet.berkeley.edu (Eric Allman)
.PP
.\"O The domain part ("monet.berkeley.edu") is a mail-accepting domain.
.\"O It can be a host and in the past it usually was, but it doesn't have to be.
.\"O  The domain part is not case sensitive.
ドメイン部分 ("monet.berkeley.edu") はメールを受信するドメインである。
ドメインはホスト名であってもよく、以前はホスト名が普通であったが、
そうである必要はない。ドメイン部分は大文字、小文字の区別はされない。
.PP
.\"O The local part ("eric") is often a username, but its meaning is
.\"O defined by the local software.
.\"O Sometimes it is case sensitive,
.\"O although that is unusual.
.\"O If you see a local-part that looks like
.\"O garbage, it is usually because of a gateway between an internal e-mail
.\"O system and the net, here are some examples:
ローカル部分 ("eric") は普通はユーザーの名前であるが、
その意味はローカルなソフトウェアによって定義される。
大文字、小文字を区別してもよいが、普通は区別されない。
ローカル部分がゴミのように見える場合は、それはたいて内部的な電子メール
システムとインターネットの間にあるゲートウェイのせいである。
例えば、以下のようなものがある。
.PP
	"surname/admd=telemail/c=us/o=hp/prmd=hp"@some.where
.br
	USER%SOMETHING@some.where
.br
	machine!machine!name@some.where
.br
	I2461572@some.where
.PP
.\"O (These are, respectively, an X.400 gateway, a gateway to an arbitrary
.\"O internal mail system that lacks proper internet support, an UUCP
.\"O gateway, and the last one is just boring username policy.)
(それぞれ、X.400 ゲートウェイ、
正しいインターネットサポートを欠いた勝手な内部メールシステム、
UUCP ゲートウェイでの例である。
最後のは単に間抜けなユーザー名である。)
.PP
.\"O The real-name part ("Eric Allman") can either be placed before
.\"O <>, or in () at the end.
.\"O (Strictly speaking the two aren't the same,
.\"O but the difference is beyond the scope of this page.)
.\"O The name may have to be quoted using "", for example, if it contains ".":
実名部分 ("Eric Allman") は <> の前に置くこともできるし、
()に入れて最後に置くこともできる。(厳密に言うと、二つは全く同じ
わけではないが、その違いはこのページの目的から外れるので言及しない。)
例えば "." などの文字を含む場合には名前を "" で括る必要がある:
.PP
	"Eric P. Allman" <eric@monet.berkeley.edu>
.\"O .SS Abbreviation.
.SS 省略形
.PP
.\"O Many mail systems let users abbreviate the domain name.
.\"O For instance,
.\"O users at berkeley.edu may get away with "eric@monet" to send mail to
.\"O Eric Allman.
.\"O .I "This behavior is deprecated."
.\"O Sometimes it works, but you should not depend on it.
多くのメール・システムがドメイン名の省略形を許している。
例えば berkeley.edu のユーザーは Eric Allman にメールを送るために
"eric@monet" が使用できるかもしれない。
『この動作は推奨されるものではない』
正しく動作する場合もあるが、それをあてにすべきではない。
.\"O .SS Route-addrs.
.SS 経路アドレス
.PP
.\"O In the past, sometimes one had to route a message through
.\"O several hosts to get it to its final destination.
.\"O Addresses which
.\"O show these relays are termed "route-addrs".
.\"O These use the syntax:
以前は、メッセージが最終目的地へ到達するために通過するホストを
指定しなければならないことが時々あった。
中継点を指定したアドレスを "経路アドレス (route-addrs)" という。
以下の書式を使用する:
.PP
	<@hosta,@hostb:user@hostc>
.PP
.\"O This specifies that the message should be sent to hosta, from there
.\"O to hostb, and finally to hostc.
.\"O Many hosts disregard route-addrs
.\"O and send directly to hostc.
これは通信文を hosta に送り、そこから hostb に送り、最終的に hostc に
送ることを指定している。多くのホストは経路アドレスを無視して直接 hostc
に送る。
.PP
.\"O Route-addrs are very unusual now.
.\"O They occur sometimes in old mail
.\"O archives.
.\"O It is generally possible to ignore all but the "user@hostc"
.\"O part of the address to determine the actual address.
今では経路アドレスが使われることはほとんどない。
古いメール・アーカイブで時々に目にすることがある。
一般には実際のアドレスを求めるために "user@hostc" 以外の全て部分を無視
することもできる。
.\"O .SS Postmaster.
.SS "ポストマスター (postmaster)"
.PP
.\"O Every site is required to have a user or user alias designated
.\"O "postmaster" to which problems with the mail system may be
.\"O addressed.
.\"O The "postmaster" address is not case sensitive.
全てのサイトは、メール・システムの問題を知らせる宛て先として、
"postmaster" というユーザか別名定義 (alias) を用意しなければ
ならない。 "postmaster" のアドレスは大文字、小文字の区別はされない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/aliases
.br
.I ~/.forward
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR binmail (1),
.BR mail (1),
.BR mconnect (1),
.BR aliases (5),
.BR forward (5),
.BR sendmail (8),
.BR vrfy (8)

RFC\ 2822 (Internet Message Format)
