.\" (C) Copyright 1992-1999 Rickard E. Faith and David A. Wheeler
.\" (faith@cs.unc.edu and dwheeler@ida.org)
.\" and (C) Copyright 2007 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" 2007-05-30 created by mtk, using text from old man.7 plus
.\" rewrites and additional text.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2007  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2007-06-13, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.54
.\" Updated 2007-07-04, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.59
.\" Updated 2007-09-03, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.64
.\" Updated 2008-08-09, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v3.05
.\" 
.TH MAN-PAGES 7 2008-10-28 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O man-pages \- conventions for writing Linux man pages
man-pages \- Linux の man ページを書く際の決まり事
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B man
.RI [ section ]
.I title
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This page describes the conventions that should be employed
.\"O when writing man pages for the Linux \fIman-pages\fP project,
.\"O which comprises Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7 of the Linux manual pages.
.\"O The conventions described on this page may also be useful
.\"O for authors writing man pages for other projects.
このページでは、
Linux \fIman-pages\fP プロジェクトのマニュアルページを書く際に
従うべき決まり事について説明する。
Linux \fIman-pages\fP は Linux のマニュアルページの
セクション 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 から構成されている。
このページで説明されている決まり事は、他のプロジェクトの
マニュアルページを書く作者にも役立つことだろう。
.\"O .SS Sections of the Manual Pages
.SS マニュアルページのセクション
.PP
.\"O The manual Sections are traditionally defined as follows:
マニュアルのセクションは、習慣的に以下のような定義が用いられている:
.TP 10
.\"O .B 1 Commands (Programs)
.\"O Those commands that can be executed by the user from within
.\"O a shell.
.B 1 コマンド (プログラム)
シェルの中からユーザが実行できるコマンド。
.TP
.\"O .B 2 System calls
.\"O Those functions which must be performed by the kernel.
.B 2 システムコール
カーネルが処理しなければならない関数。
.TP
.\"O .B 3 Library calls
.\"O Most of the
.\"O .I libc
.\"O functions.
.B 3 ライブラリコール
.I libc
の関数の大部分。
.TP
.\"O .B 4 Special files (devices)
.\"O Files found in
.\"O .IR /dev .
.B 4 スペシャルファイル (デバイス)
.I /dev
以下にあるファイル。
.TP
.\"O .B 5 File formats and conventions
.\"O The format for
.\"O .I /etc/passwd
.\"O and other human-readable files.
.B 5 ファイルのフォーマットと規約
.I /etc/passwd
などの人が読めるファイルのフォーマット。
.TP
.\"O .B 6 Games
.B 6 ゲーム
.TP
.\"O .B 7 Conventions and miscellaneous
.\"O Overviews of various topics, conventions and protocols,
.\"O character set standards, and miscellaneous other things.
.B 7 約束事その他
様々な事柄の概要、慣習、プロトコル、文字集合の規格、その他雑多なこと。
.TP
.\"O .B 8 System management commands
.\"O Commands like
.\"O .BR mount (8),
.\"O many of which only root can execute.
.B 8 システム管理コマンド
.BR mount (8)
のような root のみが実行可能なコマンド。
.\" .TP
.\"O .\" .B 9 Kernel routines
.\"O .\" This is an obsolete manual section.
.\"O .\" Once it was thought a good idea to document the Linux kernel here,
.\"O .\" but in fact very little has been documented, and the documentation
.\"O .\" that exists is outdated already.
.\"O .\" There are better sources of
.\"O .\" information for kernel developers.
.\" .B 9 カーネルルーチン
.\" このマニュアルセクションは廃止された。
.\" かつてはここに Linux カーネルのドキュメントを置くのが良いことだと
.\" 考えられていた。しかし、文書化されたものは非常に少なく、
.\" またそれらもすでに古いものとなってしまった。
.\" カーネル開発者にとって、もっとよい情報源が他にあるだろう。
.\"O .SS Macro package
.SS マクロパッケージ
.\"O New manual pages should be marked up using the
.\"O .B groff an.tmac
.\"O package described in
.\"O .BR man (7).
.\"O This choice is mainly for consistency: the vast majority of
.\"O existing Linux manual pages are marked up using these macros.
新しいマニュアルページは
.BR man (7)
で説明されている
.B groff an.tmac
パッケージを使って記述すべきである。
この方針は一貫性の確保が主な理由である。既存の Linux のマニュアルページ
の圧倒的多数がこれらのマクロを使って記述されている。
.\"O .SS Conventions for source file layout
.SS ソースファイルの配置に関する決まり事
.\"O Please limit source code line length to no more than about 75 characters
.\"O wherever possible.
.\"O This helps avoid line-wrapping in some mail clients when patches are
.\"O submitted inline.
マニュアルページのソースコードの 1行の長さは
可能な限り 75文字を越えないようにしてほしい。
こうすることで、パッチをメール本文に載せて送る場合に、
メールクライアントによる行折り返しを回避することができる。

.\"O New sentences should be started on new lines.
.\"O This makes it easier to see the effect of patches,
.\"O which often operate at the level of individual sentences.
新しい文は行頭から開始する。
これにより、パッチの内容を確認しやすくなる。
パッチは文単位であることが多いからである。
.\"O .SS Title line
.SS タイトル行
.\"O The first command in a man page should be a \fBTH\fP command:
man ページの最初の行は \fBTH\fP コマンドにすべきである。
.RS
.sp
.B \&.TH
.I "title section date source manual"
.sp
.RE
.\"O where:
個々の説明:
.RS
.TP 10
.I title
.\"O The title of the man page, written in all caps (e.g.,
.\"O .IR MAN-PAGES ).
man ページのタイトル。全部大文字で記載する (例:
.IR MAN-PAGES )。
.TP
.I section
.\"O The section number in which the man page should be placed (e.g.,
.\"O .IR 7 ).
man ページが属するセクション番号 (例:
.IR 7 )。
.TP
.I date
.\"O The date of the last revision\(emremember to change this every time a
.\"O change is made to the man page,
.\"O since this is the most general way of doing version control.
.\"O Dates should be written in the form YYYY-MM-DD.
最新のリビジョンの日付\(emman ページに変更を加えたときには
必ずこれを変更すること。
これが最も一般的なバージョン管理方法である。
日付は YYYY-MM-DD の形式で記載すべきである。
.TP
.I source
.\"O The source of the command, function, or system call.
コマンド、関数、システムコールの出自。

.\"O For those few \fIman-pages\fP pages in Sections 1 and 8,
.\"O probably you just want to write
.\"O .IR GNU .
数少ないセクション 1 と 8 のページの場合、おそらく単に
.I GNU
とだけ書くことが多いだろう。

.\"O For system calls, just write
.\"O .IR "Linux" .
.\"O (An earlier practice was to write the version number
.\"O of the kernel from which the manual page was being written/checked.
.\"O However, this was never done consistently, and so was
.\"O probably worse than including no version number.
.\"O Henceforth, avoid including a version number.)
システムコールの場合、単に
.I "Linux"
とだけ書く。
(以前の慣習では、マニュアルページを記載した/内容を確認したカーネルの
バージョン番号を記載していた。しかし、バージョン番号が実際の内容と
一致していることはなく、そのためバージョン番号がないよりも
おそらく悪い形になっていた。
今後は、バージョン番号を含めるのは避けること。)

.\"O For library calls that are part of glibc or one of the
.\"O other common GNU libraries, just use
.\"O .IR "GNU C Library" ", " GNU ,
.\"O or an empty string.
glibc のライブラリコールや
その他の一般的な GNU ライブラリのライブラリコールの場合、
単に
.IR "GNU C Library" ", " GNU
と書くか、空の文字列を使う。

.\"O For Section 4 pages, use
.\"O .IR "Linux" .
セクション 4 のページでは
.I "Linux"
を使う。

.\"O In cases of doubt, just write
.\"O .IR Linux ", or " GNU .
よくわからない場合は、
.I Linux
とか
.I GNU
と書いておく。
.TP
.I manual
.\"O The title of the manual (e.g., for Section 2 and 3 pages in
.\"O the \fIman-pages\fP package, use
.\"O .IR "Linux Programmer's Manual" ).
マニュアルのタイトル (例:
\fIman-pages\fP パッケージのセクション 2 および 3 のページの場合には、
.I "Linux Programmer's Manual"
を使うこと)。
.RE
.\"O .SS Sections within a manual page
.SS マニュアルページのセクション
.\"O The list below shows conventional or suggested sections.
.\"O Most manual pages should include at least the
.\"O .B highlighted
.\"O sections.
.\"O Arrange a new manual page so that sections
.\"O are placed in the order shown in the list.
昔から使われてきたセクション名を以下のリストに示す。
これらを使うと良いだろう。
一般的に、マニュアルページは、少なくとも
.B 色つき
のセクションを持つのが望ましい。
新しくマニュアルページを作成する際には、だいたい以下のリストに示した
順序でセクションを配置するようにしてもらいたい。
.in +0.5i
.nf

.\"O \fBNAME\fP
\fB名前\fP
.\"O \fBSYNOPSIS\fP
\fB書式\fP
.\"O CONFIGURATION      [Normally only in Section 4]
設定               [通常はセクション 4 のみ]
.\"O \fBDESCRIPTION\fP
\fB説明\fP
.\"O OPTIONS            [Normally only in Sections 1, 8]
オプション         [通常はセクション 1, 8 のみ]
.\"O EXIT STATUS        [Normally only in Sections 1, 8]
終了ステータス     [通常はセクション 1, 8 のみ]
.\"O RETURN VALUE       [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
返り値             [通常はセクション 2, 3 のみ]
.\" May 07: Few current man pages have an ERROR HANDLING section,,,
.\"O .\" ERROR HANDLING,
.\" エラー処理
.\"O ERRORS             [Typically only in Sections 2, 3]
エラー             [たいていはセクション 2, 3 のみ]
.\" May 07: Almost no current man pages have a USAGE section,,,
.\"O .\" USAGE,
.\" 利用法
.\"O .\" DIAGNOSTICS,
.\" 診断メッセージ
.\" May 07: Almost no current man pages have a SECURITY section,,,
.\"O .\" SECURITY,
.\" セキュリティ
.\"O ENVIRONMENT
環境変数
.\"O FILES
ファイル
.\"O VERSIONS           [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
バージョン         [通常はセクション 2, 3 のみ]
.\"O CONFORMING TO
準拠
.\"O NOTES
注意/備考
.\"O BUGS
バグ
.\"O EXAMPLE
例
.\"O .\" AUTHORS sections are discouraged
.\"O .\" AUTHORS             [Discouraged]
.\" 著者 セクションは非推奨である
.\" 著者
.\"O \fBSEE ALSO\fP
\fB関連項目\fP

.fi
.in
.\"O .IR "Where a traditional heading would apply" ", " "please use it" ;
.\"O this kind of consistency can make the information easier to understand.
.\"O If you must, you can create your own
.\"O headings if they make things easier to understand (this can
.\"O be especially useful for pages in Sections 4 and 5).
.\"O However, before doing this, consider whether you could use the
.\"O traditional headings, with some subsections (\fI.SS\fP) within
.\"O those sections.
「伝統的に使われてきた見出しが使える場合には、それを使ってほしい。」
この種の一貫性を保つことで、情報を理解しやすくなるからである。
どうしても必要な場合には、理解しやすくなるように独自の見出しを
作ってもよい (特にセクション 4 や 5 のページではこうした方が
わかりやすくなる)。ただし、そうする前に、伝統的な見出しを使い、
そのセクション内にサブセクション (\fI.SS\fP) を設けることで
対応できないか考えてほしい。

.\"O The following list elaborates on the contents of each of
.\"O the above sections.
以下のリストでは、上記のセクションのそれぞれの内容について
詳しく説明する。
.TP 14
.\"O .B NAME
.B 名前 (NAME)
.\"O The name of this manual page.
.\"O See
.\"O .BR man (7)
.\"O for important details of the line(s) that should follow the
.\"O \fB.SH NAME\fP command.
そのマニュアルページの名前。
\fB.SH NAME\fP コマンドの行が従うべき大事な点については
.BR man (7)
を参照してほしい。
.TP
.\"O .B SYNOPSIS
.B 書式 (SYNOPSIS)
.\"O briefly describes the command or function's interface.
.\"O For commands, this shows the syntax of the command and its arguments
.\"O (including options);
.\"O boldface is used for as-is text and italics are used to
.\"O indicate replaceable arguments.
.\"O Brackets ([]) surround optional arguments, vertical bars (|)
.\"O separate choices, and ellipses (\&...) can be repeated.
.\"O For functions, it shows any required data declarations or
.\"O .B #include
.\"O directives, followed by the function declaration.
コマンドや関数のインターフェースを簡潔に記述する。
コマンドに対しては、コマンドや引き数 (オプション) の文法を書く。
そのまま書くテキストにはボールド体を用い、置き換える引き数には
イタリック体を用いる。省略可能なオプションはブラケット ([]) で囲い、
選択肢は縦棒 (|) で区切り、繰り返しには省略符号 (...) を書く。
関数に対しては、必要なデータ宣言や
.B #include
指定を書き、関数宣言を続ける。

.\"O Where a feature test macro must be defined in order to obtain
.\"O the declaration of a function (or a variable) from a header file,
.\"O then the SYNOPSIS should indicate this, as described in
.\"O .BR feature_test_macros (7).
ヘッダファイルから関数 (や変数) の定義を得るために
機能検査マクロ (feature test macro) を定義しなければならない場合、
書式 (SYNOPSIS) に必要な機能検査マクロを記載すべきである。
機能検査マクロについては
.BR feature_test_macros (7)
で説明されている。
.\" FIXME . Say something here about compiler options
.TP
.B CONFIGURATION
.\"O Configuration details for a device.
.\"O This section normally only appears in Section 4 pages.
デバイスの設定詳細。
通常、このセクションは 4 章のマニュアルページでのみ登場する。
.TP
.\"O .B DESCRIPTION
.B 説明 (DESCRIPTION)
.\"O gives an explanation of what the program, function, or format does.
.\"O Discuss how it interacts with files and standard input, and what it
.\"O produces on standard output or standard error.
.\"O Omit internals and implementation details unless they're critical for
.\"O understanding the interface.
.\"O Describe the usual case;
.\"O for information on command-line options of a program use the
.\"O .B OPTIONS
.\"O section.
プログラム・関数・フォーマットの動作・目的を説明する。
ファイルや標準入力をどのように処理し、標準出力や標準エラー出力を
どのように生成するかといったことについて述べる。
内部動作や実装の詳細については省略する
(ただしそれが動作の理解にどうしても必要なら別)。
通常の場合について記述する。
プログラムのコマンドライン・オプションの説明には、
.B オプション
のセクションを用いる。
.\"O .\" If there is some kind of input grammar or complex set of subcommands,
.\"O .\" consider describing them in a separate
.\"O .\" .B USAGE
.\"O .\" section (and just place an overview in the
.\"O .\" .B DESCRIPTION
.\"O .\" section).
.\" 入力にある種の文法があったり、複雑なサブコマンドがある場合は、
.\" それらは
.\" .B 利用法
.\" のセクションに分離することを考えるとよい
.\" .RB ( 説明
.\" のセクションには概要だけを置くようにする)。
.TP
.\"O .B OPTIONS
.B オプション (OPTIONS)
.\"O describes the command-line options accepted by a
.\"O program and how they change its behavior.
.\"O This section should only appear for Section 1 and 8 manual pages.
プログラムが受け付けるコマンドライン・オプションと、
その場合プログラムの振舞いがどう変わるかを説明する。
このセクションはセクション 1 と 8 のマニュアルページにだけ登場すべきである。
.\" .TP
.\"O .\" .B USAGE
.\" .B 利用法 (USAGE)
.\"O .\" describes the grammar of any sublanguage this implements.
.\" コマンドなどが実装している副言語 (sublanguage) の文法を記述する。
.TP
.\"O .B EXIT STATUS
.B 終了ステータス (EXIT STATUS)
.\"O lists the possible exit status values of a program and
.\"O the conditions that cause these values to be returned.
.\"O This section should only appear for Section 1 and 8 manual pages.
プログラムの終了ステータスの値と、それらの値に対応する状況を列挙する。
このセクションはセクション 1 と 8 のマニュアルページにだけ登場すべきである。
.TP
.\"O .B RETURN VALUE
.B 返り値 (RETURN VALUE)
.\"O For Section 2 and 3 pages, this section gives a
.\"O list of the values the library routine will return to the caller
.\"O and the conditions that cause these values to be returned.
セクション 2 と 3 のページの場合、このセクションに
ライブラリルーチンが呼び出し元に返す値のリストを記載する。
それらの値が返された場合の状態に対する説明も書く。
.TP
.\"O .B ERRORS
.B エラー (ERRORS)
.\"O For Section 2 and 3 manual pages, this is a list of the
.\"O values that may be placed in
.\"O .I errno
.\"O in the event of an error, along with information about the cause
.\"O of the errors.
.\"O .IR "The error list should be in alphabetical order" .
セクション 2 と 3 のマニュアルページでは、
エラーが発生した場合に
.I errno
に設定される可能性がある値のリストを記載する。
リストには、エラーの値とエラーの原因についての情報を書く。
「エラーリストはアルファベット順にすべきである。」
.TP
.\"O .B ENVIRONMENT
.B 環境変数 (ENVIRONMENT)
.\"O lists all environment variables that affect the program or function
.\"O and how they affect it.
プログラムや関数に影響する環境変数をリストし、それらの効果を書く。
.TP
.\"O .B FILES
.B ファイル (FILES)
.\"O lists the files the program or function uses, such as
.\"O configuration files, startup files,
.\"O and files the program directly operates on.
.\"O Give the full pathname of these files, and use the installation
.\"O process to modify the directory part to match user preferences.
.\"O For many programs, the default installation location is in
.\"O .IR /usr/local ,
.\"O so your base manual page should use
.\"O .I /usr/local
.\"O as the base.
プログラムや関数が用いるファイルを列記する。
例えば、設定ファイル、起動ファイル、プログラムが直接操作するファイルなどである。
これらのファイルのファイル名はフルパスで記載し、
ディレクトリの部分はユーザーの好みに合わせて
インストール処理で変更できるようにする。
多くのプログラムではデフォルトのインストール先は
.I /usr/local
である。したがってベースとなるマニュアルページでも
.I /usr/local
が使われていることが多いだろう。
.\" May 07: Almost no current man pages have a DIAGNOSTICS section;
.\"         "RETURN VALUE" or "EXIT STATUS" is preferred.
.\" .TP
.\"O .\" .B DIAGNOSTICS
.\" .B 診断メッセージ (DIAGNOSTICS)
.\"O .\" gives an overview of the most common error messages and how to
.\"O .\" cope with them.
.\"O .\" You don't need to explain system error messages
.\"O .\" or fatal signals that can appear during execution of any program
.\"O .\" unless they're special in some way to the program.
.\" ごく一般的なエラーメッセージの概要と、
.\" それらをどう扱うかについて述べる。プログラムの実行時に現れる
.\" システムエラーメッセージや致命的シグナルを全部説明する必要はない。
.\" ただしそれらがプログラムに対して
.\" 何らかの特殊な意味を持っている場合は別である。
.\"
.\" May 07: Almost no current man pages have a SECURITY section.
.\".TP
.\"O .\".B SECURITY
.\" .B セキュリティ (SECURITY)
.\"O .\"discusses security issues and implications.
.\"O .\"Warn about configurations or environments that should be avoided,
.\"O .\"commands that may have security implications, and so on, especially
.\"O .\"if they aren't obvious.
.\"O .\"Discussing security in a separate section isn't necessary;
.\"O .\"if it's easier to understand, place security information in the
.\"O .\"other sections (such as the
.\"O .\" .B DESCRIPTION
.\"O .\" or
.\"O .\" .B USAGE
.\"O .\" section).
.\"O .\" However, please include security information somewhere!
.\" セキュリティ関連の話題・問題について述べる。
.\" 避けるべき設定や環境・セキュリティ上の問題を引き起こすコマンド
.\" などについて警告する。それらが明らかでない場合には、これは特に重要である。
.\" セキュリティに関する話題は、必ずしも独立したセクションにする必要はない。
.\" もし理解しやすければ、セキュリティの情報は他のセクション
.\" (例えば
.\" .B 説明
.\" や
.\" .B 利用法
.\" など) に書いてもよい。
.\" しかし、セキュリティの情報はどこかには書いておいてほしい!
.TP
.\"O .B VERSIONS
.B バージョン (VERSIONS)
.\"O A brief summary of the Linux kernel or glibc versions where a
.\"O system call or library function appeared,
.\"O or changed significantly in its operation.
システムコールやライブラリ関数が登場したり、動作の重要な変更が行われた、
Linux カーネルや glibc のバージョンについての簡潔な概要。
.\"O As a general rule, every new interface should
.\"O include a VERSIONS section in its manual page.
.\"O Unfortunately,
.\"O many existing manual pages don't include this information
.\"O (since there was no policy to do so when they were written).
.\"O Patches to remedy this are welcome,
.\"O but, from the perspective of programmers writing new code,
.\"O this information probably only matters in the case of kernel
.\"O interfaces that have been added in Linux 2.4 or later
.\"O (i.e., changes since kernel 2.2),
.\"O and library functions that have been added to glibc since version 2.1
.\"O (i.e., changes since glibc 2.0).
一般に、全ての新しいインターフェイスは、マニュアルページに
「バージョン」の節を設けるべきである。
残念なことに、多くの既存のマニュアルページにこの情報は含まれていない
(これらのページが書かれた時点ではそのようなポリシーはなかったからである)。
これを改善するパッチは歓迎されるが、
新しいコードを書くプログラマの観点からすれば、
おそらくこの情報が重要になるのは、
Linux 2.4 以降で追加されたカーネルインターフェイス (カーネル 2.2 からの変更) と
glibc バージョン 2.1 以降で追加されたライブラリ関数 (glibc 2.0 からの変更)
についてのみであろう。

.\"O The
.\"O .BR syscalls (2)
.\"O manual page also provides information about kernel versions
.\"O in which various system calls first appeared.
.BR syscalls (2)
マニュアルページにも、いろいろなシステムコールが初めて登場した
カーネルバージョンについての情報が書かれている。
.TP
.\"O .B CONFORMING TO
.B 準拠 (CONFORMING TO)
.\"O describes any standards or conventions that relate to the function
.\"O or command described by the manual page.
.\"O For a page in Section 2 or 3,
.\"O this section should note the POSIX.1
.\"O version(s) that the call conforms to,
.\"O and also whether the call is specified in C99.
.\"O (Don't worry too much about other standards like SUS, SUSv2, and XPG,
.\"O or the SVr4 and 4.xBSD implementation standards,
.\"O unless the call was specified in those standards,
.\"O but isn't in the current version of POSIX.1.)
.\"O (See
.\"O .BR standards (7).)
そのマニュアルページで説明している関数やコマンドに関連する
標準規格や慣習について記載する。
セクション 2 や 3 のページでは、このセクションで
システムコールや関数が準拠する POSIX.1 のバージョンと、
C99 で規定されているかに触れるべきである。
(SUS, SUSv2, XPG などの他の標準規格や、SVr4 や 4.xBSD の実装標準に
ついては、説明しているコールがこれらの規格で規定されており
POSIX.1 の現行バージョンで規定されていない場合以外は、
あまり深く気にする必要はない。)
.RB ( standards (7)
参照。)

.\"O If the call is not governed by any standards but commonly
.\"O exists on other systems, note them.
.\"O If the call is Linux-specific, note this.
そのコールがどの標準にも基づいていないが、
他のシステムで広く存在する場合は、その旨を記載すること。
そのコールが Linux 固有の場合は、その旨を記載すること。

.\"O If this section consists of just a list of standards
.\"O (which it commonly does),
.\"O terminate the list with a period (\(aq.\(aq).
(そうなっているページが多いが) このセクションの内容が標準のリスト
だけの場合、リストの最後にピリオド (\(aq.\(aq) を置くこと。
.TP
.\"O .B NOTES
.B 注意 (NOTES)
.\"O provides miscellaneous notes.
.\"O For Section 2 and 3 man pages you may find it useful to include
.\"O subsections (\fBSS\fP) named \fILinux Notes\fP and \fIGlibc Notes\fP.
その他の注意点を書く。
セクション 2 と 3 のマニュアルページでは、
\fILinux での注意 (Linux Notes)\fP や \fIglibc での注意 (Glibc Notes)\fP
という名前のサブセクション (\fBSS\fP) を設けると便利なこともある。
.TP
.\"O .B BUGS
.B バグ (BUGS)
.\"O lists limitations, known defects or inconveniences,
.\"O and other questionable activities.
制限・知られている欠陥や不便な点、その他不思議な動作などを書く。
.TP
.\"O .B EXAMPLE
.B 例 (EXAMPLE)
.\"O provides one or more examples describing how this function, file or
.\"O command is used.
.\"O For details on writing example programs,
.\"O see \fIExample Programs\fP below.
この関数・ファイル・コマンドをどのように使うかを示した
ひとつまたは複数の例を記述する。
サンプルプログラムを書く際の詳細は
以下の「サンプルプログラム」の節を参照のこと。
.TP
.\"O .B AUTHORS
.B 著者 (AUTHORS)
.\"O lists authors of the documentation or program.
文書またはプログラムの著者を列記する。
.\"O \fBUse of an AUTHORS section is strongly discouraged\fP.
.B 著者セクションは極力使用しないこと。
.\"O Generally, it is better not to clutter every page with a list
.\"O of (over time potentially numerous) authors;
.\"O if you write or significantly amend a page,
.\"O add a copyright notice as a comment in the source file.
一般的には、著者のリストを各ページに撒き散らさない方がよい
(時間がたつと、作者のリストは膨大になる可能性がある)。
マニュアルページを新規に書いたり、大幅に修正を行った場合には、
ソースファイルにコメントとして著作権表示を追加すること。
.\"O If you are the author of a device driver and what to include
.\"O an address for reporting bugs, place this under the BUGS section.
あなたがデバイスドライバの作者で、バグを報告するためのアドレスを
載せたい場合は、「バグ」セクションの後ろにこのセクションを配置すること。
.TP
.\"O .B SEE ALSO
.B 関連項目 (SEE ALSO)
.\"O provides a comma-separated list of related man pages,
.\"O ordered by section number and
.\"O then alphabetically by name, possibly followed by
.\"O other related pages or documents.
.\"O Do not terminate this with a period.
関連するマニュアルページを、コンマ区切りのリストで、
セクション番号順に、セクション内ではアルファベット順で記載する。
可能なら関連する他の文書も書く。
慣習では、このセクションは最後に置く。
リストの末尾にピリオドを置かないこと。
.\"O .SS Font conventions
.SS フォントの慣習
.PP
.\"O For functions, the arguments are always specified using italics,
.\"O .IR "even in the SYNOPSIS section" ,
.\"O where the rest of the function is specified in bold:
関数に対しては、引き数には常にイタリック体を用いる。
「たとえ書式 (SYNOPSIS) セクションであっても、このルールに従う」
関数の他の部分はボールドを指定する:
.PP
.BI "    int myfunction(int " argc ", char **" argv );
.PP
.\"O Variable names should, like argument names, be specified in italics.
引き数名といった変数名はイタリック体を指定すべきである。
.PP
.\"O Filenames (whether pathnames, or references to files in the
.\"O .I /usr/include
.\"O directory)
.\"O are always in italics (e.g.,
.\"O .IR <stdio.h> ),
.\"O except in the SYNOPSIS section, where included files are in bold (e.g.,
.\"O .BR "#include <stdio.h>" ).
ファイル名 (パス名、または
.I /usr/include
ディレクトリ内のファイルへの参照) は常にイタリック体にする (例:
.IR <stdio.h> )。
ただし、書式 (SYNOPSIS) セクションは例外で、
インクルードファイルはボールドにする (例:
.BR "#include <stdio.h>" )。
.\"O When referring to a standard include file under
.\"O .IR /usr/include ,
.\"O specify the header file surrounded by angle brackets,
.\"O in the usual C way (e.g.,
.\"O .IR <stdio.h> ).
.I /usr/include
以下の標準のインクルードファイルを参照する際は、
通常の C 言語と同様に山括弧でヘッダファイルを囲ぬで指定する (例：
.IR <stdio.h> )。
.PP
.\"O Special macros, which are usually in upper case, are in bold (e.g.,
.\"O .BR MAXINT ).
.\"O Exception: don't boldface NULL.
通常、大文字で表現する特殊マクロはボールドで表す (例えば
.BR MAXINT )。
例外として NULL はボールドにしない。
.PP
.\"O When enumerating a list of error codes, the codes are in bold (this list
.\"O usually uses the
.\"O .B \&.TP
.\"O macro).
エラーコードのリストを列挙する時には、コードはボールドで表す
(このリストには通常
.B \&.TP
マクロを用いる)。
.PP
.\"O Complete commands should, if long,
.\"O be written as in an indented line on their own, for example
完全なコマンドは、長い場合には、例に示すように
字下げした行にコマンドだけを記載すべきである。
.in +4n
.nf

man 7 man-pages

.fi
.in
.\"O If the command is short, then it can be included inline in the text,
.\"O in italic format, for example,
.\"O .IR "man 7 man-pages" .
.\"O In this case, it may be worth using nonbreaking spaces
.\"O ("\e\ ") at suitable places in the command.
.\"O Command options should be written in italics, e.g.,
.\"O .IR \-l .
コマンドが短い場合は、
.I "man 7 man-pages"
のようにイタリック体で文中に埋め込んで記載してもよい。
この場合、コマンド内の適切な位置に、改行できないスペース ("\e\ ")
を使うとよいかもしれない。
コマンドオプションも
.I \-l
のようにイタリック体で記載すべきである。
.PP
.\"O Expressions, if not written on a separate indented line, should
.\"O be specified in italics.
.\"O Again, the use of nonbreaking spaces may be appropriate
.\"O if the expression is inlined with normal text.
式は、専用の字下げした行に記載しない場合、イタリック体を指定すること。
繰り返しになるが、式を通常の文中に埋め込む場合にも、
改行できないスペースを使うとよいだろう。
.PP
.\"O Any reference to the subject of the current manual page
.\"O should be written with the name in bold.
.\"O If the subject is a function (i.e., this is a Section 2 or 3 page),
.\"O then the name should be followed by a pair of parentheses
.\"O in Roman (normal) font.
.\"O For example, in the
.\"O .BR fcntl (2)
.\"O man page, references to the subject of the page would be written as:
.\"O .BR fcntl ().
.\"O The preferred way to write this in the source file is:
そのマニュアルページの説明対象への参照は、ボールドで名前を記載する。
対象が関数 (つまり、セクション 2 や 3 のページ) の場合、
名前の後ろにローマンフォント (通常のフォント) で丸括弧の対を続ける。
例えば、
.BR fcntl (2)
のマニュアルページでは、説明対象への参照は
.BR fcntl ()
のように記載する。
マニュアルページのソースファイルには次のように記載するのが望ましい:
.nf

    .BR fcntl ()

.fi
.\"O (Using this format, rather than the use of "\\fB...\\fP()"
.\"O makes it easier to write tools that parse man page source files.)
("\\fB...\\fP()" よりも、この形式を使うこと。
これにより、マニュアルページのソースファイルを解釈するツールを
書くのが簡単になる。)
.PP
.\"O Any reference to another man page
.\"O should be written with the name in bold,
.\"O \fIalways\fP followed by the section number,
.\"O formatted in Roman (normal) font, without any
.\"O separating spaces (e.g.,
.\"O .BR intro (2)).
.\"O The preferred way to write this in the source file is:
別のマニュアルページへの参照は、ボールドで名前を記載し、
それに続けてセクション番号を「必ず」書く。セクション番号は
ローマンフォント (通常のフォント) で書き、スペースは入れない
(例:
.BR intro (2))。
マニュアルページのソースファイルには次のように記載するのが望ましい:
.nf

    .BR intro (2)

.fi
.\"O (Including the section number in cross references lets tools like
.\"O .BR man2html (1)
.\"O create properly hyperlinked pages.)
(相互参照にセクション番号を含めておくと、
.B man2html
といったツールがページ間のハイパーリンクを適切に生成できる。)
.\"O .SS Spelling
.SS 綴り (spelling)
.\"O Starting with release 2.59,
.\"O .I man-pages
.\"O follows American spelling conventions;
.\"O please write all new pages and patches according to these conventions.
リリース 2.59 からだが、
.I man-pages
はアメリカ英語の綴りの慣習に従っている。
新しいページやパッチは全てこの慣習に従って下さい。
.\"O .SS Example Programs and Shell Sessions
.SS サンプルプログラムとシェルのセッション
.\"O Manual pages can include example programs demonstrating how to
.\"O use a system call or library function.
.\"O However, note the following:
マニュアルページには、システムコールやライブラリ関数の使い方を示す
サンプルプログラムを含めることができる。
その際には、以下の点に留意すべきである。
.TP 3
*
.\"O Example programs should be written in C.
サンプルプログラムは C で記載すること。
.TP
*
.\"O An example program is only necessary and useful if it demonstrates
.\"O something beyond what can easily be provided in a textual
.\"O description of the interface.
.\"O An example program that does nothing
.\"O other than call an interface usually serves little purpose.
サンプルプログラムは、
インタフェースについて文章で簡単に説明できる以上のことを示す場合にだけ
必要かつ有用である。インタフェースを呼び出す以外に何もしないサンプル
プログラムは普通はほとんど役に立たない。
.TP
*
.\"O Example programs should be fairly short (preferably less than 100 lines;
.\"O ideally less than 50 lines).
サンプルプログラムはかなり短めにすること
(100行未満が望ましく、50行未満が理想的である)。
.TP
*
.\"O Example programs should do error checking after system calls and
.\"O library function calls.
サンプルプログラムでは、システムコールやライブラリ関数を呼び出した後で
エラーチェックを行うこと。
.TP
*
.\"O Example programs should be complete, and compile without
.\"O warnings when compiled with \fIcc\ \-Wall\fP.
サンプルプログラムは完結していて、
\fIcc\ \-Wall\fP
でコンパイルした際に警告なしでコンパイルできること。
.TP
*
.\"O Where possible and appropriate, example programs should allow
.\"O experimentation, by varying their behavior based on inputs
.\"O (ideally from command-line arguments, or alternatively, via
.\"O input read by the program).
可能かつ適切な場合には、サンプルプログラムで
入力により動作を変化させるなどの実験を行うとよい
(理想的には、コマンドライン引き数や、プログラムが読み込む入力データ
経由で、動作を変化させるのがよい)。
.TP
*
.\"O Example programs should be laid out according to Kernighan and
.\"O Ritchie style, with 4-space indents.
サンプルプログラムは、K&R (Kernighan and Ritchie) スタイルで書き、
字下げはスペース 4文字で行う。
.\"O (Avoid the use of TAB characters in source code!)
(ソースコードで TAB 文字を使うのは避けること。)
.PP
.\"O For some examples of what example programs should look like, see
.\"O .BR wait (2)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR pipe (2).
サンプルプログラムがどんな風になっていればよいかの例については、
.BR wait (2)
と
.BR pipe (2)
を参照すること。

.\"O If you include a shell session demonstrating the use of a program
.\"O or other system feature, boldface the user input text,
.\"O to distinguish it from output produced by the system.
プログラムの使い方や他のシステムの特徴を示すためにシェルのセッション例
を含める場合、ユーザの入力文をボールドにして、システムが生成する
出力と区別できるようにすること。
.\"O .SS Indentation of structure definitions, shell session logs, etc.
.SS 構造体の定義、シェルのセッションログなどの字下げ
.\"O When structure definitions, shell session logs, etc. are included
.\"O in running text, indent them by 4 spaces (i.e., a block enclosed by
.\"O .I ".in\ +4n"
.\"O and
.\"O .IR ".in" ).
構造体の定義やシェルのセッションログなどを本文中に記載する際は、
スペース 4個分の字下げを行う (つまり、ブロックを
.I ".in\ +4n"
と
.I ".in"
で囲む)。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O For canonical examples of how man pages in the
.\"O .I man-pages
.\"O package should look, see
.\"O .BR pipe (2)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR fcntl (2).
.I man-pages
パッケージに含まれるマニュアルページの体裁の標準的な例については、
.BR pipe (2)
と
.BR fcntl (2)
を参照すること。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR man (1),
.BR man2html (1),
.BR groff (7),
.BR groff_man (7),
.BR man (7),
.BR mdoc (7)
