.\" (C) Copyright 1992-1999 Rickard E. Faith and David A. Wheeler
.\" (faith@cs.unc.edu and dwheeler@ida.org)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 11:06:05 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Sat Jun  8 00:39:52 1996 by aeb
.\" Modified Wed Jun 16 23:00:00 1999 by David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org)
.\" Modified Thu Jul 15 12:43:28 1999 by aeb
.\" Modified Sun Jan  6 18:26:25 2002 by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.org>
.\" Modified Tue Jul 27 20:12:02 2004 by Colin Watson <cjwatson@debian.org>
.\" 2007-05-30, mtk: various rewrites and moved much text to new man-pages.7.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-2000 OZASA Hiromasa and NAKANO Takeo
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1997-07-25, OZASA Hiromasa <ozasa@cpsy.is.tohoku.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 2000-01-14, NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 2001-12-27, Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2002-03-23, Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated 2005-02-23, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2005-04-17, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2007-06-13, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.53
.\" Updated 2007-06-13, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.54
.\"
.\"WORD:	prevailing indent	優先インデント
.\"
.TH MAN 7 2007-05-30 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O man \- macros to format man pages
man \- man ページを整形するマクロ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B groff \-Tascii \-man
.I file
\&...
.LP
.B groff \-Tps \-man
.I file
\&...
.LP
.B man
.RI [ section ]
.I title
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This manual page explains the
.\"O .B "groff an.tmac"
.\"O macro package (often called the
.\"O .B man
.\"O macro package).
.\"O This macro package should be used by developers when
.\"O writing or porting man pages for Linux.
.\"O It is fairly compatible with other
.\"O versions of this macro package, so porting man pages should not be a major
.\"O problem (exceptions include the NET-2 BSD release, which uses a totally
.\"O different macro package called mdoc; see
.\"O .BR mdoc (7)).
このマニュアルページでは、
.B "groff an.tmac"
のマクロパッケージ
.RB ( man
マクロパッケージとも呼ばれることも多い) について説明する。
このマクロパッケージは、
Linux の man ページを書いたり移植したりするときに、
開発者が用いるものである。
このマクロパッケージはバージョン間での互換性が高く、
man page の移植にあたっては大きな問題はないだろう
(但し、NET-2 BSD release は例外である。
こちらでは mdoc と呼ばれる全く異なるマクロパッケージが使用されている。
.BR mdoc (7)
を参照)。
.PP
.\"O Note that NET-2 BSD mdoc man pages can be used with
.\"O .B groff
.\"O simply by specifying the
.\"O .B \-mdoc
.\"O option instead of the
.\"O .B \-man
.\"O option.
.\"O Using the
.\"O .B \-mandoc
.\"O option is, however, recommended, since this will automatically detect which
.\"O macro package is in use.
NET-2 BSD の man ページも、
.B groff
のオプションとして
.B \-man
の代わりに
.B \-mdoc
を指定するだけで、利用することができる。
.B \-mandoc
オプションを使えばどのマクロパッケージが用いられているか
自動的に検出できるので、このオプションを使うのがお薦めである。
.PP
.\"O For conventions that should be employed when writing man pages
.\"O for the Linux \fIman-pages\fP package, see
.\"O .BR man-pages (7).
Linux \fIman-pages\fP プロジェクトのマニュアルページを書く際に
従うべき決まり事については
.BR man-pages (7)
を参照。
.\"O .SS Title line
.SS タイトル行
.\"O The first command in a man page (after comment lines,
.\"O that is, lines that start with \fB.\\"\fP) should be
man ページの (コメント行を除く) 最初のコマンドは、
以下のようにする必要がある。
コメント行とは \fB.\\"\fP で始まる行のことである。
.RS
.sp
.B \&.TH
.I "title section date source manual"
.sp
.RE
.\"O For details of the arguments that should be supplied to the \fBTH\fP
.\"O command, see
.\"O .BR man-pages (7).
\fBTH\fP に渡す引き数の詳細については
.BR man-pages (7)
を参照。
.PP
.\"O Note that BSD mdoc-formatted pages begin with the
.\"O .B Dd
.\"O command, not the
.\"O .B TH
.\"O command.
なお BSD の mdoc フォーマットのページは
.B TH
コマンドではなく
.B Dd
コマンドから始まる。
.\"O .SS Sections
.SS セクション
.\"O Sections are started with
.\"O .B \&.SH
.\"O followed by the heading name.
.\"O .\" The following doesn't seem to be required (see Debian bug 411303),
.\"O .\" If the name contains spaces and appears
.\"O .\" on the same line as
.\"O .\" .BR \&.SH ,
.\"O .\" then place the heading in double quotes.
セクションは
.B \&.SH
で始まり、見出し名がそれに続く。
.\" 以下は必須ではないようだ (Debian bug 411303 参照),
.\" スペースが含まれている名前を
.\" .BR \&.SH
.\" と同じ行に置く場合は、見出し名はダブルクォートで囲む。

.\"O The only mandatory heading is NAME, which should be the first section and
.\"O be followed on the next line by a one line description of the program:
NAME (名前) という見出しだけは必ず置かないといけない。
この見出しは一番最初のセクションにすべきで、見出しの
次の行にはプログラムの説明を一行で書く。
.RS
.sp
\&.SH NAME
.br
.sp
.RE
.\"O It is extremely important that this format is followed, and that there is a
.\"O backslash before the single dash which follows the command name.
.\"O This syntax is used by the
.\"O .BR makewhatis (8)
.\"O program to create a database of short command descriptions for the
.\"O .BR whatis (1)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR apropos (1)
.\"O commands.
このフォーマットに従い、コマンド名に続くシングルダッシュ (-)
の前には必ずバックスラッシュを置くこと。
この文法は、
.BR makewhatis (8)
プログラムが
.BR whatis (1)
や
.BR apropos (1)
コマンド用の (コマンドの短い説明の) データベースを生成する際に利用される。
.PP
.\"O For a list of other sections that might appear in a manual page, see
.\"O .BR man-pages (7).
マニュアルページに登場する可能性のあるこれ以外のセクションのリストに
ついては
.BR man-pages (7)
を参照。
.\"O .SS Fonts
.SS フォント
.\"O The commands to select the type face are:
タイプフェイスを選択するコマンドは以下のように指定する:
.TP 4
.B \&.B
.\"O Bold
ボールド。
.TP
.B \&.BI
.\"O Bold alternating with italics
.\"O (especially useful for function specifications)
ボールドとイタリックとを交互に
(特に関数指定に便利)。
.TP
.B \&.BR
.\"O Bold alternating with Roman
.\"O (especially useful for referring to other
.\"O manual pages)
ボールドとローマンとを交互に
(特に他のマニュアルページを参照するときに便利)。
.TP
.B \&.I
.\"O Italics
イタリック。
.TP
.B \&.IB
.\"O Italics alternating with bold
イタリックとボールドとを交互に。
.TP
.B \&.IR
.\"O Italics alternating with Roman
イタリックとローマンとを交互に。
.TP
.B \&.RB
.\"O Roman alternating with bold
ローマンとボールドとを交互に。
.TP
.B \&.RI
.\"O Roman alternating with italics
ローマンとイタリックとを交互に。
.TP
.B \&.SB
.\"O Small alternating with bold
スモールとボールドを交互に。
.TP
.B \&.SM
.\"O Small (useful for acronyms)
スモール (頭字語などに用いる)
.LP
.\"O Traditionally, each command can have up to six arguments, but the GNU
.\"O implementation removes this limitation (you might still want to limit
.\"O yourself to 6 arguments for portability's sake).
.\"O Arguments are delimited by
.\"O spaces.
.\"O Double quotes can be used to specify an argument which contains spaces.
.\"O All of the arguments will be printed next to each other without
.\"O intervening spaces, so that the
.\"O .B \&.BR
.\"O command can be used to specify a word in bold followed by a mark of
.\"O punctuation in Roman.
.\"O If no arguments are given, the command is applied to the following line
.\"O of text.
慣例としては、各コマンドは 6 つまでの引き数を持つ事が可能だが、
GNU の実装では制限はないようだ (しかし移植性を保持するためには
引き数は 6 までに限っておくのが良いだろう)。
引き数はスペースで区切られる。
スペースを含んだ引き数を与えるには、ダブルクォートで囲えばよい。
すべての引き数はスペースを取り除いて並べられるので、
.B \&.BR
コマンドを使えば、単語はボールドで、句読点をローマンで表すことができる。
引き数が全く与えられなければ、
そのコマンドは次の行のテキストに適用される。
.\"O .SS "Other Macros and Strings"
.SS その他のマクロや文字列
.PP
.\"O Below are other relevant macros and predefined strings.
.\"O Unless noted otherwise, all macros
.\"O cause a break (end the current line of text).
.\"O Many of these macros set or use the "prevailing indent."
.\"O The "prevailing indent" value is set by any macro with the parameter
.\"O .I i
.\"O below;
.\"O macros may omit
.\"O .I i
.\"O in which case the current prevailing indent will be used.
.\"O As a result, successive indented paragraphs can use the same indent without
.\"O respecifying the indent value.
.\"O A normal (nonindented) paragraph resets the prevailing indent value
.\"O to its default value (0.5 inches).
.\"O By default a given indent is measured in ens;
.\"O try to use ens or ems as units for
.\"O indents, since these will automatically adjust to font size changes.
.\"O The other key macro definitions are:
以下に、他のマクロや定義済みの文字列を示す。
特に記述がない限り、マクロを使うと改行が行われる
(テキストの現在の行を終了する)。
多くのマクロは
「優先インデント (prevailing indent)」を設定したり、使用する。
優先インデントの値は、どのマクロからもパラメータ
.I i
によって指定できる (以下に示す)。
マクロでは
.I i
を省略することもでき、その場合は現在の優先インデントの値が用いられる。
これにより結果として、インデントされた段落が連続している場合、
インデントの値を再指定しなくてもインデント量を同じにすることができる。
通常の (インデントされていない) 段落が登場すると、
優先インデントの値はデフォルトの値 (0.5 インチ) にリセットされる。
デフォルトでは、与えたインデントの値は ens 単位である。
インデントの単位には ens や ems を用いるとよい。これらの単位は
フォントサイズが変更されると自動的に調整されるからである。
他の重要なマクロ定義は以下の通り:
.\"O .SS "Normal Paragraphs"
.SS 通常の段落
.TP 9m
.B \&.LP
.\"O Same as
.\"O .B \&.PP
.\"O (begin a new paragraph).
.B \&.PP
と同じ (新たな段落の開始)。
.TP
.B \&.P
.\"O Same as
.\"O .B \&.PP
.\"O (begin a new paragraph).
.B \&.PP
と同じ (新たな段落の開始)。
.TP
.B \&.PP
.\"O Begin a new paragraph and reset prevailing indent.
新しい段落を開始し、インデントをリセットする。
.\"O .SS "Relative Margin Indent"
.SS 相対マージンインデント
.TP 9m
.BI \&.RS " i"
.\"O Start relative margin indent: moves the left margin
.\"O .I i
.\"O to the right (if
.\"O .I i
.\"O is omitted, the prevailing indent value is used).
.\"O A new prevailing indent is set to 0.5 inches.
.\"O As a result, all following paragraph(s) will be
.\"O indented until the corresponding
.\"O .BR \&.RE .
相対マージンインデント (relative margin indent) を開始する。
左マージンを
.I i
だけ右に移動する
.RI ( i
が省略されると優先インデントの値が用いられる)。
新たな優先インデントは 0.5 インチにセットされる。
結果として、以下の段落は対応する
.B \&.RE
が現れるまでインデントされる。
.TP
.B \&.RE
.\"O End relative margin indent and
.\"O restores the previous value of the prevailing indent.
相対マージンインデントを終了し、
優先インデントの値を元に戻す。
.\"O .SS "Indented Paragraph Macros"
.SS 段落をインデントするマクロ
.TP 9m
.BI \&.HP " i"
.\"O Begin paragraph with a hanging indent
.\"O (the first line of the paragraph is at the left margin of
.\"O normal paragraphs, and the rest of the paragraph's lines are indented).
ぶらさがりインデントの段落を開始する
(段落の先頭行は通常の段落の左マージンとなり、
段落の残りの行はインデントされる)。
.TP
.BI \&.IP " x i"
.\"O Indented paragraph with optional hanging tag.
.\"O If the tag
.\"O .I x
.\"O is omitted, the entire following paragraph is indented by
.\"O .IR i .
.\"O If the tag
.\"O .I x
.\"O is provided, it is hung at the left margin
.\"O before the following indented paragraph
.\"O (this is just like
.\"O .B \&.TP
.\"O except the tag is included with the command instead of being on the
.\"O following line).
.\"O If the tag is too long, the text after the tag will be moved down to the
.\"O next line (text will not be lost or garbled).
.\"O For bulleted lists, use this macro with \e(bu (bullet) or \e(em (em dash)
.\"O as the tag, and for numbered lists, use the number or letter followed by
.\"O a period as the tag;
.\"O this simplifies translation to other formats.
インデントされた段落。オプションとしてぶらさがりタグをとる。
タグ
.I x
が省略されると、以下の段落すべてが
.I i
でインデントされる。タグ
.I x
が与えられると、タグはインデントされた段落の前にぶら下げられる
.RB ( \&.TP
とちょうど同じ。ただしタグを次の行に書く代わりにコマンドに指定する)。
タグが長すぎる場合には、タグに続くテキストは次の行に移動する
(テキストが失われたり混ざったりすることはない)。
箇条書きをするには、 \e(bu (点) あるいは \e(em (ダッシュ)
をタグにしてこのマクロを用いるとよい。番号付きで箇条書きをする場合は、
数字または文字にピリオドを付けたものをタグにすればよい。
こうすれば他のフォーマットへの変換が簡単になる。
.TP
.BI \&.TP " i"
.\"O Begin paragraph with hanging tag.
.\"O The tag is given on the next line, but
.\"O its results are like those of the
.\"O .B \&.IP
.\"O command.
ぶらさがりタグの段落を開始する。タグは次の行に指定する。
結果は
.B \&.IP
コマンドと似たものになる。
.\"O .SS "Hypertext Link Macros"
.SS ハイパーテキストリンク用のマクロ
.\"O (Feature supported with
.\"O .B groff
.\"O only.)
.\"O In order to use hypertext link macros, it is necessary to load the
.\"O .B www.tmac
.\"O macro package.
.\"O Use the request
.\"O .B .mso www.tmac
.\"O to do this.
.RB ( groff
だけでサポートされている機能)
ハイパーテキストリンク用のマクロを使用するためには、
.B www.tmac
マクロパッケージをロードする必要がある。
ロードを行うには
.B .mso www.tmac
リクエストを使用する。
.TP 9m
.BI \&.URL " link url trailer"
.\" motoki: 原文では .URL url link trailer となっているが、誤記。
.\"O Inserts a hypertext link to the URI (URL)
.\"O .IR url ,
.\"O with
.\"O .I link
.\"O as the text of the link.
.\"O The
.\"O .I trailer
.\"O will be printed immediately afterwards.
URI (URL)
.I url
へのハイパーテキストリンクを挿入する。
.I link
はリンク名のテキストであり、
.I trailer
の内容はリンクの直後に表示される。
.\"O When generating HTML this should translate into the HTML command
.\"O \fB<A HREF="\fP\fIurl\fP\fB">\fP\fIlink\fP\fB</A>\fP\fItrailer\fP.
HTML を生成する時に、このマクロは
\fB<A HREF="\fP\fIurl\fP\fB">\fP\fIlink\fP\fB</A>\fP\fItrailer\fP
という HTML コマンドに変換される。
.\"O .\" The following is a kludge to get a paragraph into the listing.
.\" 以下はリスト表示の中で段落を作るためのその場しのぎの方法である。
.TP
.B " "
.\"O This and other related macros are new, and
.\"O many tools won't do anything with them, but
.\"O since many tools (including troff) will simply ignore undefined macros
.\"O (or at worst insert their text) these are safe to insert.
このマクロや他の関連マクロは新しく、
多くのツールはこれらに対しては何もしないであろう。
(troff を含めた) 多くのツールは未定義のマクロを単に無視するだけ
(あるいは最悪でもマクロをテキストとして挿入するだけ)
なので、これらを書いても危険はない。
.\"O .\" The following is a kludge to get a paragraph into the listing.
.\" 以下はリスト表示の中で段落を作るためのその場しのぎの方法である。
.TP
.B " "
.\"O It can be useful to define your own
.\"O .B URL
.\"O macro in manual pages for the benefit of those viewing it with a roff
.\"O viewer other than
.\"O .BR groff .
.\"O That way, the URL, link text, and trailer text (if any) are still visible.
マニュアルページ内で自分で
.B URL
マクロを定義して、
.B groff
以外の roff ビューアでも表示されるようにするのもいいだろう。
こうすることで、URL も、リンク用のテキストも、(もしあれば) それに続く
テキストも、表示できるようになる。
.\"O .\" The following is a kludge to get a paragraph into the listing.
.\" 以下はリスト表示の中で段落を作るためのその場しのぎの方法である。
.TP
.B " "
.\"O Here's an example:
以下に例を挙げる:
.RS 1.5i
\&.de URL
.br
\\\\$2 \\(laURL: \\\\$1 \\(ra\\\\$3
.br
\&..
.br
\&.if \\n[.g] .mso www.tmac
.br
\&.TH
.I ...
.br
.I (later in the page)
.br
This software comes from the
.br
\&.URL "http://www.gnu.org/" "GNU Project" " of the"
.br
\&.URL "http://www.fsf.org/" "Free Software Foundation" .
.RE
.\"O .\" The following is a kludge to get a paragraph into the listing.
.\" 以下はリスト表示の中で段落を作るためのその場しのぎの方法である。
.TP
.B " "
.\"O In the above, if
.\"O .B groff
.\"O is being used, the
.\"O .B www.tmac
.\"O macro package's definition of the URL macro will supersede the locally
.\"O defined one.
上記の例において、
.B groff
を使って表示しようとした場合には、
.B www.tmac
マクロパッケージの URL マクロの定義の方が
ローカルで行われた定義よりも優先される。
.PP
.\"O A number of other link macros are available.
.\"O See
.\"O .BR groff_www (7)
.\"O for more details.
.\" motoki: groff_mwww (7) の誤記と思われる。
他にもいくつかのリンク用のマクロが用意されている。
詳しくは
.BR groff_mwww (7)
を参照のこと。
.BR
.\"O .SS "Miscellaneous Macros"
.SH その他のマクロ
.TP 9m
.B \&.DT
.\"O Reset tabs to default tab values (every 0.5 inches);
.\"O does not cause a break.
タブをデフォルトのタブ値 (0.5 インチごと) にリセットする。
改行はしない。
.TP
.BI \&.PD " d"
.\"O Set inter-paragraph vertical distance to d
.\"O (if omitted, d=0.4v);
.\"O does not cause a break.
パラグラフ間の間隔を引き数にセットする
(省略されると d=0.4v となる)。
.TP
.BI \&.SS " t"
.\"O Subheading
.\"O .I t
.\"O (like
.\"O .BR \&.SH ,
.\"O but used for a subsection inside a section).
サブヘッダ
.I t
.RB ( \&.SH
のようなものだが、サブセクションのために用いる)。
.\"O .SS "Predefined Strings"
.SS 定義済みの文字列
.\"O The
.\"O .B man
.\"O package has the following predefined strings:
.B man
パッケージには、以下のような定義済みの文字列がある:
.IP \e*R
.\"O Registration Symbol: \*R
登録シンボル: \*R
.IP \e*S
.\"O Change to default font size
デフォルトフォントサイズを変更する
.IP \e*(Tm
.\"O Trademark Symbol: \*(Tm
商標シンボル: \*(Tm
.IP \e*(lq
.\"O Left angled double quote: \*(lq
左に傾いたダブルクォート: \*(lq
.IP \e*(rq
.\"O Right angled double quote: \*(rq
右に傾いたダブルクォート: \*(rq
.\"O .SS "Safe Subset"
.SS 安全なサブセット
.\"O Although technically
.\"O .B man
.\"O is a troff macro package, in reality a large number of other tools
.\"O process man page files that don't implement all of troff's abilities.
.\"O Thus, it's best to avoid some of troff's more exotic abilities
.\"O where possible to permit these other tools to work correctly.
.\"O Avoid using the various troff preprocessors
.\"O (if you must, go ahead and use
.\"O .BR tbl (1),
.\"O but try to use the
.\"O .B IP
.\"O and
.\"O .B TP
.\"O commands instead for two-column tables).
.\"O Avoid using computations; most other tools can't process them.
.\"O Use simple commands that are easy to translate to other formats.
.\"O The following troff macros are believed to be safe (though in many cases
.\"O they will be ignored by translators):
技術的には
.B man
は troff のマクロパッケージだが、実際には多数の別のツールが
man ページのファイルを処理しており、それらは troff の全ての機能を
実装していないこともある。したがって、他のツールでも正しく処理できるように、
troff のあまり一般的でない機能は、可能ならば用いないのが望ましい。
様々な troff プリプロセッサ
も用いないほうが良いだろう (やむを得ない場合は
.BR tbl (1)
は用いても良い。しかし 2 列の表なら、代わりに
.B IP
や
.B TP
コマンドを用いてみよう)。
計算機能も用いない方が良いだろう。他のツールのほとんどはこれらを処理できない。
他のフォーマットに変換が容易な、単純なコマンドを使うようにしよう。
以下の troff コマンドは、使っても問題ないと考えてよいだろう
(多くの場合、変換コマンドによって無視されるかもしれないが)。
.BR \e" ,
.BR . ,
.BR ad ,
.BR bp ,
.BR br ,
.BR ce ,
.BR de ,
.BR ds ,
.BR el ,
.BR ie ,
.BR if ,
.BR fi ,
.BR ft ,
.BR hy ,
.BR ig ,
.BR in ,
.BR na ,
.BR ne ,
.BR nf ,
.BR nh ,
.BR ps ,
.BR so ,
.BR sp ,
.BR ti ,
.\"O .BR tr .
.B tr
.PP
.\"O You may also use many troff escape sequences (those sequences beginning
.\"O with \e).
.\"O When you need to include the backslash character as normal text,
.\"O use \ee.
.\"O Other sequences you may use, where x or xx are any characters and N
.\"O is any digit, include:
troff のエスケープシーケンスの多くも利用できる
(これらのエスケープシーケンスは \e で始まる)。
バックスラッシュ文字を通常のテキストとして使いたい場合は \ee とする。
利用できる他のシーケンスには以下のようなものがある (x や xx
は任意の文字, N は任意の数字):
.BR \e' ,
.BR \e` ,
.BR \e- ,
.BR \e. ,
.BR \e" ,
.BR \e% ,
.BR \e*x ,
.BR \e*(xx ,
.BR \e(xx ,
.BR \e$N ,
.BR \enx ,
.BR \en(xx ,
.BR \efx ,
.\"O and
.BR \ef(xx .
.\"O Avoid using the escape sequences for drawing graphics.
グラフィックの描画にはエスケープシーケンスは用いないほうが良い。
.PP
.\"O Do not use the optional parameter for
.\"O .B bp
.\"O (break page).
.\"O Use only positive values for
.\"O .B sp
.\"O (vertical space).
.\"O Don't define a macro
.\"O .RB ( de )
.\"O with the same name as a macro in this or the
.\"O mdoc macro package with a different meaning; it's likely that
.\"O such redefinitions will be ignored.
.\"O Every positive indent
.\"O .RB ( in )
.\"O should be paired with a matching negative indent
.\"O (although you should be using the
.\"O .B RS
.\"O and
.\"O .B RE
.\"O macros instead).
.\"O The condition test
.\"O .RB ( if,ie )
.\"O should only have \(aqt\(aq or \(aqn\(aq as the condition.
.\"O Only translations
.\"O .RB ( tr )
.\"O that can be ignored should be used.
.\"O Font changes
.\"O .RB ( ft
.\"O and the \fB\ef\fP escape sequence)
.\"O should only have the values 1, 2, 3, 4, R, I, B, P, or CW
.\"O (the ft command may also have no parameters).
.B bp
(改頁) にはオプションパラメータを用いないこと。
.B sp
(垂直スペース) には正の値のみを用いること。
man や mdoc マクロパッケージにあるマクロと、
名前が同じで機能の異なるマクロを定義
.RB ( de )
しないこと。そのような再定義は無視される可能性が高い。
正方向へのインデント
.RB ( in )
には、負のインデントを対応させること (このマクロの代わりに
.B RS
と
.B RE
マクロを使った方がよいのだが)。
条件テスト
.RB ( if , ie )
は状態として \(aqt\(aq または \(aqn\(aq だけを持つようにすること。
変換
.RB ( tr )
には無視できるものだけを使うこと。
フォントの変更
.RB ( ft
と \fB\ef\fP エスケープシーケンス) には
1, 2, 3, 4, R, I, B, P, CW のみを用いること
(ft コマンドの場合はパラメータを指定しなくてもよい)。
.PP
.\"O If you use capabilities beyond these, check the
.\"O results carefully on several tools.
.\"O Once you've confirmed that the additional capability is safe,
.\"O let the maintainer of this
.\"O document know about the safe command or sequence
.\"O that should be added to this list.
この制限を越えて機能を用いる場合は、いくつかのツールを使って、
その結果を注意してチェックすること。追加した機能が安全だと
確信したら、この文書の管理者にその安全なコマンドまたはシーケンスを
教えてほしい。リストに追加する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.IR /usr/share/groff/ [*/] tmac/an.tmac
.br
.I /usr/man/whatis
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.PP
.\"O By all means include full URLs (or URIs) in the text itself;
.\"O some tools such as
.\"O .BR man2html (1)
.\"O can automatically turn them into hypertext links.
.\"O You can also use the new
.\"O .B URL
.\"O macro to identify links to related information.
.\"O If you include URLs, use the full URL
.\"O (e.g., <http://www.kernelnotes.org>) to ensure that tools
.\"O can automatically find the URLs.
テキストにはぜひとも完全な URL (または URI) を書くようにすること。
.BR man2html (1)
のようなツールは、これらを自動的にハイパーテキストリンクに変換する。
新たに取り入れられた
.B URL
マクロを関連情報へのリンクに用いても良い。 URL を書く場合は、
例えば <http://www.kernelnotes.org> のように完全な形式で書き、
ツールによる URL 自動検知ができるようにすること。
.PP
.\"O Tools processing these files should open the file and examine the first
.\"O nonwhitespace character.
.\"O A period (.) or single quote (') at the beginning
.\"O of a line indicates a troff-based file (such as man or mdoc).
.\"O A left angle bracket (<) indicates an SGML/XML-based
.\"O file (such as HTML or Docbook).
.\"O Anything else suggests simple ASCII
.\"O text (e.g., a "catman" result).
これらのファイルを処理するツールは、ファイルをオープンして
最初の空白以外の文字を調べる。行の先頭にピリオド (.)
またはシングルクォート (') があると、これは troff ベースの
ファイル (man や mdoc) であるとみなす。左角括弧 (<) は
SGML/XML ベースのファイル (HTML や Docbook) であるとみなす。
それ以外は単純な ASCII テキスト ("catman" の結果など) とみなす。
.PP
.\"O Many man pages begin with \fB\'\e"\fP followed by a
.\"O space and a list of characters,
.\"O indicating how the page is to be preprocessed.
.\"O For portability's sake to non-troff translators we recommend
.\"O that you avoid using anything other than
.\"O .BR tbl (1),
.\"O and Linux can detect that automatically.
.\"O However, you might want to include this information so your man page
.\"O can be handled by other (less capable) systems.
.\"O Here are the definitions of the preprocessors invoked by these characters:
多くの man ページは、最初の行が \fB\'\e"\fP とスペースで始まっており、
そこにはそのページが処理されるべきプリプロセスを表す文字が書いてある。
troff 以外の変換プログラムへの移植性のため、
.BR tbl (1)
や、 Linux が自動的に検知できるもの以外は使わないようにすることを勧める。
しかし、この情報を記述して、書いたページが他の (より低機能な) システムでも
扱えるようにしたい場合もあるかも知れない。
以下にこれらの文字によって起動されるプリプロセッサの定義を示す:
.TP 3
.B e
eqn(1)
.TP
.B g
grap(1)
.TP
.B p
pic(1)
.TP
.B r
refer(1)
.TP
.B t
tbl(1)
.TP
.B v
vgrind(1)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.PP
.\"O Most of the macros describe formatting (e.g., font type and spacing) instead
.\"O of marking semantic content (e.g., this text is a reference to another page),
.\"O compared to formats like mdoc and DocBook (even HTML has more semantic
.\"O markings).
.\"O This situation makes it harder to vary the
.\"O .B man
.\"O format for different media,
.\"O to make the formatting consistent for a given media, and to automatically
.\"O insert cross-references.
.\"O By sticking to the safe subset described above, it should be easier to
.\"O automate transitioning to a different reference page format in the future.
mdoc や DocBook に比べると、
マクロの多くは書式 (フォントタイプやスペーシングなど) に関するものであり、
意味上のもの (このテキストは他のページへの参照である、など) ではない
(HTML ですら意味的なマーキングに思える)。
このため、
.B man
フォーマットを他のメディアへ変換したり、
フォーマットを他のメディアで有効なものにしたり、
相互参照を自動的に挿入したりすることが困難になっている。
上に挙げたような安全なサブセットを守れば、
将来別のリファレンスページフォーマットへ変換する作業が簡単になるだろう。
.LP
.\"O The Sun macro
.\"O .B TX
.\"O is not implemented.
Sun のマクロである
.B TX
は定義されていない。
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHORS
.\" .SH 著者
.\"O .\" .IP \(em 3m
.\"O .\" James Clark (jjc@jclark.com) wrote the implementation of the macro package.
.\"O .\" .IP \(em
.\"O .\" Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) wrote the initial version of
.\"O .\" this manual page.
.\"O .\" .IP \(em
.\"O .\" Jens Schweikhardt (schweikh@noc.fdn.de) wrote the Linux Man-Page Mini-HOWTO
.\"O .\" (which influenced this manual page).
.\"O .\" .IP \(em
.\"O .\" David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org) heavily modified this
.\"O .\" manual page, such as adding detailed information on sections and macros.
.\" .IP \(em 3m
.\" James Clark (jjc@jclark.com) がマクロパッケージの実装を書いた。
.\" .IP \(em
.\" Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) がこのマニュアルページの最初の版を書いた。
.\" .IP \(em
.\" Jens Schweikhardt (schweikh@noc.fdn.de) は Linux Man-Page Mini-HOWTO
.\" を書いた (本マニュアルページもこの文書の影響を受けている)。
.\" .IP \(em
.\" David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org) はこのマニュアルページを大きく変更し、
.\" セクションやマクロに関する細かな情報を追加するなどを行った。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR apropos (1),
.BR groff (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR man2html (1),
.BR whatis (1),
.BR groff_man (7),
.BR groff_www (7),
.BR man-pages (7),
.BR mdoc (7),
.BR mdoc.samples (7)
