.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)mdoc.7	8.2 (Berkeley) 12/30/93
.\"	$Id: mdoc.7,v 1.6 2000/09/07 07:21:50 hanataka Exp $
.\"
.\" The December 30, 1993 version
.\" Modified by David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.org) on 1999-07-11
.\" to conform to Linux.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri 14 Jan 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated 2008-07-31 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.\"WORD:	manual domain macro		マニュアルドメインマクロ
.\"WORD:	general text domain macro	一般テキストドメインマクロ
.\"WORD:	callable macro			呼び出し可能マクロ
.\"
.Dd July 11, 1999
.Dt MDOC 7
.Os Linux
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm mdoc
.\"O .Nd quick reference guide for the
.Nd
.Nm \-mdoc
マクロパッケージのクイックリファレンスガイド
.\"O .Nm \-mdoc
.\"O macro package
.\"O .Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sh 書式
.Nm groff
.Fl m Ns Ar doc
.Ar files ...
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .Nm \-mdoc
.\"O package is a set of content-based and domain-based macros
.\"O used to format the
.\"O .Bx
.\"O man pages.
.\"O The macro names and their meanings are
.\"O listed below for quick reference; for
.\"O a detailed explanation on using the package,
.\"O see the tutorial sampler
.\"O .Xr mdoc.samples 7 .
.Nm \-mdoc
パッケージは
.Bx
man ページに用いられる内容ベース・ドメインベースのマクロである。
以下ではクイックリファレンスとしてマクロの名前とその意味をリストする。
このパッケージの利用法に関する詳細な説明は、
チュートリアル用の見本である
.Xr mdoc.samples 7
を参照すること。
.Pp
.\"O Note that this is not the usual macro package for Linux documentation,
.\"O although it is used for documentation of several widely used programs;
.\"O see
.\"O .Xr man 7 .
これは Linux の文書で通常用いられているマクロパッケージとは異なる。
しかし広く用いられているいくつかのプログラムの文書で、
このマクロが利用されている。
.Xr man 7
を見よ。
.Pp
.\"O The macros are described in two groups, the first
.\"O includes the structural and physical page layout macros.
.\"O The second contains the manual and general text domain
.\"O macros which differentiate the
.\"O .Nm \-mdoc
.\"O package from other
.\"O .Xr troff
.\"O formatting packages.
マクロは 2 つのグループに分けて説明する。
最初のグループは構造や物理的なページレイアウトに関するマクロである。
2 つめはマニュアルドメインマクロ (manual domain macro)
や一般テキストドメインマクロ (general text domain macro)
で、
.Nm \-mdoc
パッケージを他の
.Xr troff
フォーマットパッケージと差別化しているものである。
.\"O .Sh PAGE STRUCTURE DOMAIN
.Sh ページ構造のドメイン
.\"O .Ss Title Macros
.Ss タイトルマクロ
.\"O To create a valid manual page, these three macros, in this order,
.\"O are required:
正しいマニュアルページを生成するためには、これらの 3 つのマクロを
この順番で書く必要がある。
.Bl -tag -width "xxxx.Os OPERATINGxSYSTEM [version/release]" -compact
.It Li "\&.Dd  " Ar "Month day, year"
.\"O Document date.
文書の日付。
.It Li "\&.Dt  " Ar "DOCUMENT_TITLE [section] [volume]"
.\"O Title, in upper case.
タイトルを大文字で。
.It Li "\&.Os  " Ar "OPERATING_SYSTEM [version/release]"
.\"O Operating system
オペレーティングシステム
.Pq Tn BSD .
.El
.\"O .Ss Page Layout Macros
.Ss ページレイアウトマクロ
.\"O Section headers, paragraph breaks, lists and displays.
セクションヘッダ、段落の終わり、リスト、表示など。
.Bl -tag -width flag -compact
.It Li \&.Sh
.\"O Section Headers.
.\"O Valid headers, in the order of presentation:
セクションのヘッダ。
正しいヘッダは、現れる順に:
.Bl -tag -width "RETURN VALUE" -compact
.It Ar NAME
.\"O Name section, should include the
名前のセクション。
.Ql \&.Nm
.\"O or
,
.Ql \&.Fn
.\"O and the
,
.Ql \&.Nd
.\"O macros.
などのマクロを含む。
.It Ar SYNOPSIS
.\"O Usage.
利用法。
.It Ar DESCRIPTION
.\"O General description, should include
.\"O options and parameters.
一般的な説明。オプションやパラメータの説明も含む。
.It Ar RETURN VALUE
.\"O Sections two and three function calls.
セクション 2 や 3 の関数コール。
.It Ar ENVIRONMENT
.\"O Describe environment variables.
環境変数を説明する。
.It Ar FILES
.\"O Files associated with the subject.
内容に関係するファイル。
.It Ar EXAMPLES
.\"O Examples and suggestions.
例やおすすめ。
.It Ar DIAGNOSTICS
.\"O Normally used for section four device interface diagnostics.
通常セクション 4 のデバイスインターフェースの診断用。
.It Ar ERRORS
.\"O Sections two and three error and signal
.\"O handling.
セクション 2 や 3 のエラーやシグナル処理。
.It Ar SEE ALSO
.\"O Cross references and citations.
相互参照や引用。
.It Ar CONFORMING TO
.\"O Conformance to standards if applicable.
可能なら標準への準拠。
.It Ar HISTORY
.\"O If a standard is not applicable, the history
.\"O of the subject should be given.
標準が適用されていない場合は、
歴史的な内容を与えるべきである。
.It Ar BUGS
.\"O Gotchas and caveats.
瑕疵や警告。
.It Ar other
.\"O Customized headers may be added at
.\"O the authors discretion.
筆者の判断でヘッダをあつらえてもよい。
.El
.It Li \&.Ss
.\"O Subsection Headers.
サブセクションのヘッダ。
.It Li \&.Pp
.\"O Paragraph Break.
.\"O Vertical space (one line).
段落の区切り。
垂直スペース (一行)。
.It Li \&.D1
.\"O (D-one) Display-one
.\"O Indent and display one text line.
(D-one) Display-one
インデントしてテキストを一行表示。
.It Li \&.Dl
.\"O (D-ell) Display-one literal.
.\"O Indent and display one line of literal text.
(D-ell) Displey-one literal。
インデントしてリテラルなテキストを一行表示。
.It Li \&.Bd
.\"O Begin-display block.
.\"O Display options:
表示ブロックの開始。
表示オプション:
.Bl -tag -width "xoffset string " -compact
.It Fl ragged
.\"O Unjustified (ragged edges).
揃えない (両端は不揃い)。
.It Fl filled
.\"O Justified.
揃える。
.It Fl literal
.\"O Literal text or code.
リテラルなテキストまたはコード。
.It Fl file Ar name
.\"O Read in named
.\"O .Ar file
.\"O and display.
指定された
.Ar file
を読んで表示する。
.It Fl offset Ar string
.\"O Offset display.
.\"O Acceptable
.\"O .Ar string
.\"O values:
オフセット表示。
受付ける
.Ar string
の値は:
.Bl -tag -width indent-two -compact
.It Ar left
.\"O Align block on left (default).
ブロックを左に揃える (デフォルト)。
.It Ar center
.\"O Approximate center margin.
大まかなセンターマージン。
.It Ar indent
.\"O Six constant width spaces (a tab).
定数幅の空白 6 つ (タブ 1 つ)。
.It Ar indent-two
.\"O Two tabs.
タブ 2 つ。
.It Ar right
.\"O Left aligns block 2 inches from
.\"O right.
揃えブロックを右から 2 インチの位置に残す。
.\"NAKANO ???
.It Ar xx Ns Cm n
.\"O Where
.\"O .Ar xx
.\"O is a number from
.Ar xx
は
.No \&4 Ns Cm n
.\"O to
から
.\"O .No \&9\&9 Ns Cm n .
.No \&9\&9 Ns Cm n
までの数字。
.It Ar Aa
.\"O Where
.\"O .Ar Aa
.\"O is a callable macro name.
.Ar Aa
は呼びだし可能なマクロの名前。
.It Ar string
.\"O The width of
.\"O .Ar string
.\"O is used.
.Ar string
の幅が用いられる。
.El
.El
.It Li \&.Ed
.\"O End-display (matches \&.Bd).
表示終了 (\&.Bd にマッチする)。
.It Li \&.Bl
.\"O Begin-list.
.\"O Create lists or columns.
.\"O Options:
リスト開始。
リストまたはコラムを生成する。オプションは以下:
.Bl -tag -width flag -compact
.\"O .It Ar List-types
.It Ar リスト形式
.Bl -column xbullet -compact
.\"O .It Fl bullet Ta "Bullet Item List"
.\"O .It Fl item Ta "Unlabeled List"
.\"O .It Fl enum Ta "Enumerated List"
.\"O .It Fl tag Ta "Tag Labeled List"
.\"O .It Fl diag Ta "Diagnostic List"
.\"O .It Fl hang Ta "Hanging Labeled List"
.\"O .It Fl ohang Ta "Overhanging Labeled List"
.\"O .It Fl inset Ta "Inset or Run-on Labeled List"
.It Fl bullet Ta "中黒のアイテムリスト"
.It Fl item Ta "ラベルなしリスト"
.It Fl enum Ta "数値付きリスト"
.It Fl tag Ta "タグラベル付きリスト"
.It Fl diag Ta "診断リスト (diagnostic list)"
.It Fl hang Ta "ぶらさがりラベルリスト"
.It Fl ohang Ta "飛び出しラベルリスト"
.It Fl inset Ta "ラベル付きリストの挿入・継続"
.El
.\"O .It List-parameters
.It リストパラメータ
.Bl -tag -width "xcompact " -compact
.It Fl offset
.\"O (All lists.) See
.\"O .Ql \&.Bd
.\"O begin-display above.
(全てのリスト) 上記の
.Ql \&.Bd
ディスプレイ開始 (begin-display) を見よ。
.It Fl width
.Pf ( Fl tag
.\"O and
および
.Fl hang
.\"O lists only.)
リストのみ)
.\"O See
.\"O .Ql \&.Bd .
.Ql \&.Bd .
を見よ。
.It Fl compact
.\"O (All lists.)
.\"O Suppresses blank lines.
(全てのリスト)
空行を抑制する。
.El
.El
.It Li \&.El
.\"O End-list.
リストの終わり。
.It Li \&.It
.\"O List item.
リスト項目。
.El
.\"O .Sh MANUAL AND GENERAL TEXT DOMAIN MACROS
.Sh マニュアルドメインマクロと一般テキストドメインマクロ
.\"O The manual and general text domain macros are special in that
.\"O most of them are parsed for callable macros
.\"O for example:
マニュアルドメインマクロと一般テキストドメインマクロとが
他と異なっているのは、
呼びだし可能マクロ (callable macro) の内部では、
そのほとんどがパーズされるという点である。
例えば以下のように変換される:
.Bl -tag -width ".Op Fl s Ar filex" -offset indent
.It Li "\&.Op Fl s Ar file"
.\"O Produces
→
.Op Fl s Ar file
.El
.Pp
.\"O In this example, the option enclosure macro
.\"O .Ql \&.Op
.\"O is parsed, and calls the callable content macro
.\"O .Ql \&Fl
.\"O which operates on the argument
.\"O .Ql s
.\"O and then calls the callable content macro
.\"O .Ql \&Ar
.\"O which operates on the argument
.\"O .Ql file .
.\"O Some macros may be callable, but are not parsed and vice versa.
.\"O These macros are indicated in the
.\"O .Em parsed
.\"O and
.\"O .Em callable
.\"O columns below.
この例では、囲みマクロ
.Ql \&.Op
に与えられたオプションがパーズされ、
中身の呼びだし可能なマクロである
.Ql \&Fl
が呼ばれ、引数である
.Ql s
に対して作用する。そして次に中身の呼びだし可能なマクロ
.Ql \&Ar
が呼ばれ、引数である
.Ql file
に作用する。呼びだし可能であるがパースされないマクロや、
その逆のマクロも存在する。このようなマクロは以下の
.Em parsed
カラムや
.Em callable
カラムで示す。
.Pp
.\"O Unless stated, manual domain macros share a common syntax:
特に記述がなければ、マニュアルドメインマクロは共通の書式をとる:
.Pp
.Dl \&.Va argument [\ .\ ,\ ;\ :\ (\ )\ [\ ]\ argument \...\ ]
.Pp
.\"O .Sy Note :
.\"O Opening and closing
.\"O punctuation characters are only recognized as such if they are presented
.\"O one at a time.
.\"O The string
.\"O .Ql "),"
.\"O is not recognized as punctuation and will be output with a leading white
.\"O space and in what ever font the calling macro uses.
.Sy 注意 :
句読文字 (punctuation character) の開き・閉じは、
それらが一度に単一の文字で現れた場合のみそのように解釈される。
文字列
.Ql "),"
は、句読区切りとはみなされず、その前に空白文字があれば
その文字とともに、また呼び出したマクロが用いるフォントで出力される。
.\"O The
.\"O argument list
.\"O .Ql "] ) ,"
.\"O is recognized as three sequential closing punctuation characters
.\"O and a leading white space is not output between the characters
.\"O and the previous argument (if any).
引数リスト
.Ql "] ) ,"
は 3 つの連続した閉じ句読文字と解釈され、
それぞれの前にある空白文字は、各文字や (もしあれば) その前にある
引数との間には出力されない。
.\"O The special meaning of a punctuation character may be escaped
.\"O with the string
.\"O .Ql \e& .
.\"O For example the following string,
特殊な意味を持つ句読文字は、文字列
.Ql \e&
によってエスケープできる。
例えば以下の左の文字列は右のように変換される。
.Bl -tag -width "&.Ar file1\ , file2\ , file3\ )\ ." -offset indent
.It Li "\&.Ar file1\ , file2\ , file3\ )\ ."
.\"O Produces
→
.Ar file1 , file2 , file3 ) .
.El
.ne 1i
.\"O .Ss Manual Domain Macros
.Ss マニュアルドメインマクロ
.Bl -column "Name" "Parsed" Callable" -compact
.\"O .It Em Name	Parsed	Callable	Description
.It Em 名前	Parsed	Callable	説明
.\"O .It Li \&Ad Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Address. (This macro may be deprecated.)"
.\"O .It Li \&An Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Author name."
.\"O .It Li \&Ar Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Command-line argument."
.\"O .It Li \&Cd Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Configuration declaration (section four only)."
.\"O .It Li \&Cm Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Command-line argument modifier."
.It Li \&Ad Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "アドレス (このマクロは使わない方が良い)"
.It Li \&An Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "著者の名前"
.It Li \&Ar Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "コマンドライン引数"
.It Li \&Cd Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "設定の宣言 (セクション 4 のみ)"
.It Li \&Cm Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "コマンドライン引数の修正子"
.\"O .It Li \&Dv Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Defined variable (source code)."
.\"O .It Li \&Er Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Error number (source code)."
.\"O .It Li \&Ev Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Environment variable."
.\"O .It Li \&Fa Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Function argument."
.\"O .It Li \&Fd Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Function declaration."
.It Li \&Dv Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "定義済み変数 (ソースコード)"
.It Li \&Er Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "エラー番号 (ソースコード)"
.It Li \&Ev Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "環境変数"
.It Li \&Fa Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "関数の引き数"
.It Li \&Fd Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "関数の宣言"
.\"O .It Li \&Fn Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Function call (also .Fo and .Fc)."
.\"O .It Li \&Ic Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Interactive command."
.\"O .It Li \&Li Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Literal text."
.\"O .It Li \&Nm Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Command name."
.\"O .It Li \&Op Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Option (also .Oo and .Oc)."
.It Li \&Fn Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "関数呼びだし (.Fo と .Fc も)"
.It Li \&Ic Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "インタラクティブなコマンド"
.It Li \&Li Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "リテラルなテキスト"
.It Li \&Nm Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "コマンドの名前"
.It Li \&Op Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "オプション (.Oo と .Oc も)"
.\"O .It Li \&Ot Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Old style function type (Fortran only)."
.\"O .It Li \&Pa Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Pathname or filename."
.\"O .It Li \&St Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Standards (\-p1003.2, \-p1003.1 or \-ansiC)"
.\"O .It Li \&Va Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Variable name."
.\"O .It Li \&Vt Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Variable type (Fortran only)."
.\"O .It Li \&Xr Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Manual Page Cross Reference."
.It Li \&Ot Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "古い形式の関数型 (Fortran のみ)."
.It Li \&Pa Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "パス名またはファイル名"
.It Li \&St Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "標準 (\-p1003.2, \-p1003.1, \-ansiC のどれか)"
.It Li \&Va Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "変数の名前"
.It Li \&Vt Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "変数の型 (Fortran のみ)"
.It Li \&Xr Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "マニュアルページの相互参照"
.El
.\"O .Ss General Text Domain Macros
.Ss 一般テキストドメインマクロ
.Bl -column "Name" "Parsed" Callable" -compact
.\"O .It Em "Name	Parsed	Callable	Description"
.It Em 名前	Parsed	Callable	説明
.\"O .It Li \&%A Ta Yes Ta \&No Ta "Reference author."
.\"O .It Li \&%B Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Reference book title."
.\"O .It Li \&%\&C Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Reference place of publishing (city)."
.\"O .It Li \&%\&D Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Reference date."
.\"O .It Li \&%J Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Reference journal title."
.It Li \&%A Ta Yes Ta \&No Ta "参考文献の著者"
.It Li \&%B Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "参考文献の書籍タイトル"
.It Li \&%\&C Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "参考文献の出版地 (街)"
.It Li \&%\&D Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "参考文献の日付"
.It Li \&%J Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "参考文献の雑誌名"
.\"O .It Li \&%N Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Reference issue number."
.\"O .It Li \&%\&O Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Reference optional information."
.\"O .It Li \&%P Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Reference page number(s)."
.\"O .It Li \&%R Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Reference report Name."
.\"O .It Li \&%T Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Reference article title."
.It Li \&%N Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "参考文献の号数"
.It Li \&%\&O Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "参考文献の補助情報"
.It Li \&%P Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "参考文献のページ"
.It Li \&%R Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "参考文献のリポート名"
.It Li \&%T Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "参考文献の記事タイトル"
.\"O .It Li \&%V Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Reference volume."
.\"O .It Li \&Ac Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Angle close quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Ao Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Angle open quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Ap Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Apostrophe."
.\"O .It Li \&Aq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Angle quote."
.It Li \&%V Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "参考文献の巻数"
.It Li \&Ac Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "アングルクォートの閉じ"
.It Li \&Ao Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "アングルクォートの開き"
.It Li \&Ap Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "アポストロフィ"
.It Li \&Aq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "アングルクォート"
.\"O .It Li \&At Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta Tn "AT&T UNIX"
.\"O .It Li \&Bc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Bracket close quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Bf Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Begin font mode."
.\"O .It Li \&Bo Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Bracket open quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Bq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Bracket quote."
.It Li \&At Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta Tn "AT&T UNIX"
.It Li \&Bc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "ブラケットクォートの閉じ"
.It Li \&Bf Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "フォントモードの開始"
.It Li \&Bo Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "ブラケットクォートの開き"
.It Li \&Bq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "ブラケットクォート"
.\"O .It Li \&Bx Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta Bx .
.\"O .It Li \&Db Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Debug (default is \\*qoff\\*q)"
.\"O .It Li \&Dc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Double close quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Do Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Double open quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Dq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Double quote."
.It Li \&Bx Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta Bx .
.It Li \&Db Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "デバッグ (デフォルトは \\*qoff\\*q)"
.It Li \&Dc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "ダブルクォートの閉じ"
.It Li \&Do Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "ダブルクォートの開き"
.It Li \&Dq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "ダブルクォート"
.\"O .It Li \&Ec Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Enclose string close quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Ef Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "End font mode."
.\"O .It Li \&Em Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Emphasis (traditional English)."
.\"O .It Li \&Eo Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Enclose string open quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Fx Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta Tn "FreeBSD operating system"
.It Li \&Ec Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "エンクローズ文字列引用の閉じ"
.It Li \&Ef Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "フォントモードの終了"
.It Li \&Em Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "強調 (traditional English)."
.It Li \&Eo Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "エンクローズ文字列引用の開き"
.It Li \&Fx Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta Tn "FreeBSD operating system"
.\"O .It Li \&No Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Normal text (no-op)."
.\"O .It Li \&Ns Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "No space."
.\"O .It Li \&Pc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Parenthesis close quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Pf Ta Yes Ta \&No Ta "Prefix string."
.\"O .It Li \&Po Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Parenthesis open quote."
.It Li \&No Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "通常のテキスト (効果なし)"
.It Li \&Ns Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "スペース無し"
.It Li \&Pc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "括弧クォートの閉じ"
.It Li \&Pf Ta Yes Ta \&No Ta "前置文字"
.It Li \&Po Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "括弧クォートの開き"
.\"O .It Li \&Pq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Parentheses quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Qc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Straight Double close quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Ql Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Quoted literal."
.\"O .It Li \&Qo Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Straight Double open quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Qq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Straight Double quote."
.It Li \&Pq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "括弧クォート"
.It Li \&Qc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "ダブルストレートクォートの閉じ"
.It Li \&Ql Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "クォートされたリテラル"
.It Li \&Qo Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "ダブルストレートクォートの閉じ"
.It Li \&Qq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "ダブルストレートクォートの閉じ"
.\"O .It Li \&Re Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Reference end."
.\"O .It Li \&Rs Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Reference start."
.\"O .It Li \&Rv Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Return values (sections two and three only)."
.\"O .It Li \&Sc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Single close quote."
.\"O .It Li \&So Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Single open quote."
.It Li \&Re Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "参考文献の終了"
.It Li \&Rs Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "参考文献の開始"
.It Li \&Rv Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "返り値 (セクション 2, 3 のみ)"
.It Li \&Sc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "シングルクォートの閉じ"
.It Li \&So Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "シングルクォートの開き"
.\"O .It Li \&Sq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Single quote."
.\"O .It Li \&Sm Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Space mode (default is \\*qon\\*q)"
.\"O .It Li \&Sx Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Section Cross Reference."
.\"O .It Li \&Sy Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Symbolic (traditional English)."
.\"O .It Li \&Tn Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Trade or type name (small Caps)."
.It Li \&Sq Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "シングルクォート"
.It Li \&Sm Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "スペースモード (デフォルトは \\*qon\\*q)"
.It Li \&Sx Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "セクションの相互参照"
.It Li \&Sy Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "シンボリック (traditional English)."
.It Li \&Tn Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Trade または型名 (small Caps)."
.\"O .It Li \&Ux Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta Ux
.\"O .It Li \&Xc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Extend argument list close."
.\"O .It Li \&Xo Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "Extend argument list open."
.It Li \&Ux Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta Ux
.It Li \&Xc Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "拡張引数リストの閉じ"
.It Li \&Xo Ta Yes Ta Yes Ta "拡張引数リストの開き"
.El
.\" .It Sy \&Hf Ta \&No Ta \&No Ta "Include file with header"
.Pp
.\"O Macro names ending in
.\"O .Ql q
.\"O quote remaining items on the argument list.
.\"O Macro names ending in
.\"O .Ql o
.\"O begin a quote which may span more than one line of input and
.\"O are close quoted with the matching macro name ending in
.\"O .Ql c .
.\"O Enclosure macros may be nested and are limited to
.\"O eight arguments.
.Ql q
で終わる名前のマクロは、引数リストの残りの項目をクォートする。
.Ql o
で終わる名前のマクロは一行以上にわたる入力のクォートを開始し、
これは対応する名前の
.Ql c
でおわる名前のマクロで終了する。
囲みマクロはネストでき、引数は 8 つまで取れる。
.Pp
.\"O Note: the extended argument list macros
.\"O .Pf ( Ql \&.Xo ,
.\"O .Ql \&.Xc )
.\"O and the function enclosure macros
.\"O .Pf ( Ql \&.Fo ,
.\"O .Ql \&.Fc )
.\"O are irregular.
.\"O The extended list macros are used when the number of macro arguments
.\"O would exceed the
.\"O .Xr troff
.\"O limitation of nine arguments.
注意: 拡張引数リストマクロ
.Pf ( Ql \&.Xo ,
.Ql \&.Xc )
および関数の囲みマクロ
.Pf ( Ql \&.Fo ,
.Ql \&.Fc )
は変則である。
拡張リストマクロはマクロの引数が
.Xr troff
の制限である 9 個を越えるときに用いられる。
.Pp
.\"O The macros UR (starting a URI/URL hypertext reference), UE (ending one),
.\"O and UN (identifying a target for a reference) are also available.
.\"O See
.\"O .Xr man 7
.\"O for more information on these macros.
UR マクロ (URI/URL ハイパーテキスト参照の開始), UE マクロ (終了),
UN マクロ (参照用ターゲットの指定) も利用できる。
これらのマクロに関するより詳しい情報は
.Xr man 7
を見よ。
.\" The following does not apply on Linux:
.\"O .\".Sh CONFIGURATION
.\"O .\"For site specific configuration of the macro package,
.\"O .\"see the file
.\"O .\".Pa /usr/src/share/tmac/README .
.\".Sh 設定
.\"サイト特有のマクロパッケージの設定に関しては、
.\".Pa /usr/src/share/tmac/README
.\"ファイルを見よ。
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Bl -tag -width "tmac.doc-ditroff" -compact
.It Pa doc.tmac
.\"O Manual and general text domain macros.
マニュアルドメインマクロと一般テキストドメインマクロ。
.It Pa tmac/doc-common
.\"O Common structural macros and definitions.
共通の構造マクロと定義。
.It Pa tmac/doc-nroff
.\"O Site dependent
.\"O .Xr nroff
.\"O style file.
サイト依存の
.Xr nroff
スタイルファイル。
.It Pa tmac/doc-ditroff
.\"O Site dependent
.\"O .Xr troff
.\"O style file.
サイト依存の
.Xr troff
スタイルファイル。
.It Pa tmac/doc-syms
.\"O Special defines (such as the standards macro).
特殊定義 (標準マクロなど)。
.El
.\"O .Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr groff_mdoc 7 ,
.Xr mdoc.samples 7 ,
.Xr man 7 ,
.Xr man-pages 7
