.\" Copyright (c) 2006, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" includes some material by other authors that was formerly
.\" in intro.2.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Akihiro MOTOKI all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2006-08-12, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.39
.\" Updated 2008-08-07, Akihiro MOTOKI, LDP v3.05
.\" Updated 2008-08-20, Akihiro MOTOKI, LDP v3.07
.\"
.\" WORD:	standards	標準規格
.\" WORD:	revision	改訂版
.\" WORD:	guide		指針
.\"
.TH STANDARDS 7 2009-06-01 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O standards \- C and UNIX Standards
standards \- C と UNIX の標準規格
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The CONFORMING TO section that appears in many manual pages identifies
.\"O various standards to which the documented interface conforms.
.\"O The following list briefly describes these standards.
多くのマニュアルページの「準拠 (CONFORMING TO)」の章は、
そのページに記載されたインタフェースが準拠する
各種の標準規格を示すものである。
以下にこれらの標準規格の簡単な説明を記す。
.TP
.B V7
.\"O Version 7, the ancestral UNIX from Bell Labs.
ベル研究所による元祖 UNIX である Version 7。
.TP
.B 4.2BSD
.\"O This is an implementation standard defined by the 4.2 release
.\"O of the
.\"O .IR "Berkeley Software Distribution",
.\"O released by the University of California at Berkeley.
.\"O This was the first Berkeley release that contained a TCP/IP
.\"O stack and the sockets API.
.\"O 4.2BSD was released in 1983.
カリフォルニア大バークレー校 (the University of California at Berkeley)
によりリリースされた
.IR "Berkeley Software Distribution"
リリース 4.2 によって規定された、実装に基づく標準規格
(implementation standard)。
バークレーによるリリースの中で
TCP/IP スタックとソケット API を含む最初のリリースである。

.\"O Earlier major BSD releases included \fI3BSD\fP (1980), \fI4BSD\fP (1980),
.\"O and \fI4.1BSD\fP (1981).
これより前のBSD の主なリリースとしては
\fI3BSD\fP (1980), \fI4BSD\fP (1980), \fI4.1BSD\fP (1981) がある。
.TP
.B 4.3BSD
.\"O The successor to 4.2BSD, released in 1986.
1986 年にリリースされた 4.2BSD の後継。
.TP
.B 4.4BSD
.\"O The successor to 4.3BSD, released in 1993.
.\"O This was the last major Berkeley release.
1993 年にリリースされた 4.3BSD の後継。
バークレー (Berkeley) による最後の大きなリリースである。
.TP
.B System V
.\"O This is an implementation standard defined by AT&T's milestone 1983
.\"O release of its commercial System V (five) release.
.\"O The previous major AT&T release was
.\"O .IR "System III" ,
.\"O released in 1981.
AT&T の商用 System V (5) リリースの 1983 年版により規定された
実装に基づく標準規格。
一つ前の AT&T の大きなリリースは 1981 年にリリースされた
.I "System III"
である。
.TP
.B System V release 2 (SVr2)
.\"O This was the next System V release, made in 1985.
.\"O The SVr2 was formally described in the
.\"O .I "System V Interface Definition version 1"
.\"O .RI ( "SVID 1" )
.\"O published in 1985.
System V の二番目のリリースであり、1985 年に作成された。
SVr2 は正式には 1985 年に発行された
.I "System V Interface Definition version 1"
.RI ( "SVID 1" )
に記載されている。
.TP
.B System V release 3 (SVr3)
.\"O This was the successor to SVr2, released in 1986.
.\"O This release was formally described in the
.\"O .I "System V Interface Definition version 2"
.\"O .RI ( "SVID 2" ).
SVr2 の後継。1986 年にリリースされた。
このリリースは正式には
.I "System V Interface Definition version 2"
.RI ( "SVID 2" )
に記載されている。
.TP
.B System V release 4 (SVr4)
.\"O This was the successor to SVr3, released in 1989.
.\"O This version of System V is described in the "Programmer's Reference
.\"O Manual: Operating System API (Intel processors)" (Prentice-Hall
.\"O 1992, ISBN 0-13-951294-2)
.\"O This release was formally described in the
.\"O .I "System V Interface Definition version 3"
.\"O .RI ( "SVID 3" ),
.\"O and is considered the definitive System V release.
SVr3 の後継。1989 年にリリースされた。
このバージョンの System V については
"Programmer's Reference Manual: Operating System API (Intel processors)"
(Prentice-Hall 1992, ISBN 0-13-951294-2) に記載されている。
このリリースは正式には
.I "System V Interface Definition version 3"
.RI ( "SVID 3" )
に記載されており、System V の最終的なリリースと考えられている。
.TP
.B SVID 4
.\"O System V Interface Definition version 4, issued in 1995.
.\"O Available online at http://www.sco.com/developers/devspecs/ .
System V Interface Definition version 4。
1995 年に発行された。
インターネットでは http://www.sco.com/developers/devspecs/
で入手できる。
.TP
.B C89
.\"O This was the first C language standard, ratified by ANSI
.\"O (American National Standards Institute) in 1989
.\"O .RI ( X3.159-1989 ).
.\"O Sometimes this is known as
.\"O .IR "ANSI C" ,
.\"O but since C99 is also an
.\"O ANSI standard, this term is ambiguous.
.\"O This standard was also ratified by
.\"O ISO (International Standards Organization) in 1990
.\"O .RI ( "ISO/IEC 9899:1990" ),
.\"O and is thus occasionally referred to as
.\"O .IR "ISO C90" .
最初の C 言語の標準規格である。
ANSI (American National Standards Institute) により
1989 年の承認された
.RI ( X3.159-1989 )。
時には、この規格は
.I "ANSI C"
とも呼ばれるが、
C99 も ANSI 標準なので、この言い方はあいまいである。
この規格は 1990 年に ISO (International Standards Organization) による
承認も受けており
.RI ( "ISO/IEC 9899:1990" )、
そのため
.I "ISO C90"
として参照されることもたまにある。
.TP
.B C99
.\"O This revision of the C language standard was ratified by ISO in 1999
.\"O .RI ( "ISO/IEC 9899:1999" ).
.\"O Available online at
.\"O http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/standards.
C 言語の標準規格のこの改訂版は ISO により 1999 年に承認された
.RI ( "ISO/IEC 9899:1999" )。
http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/standards
からオンラインで入手可能である。
.TP
.B POSIX.1-1990
.\"O "Portable Operating System Interface for Computing Environments".
.\"O IEEE 1003.1-1990 part 1, ratified by ISO in 1990
.\"O .RI ( "ISO/IEC 9945-1:1990" ).
.\"O The term "POSIX" was coined by Richard Stallman.
"Portable Operating System Interface for Computing Environments".
1990 年に ISO により承認された、IEEE 1003.1-1990 part 1
.RI ( "ISO/IEC 9945-1:1990" )。
"POSIX" という言葉は Richard Stallman が初めて作った。
.TP
.B POSIX.2
.\"O IEEE Std 1003.2-1992,
.\"O describing commands and utilities, ratified by ISO in 1993
.\"O .RI ( "ISO/IEC 9945-2:1993" ).
IEEE Std 1003.2-1992.
コマンドとユーティリティについて説明が書かれており、
1993 年に ISO により承認された
.RI ( "ISO/IEC 9945-2:1993" )。
.TP
.\"O .BR POSIX.1b " (formerly known as \fIPOSIX.4\fP)"
.BR POSIX.1b " (以前は \fIPOSIX.4\fP とも言われた)"
.\"O IEEE Std 1003.1b-1993
.\"O describing real-time facilities
.\"O for portable operating systems, ratified by ISO in 1996
.\"O .RI ( "ISO/IEC 9945-1:1996" ).
IEEE Std 1003.1b-1993.
移植可能なオペレーティングシステムのためのリアルタイム機能について
記載されており、
1996 年の ISO により承認された
.RI ( "ISO/IEC 9945-1:1996" )。
.TP
.B POSIX.1c
.\"O IEEE Std 1003.1c-1995 describing the POSIX threads interfaces.
IEEE Std 1003.1c-1995.
POSIX スレッドインタフェースについて記載している。
.TP
.B POSIX.1d
.\"O IEEE Std 1003.1c-1999 describing additional real-time extensions.
IEEE Std 1003.1c-1999.
追加のリアルタイム拡張について記載している。
.TP
.B POSIX.1g
.\"O IEEE Std 1003.1g-2000 describing networking APIs (including sockets).
IEEE Std 1003.1g-2000.
(ソケットを含めた) ネットワーク API について記載している。
.TP
.B POSIX.1j
.\"O IEEE Std 1003.1j-2000 describing advanced real-time extensions.
IEEE Std 1003.1j-2000.
高度なリアルタイム拡張について記載している。
.TP
.B POSIX.1-1996
.\"O A 1996 revision of POSIX.1 which incorporated POSIX.1b and POSIX.1c.
POSIX.1 の 1996 年の改訂版。
POSIX.1b と POSIX.1c を取り込んでいる。
.TP
.B XPG3
.\"O Released in 1989, this was the first significant release of the
.\"O .IR "X/Open Portability Guide" ,
.\"O produced by the
.\"O X/Open Company, a multivendor consortium.
.\"O This multivolume guide was based on the POSIX standards.
1989 年リリースの、マルチベンダによる業界団体である X/Open 社による
.I "X/Open Portability Guide"
の最初の大きなリリースである。
この指針は POSIX 標準規格に基づいている。
.TP
.B XPG4
.\"O A revision of the X/Open Portability Guide, released in 1992.
1992 年にリリースされた、X/Open Portability Guide (移植性に関する指針)
の改訂版。
.TP
.B XPG4v2
.\"O A 1994 revision of XPG4.
.\"O This is also referred to as
.\"O .IR "Spec 1170" ,
.\"O where 1170 referred to the number of interfaces
.\"O defined by this standard.
XPG4 の 1994年改訂版。
.I "Spec 1170"
とも呼ばれる。
1170 とはこの標準規格が定義しているインタフェースの数を表すものである。
.TP
.B SUS  (SUSv1)
.\"O Single UNIX Specification.
.\"O This was a repackaging of XPG4v2 and other X/Open standards
.\"O (X/Open Curses Issue 4 version 2,
.\"O X/Open Networking Service (XNS) Issue 4).
.\"O Systems conforming to this standard can be branded
.\"O .IR "UNIX 95" .
Single UNIX Specification.
この規格は、XPG4v2 やその他の X/Open による標準規格
(X/Open Curses Issue 4 version 2,
X/Open Networking Service (XNS) Issue 4)
を再構成したものである。
この規格に準拠するシステムは
.I "UNIX 95"
を名乗ることができる。
.TP
.B SUSv2
.\"O Single UNIX Specification version 2.
.\"O Sometimes also referred to as
.\"O .IR XPG5 .
.\"O This standard appeared in 1997.
.\"O Systems conforming to this standard can be branded
.\"O .IR "UNIX 98" .
.\"O See also
.\"O http://www.UNIX-systems.org/version2/ .)
Single UNIX Specification version 2.
.I XPG5
と呼ばれることもある。
この規格は 1997 年に登場した。
この規格に準拠するシステムは
.I "UNIX 98"
を名乗ることができる。
http://www.UNIX-systems.org/version2/
も参照のこと。
.TP
.B POSIX.1-2001, SUSv3
.\"O This was a 2001 revision and consolidation of the
.\"O POSIX.1, POSIX.2, and SUS standards into a single document,
.\"O conducted under the auspices of the Austin group
.\"O (http://www.opengroup.org/austin/ .)
.\"O The standard is available online at
.\"O http://www.unix-systems.org/version3/ ,
.\"O and the interfaces that it describes are also available in the Linux
.\"O manual pages package under sections 1p and 3p (e.g., "man 3p open").
これは POSIX.1, POSIX.2, SUS の 2001年の改訂版である。
また、POSIX.1, POSIX.2, SUS を一つの文書に統合したものである。
この統合は Austin Group (http://www.opengroup.org/austin/)
の後援の元で行われた。
インターネットでは
http://www.unix-systems.org/version3/ で入手できる。
また、この規格に書かれているインタフェースについては
Linux のマニュアルページ・パッケージの 1p, 3p セクションでも
参照できる (例えば、"man 3p open")。

.\"O The standard defines two levels of conformance:
.\"O .IR "POSIX conformance" ,
.\"O which is a baseline set of interfaces required of a conforming system;
.\"O and
.\"O .IR "XSI Conformance",
.\"O which additionally mandates a set of interfaces
.\"O (the "XSI extension") which are only optional for POSIX conformance.
.\"O XSI-conformant systems can be branded
.\"O .IR "UNIX 03" .
.\"O (XSI conformance constitutes the
.\"O .I "Single UNIX Specification version 3"
.\"O .RI ( SUSv3 ).)
この規格では、
.I "POSIX Conformance (POSIX 準拠)"
と
.I "XSI Conformance (XSI 準拠)"
の二段階の適合性を定義している。
.I "POSIX 準拠"
は準拠するシステムに必要とされるインタフェースの基本セットであり、
.I "XSI 準拠)"
では "XSI 拡張" という追加のインタフェース群が義務付けられている
(POSIX 準拠では XSI 拡張の実装は任意 (optional) となっている)。
XSI 準拠のシステムは
.I "UNIX 03"
を名乗ることができる
(XSI 準拠の内容が
.I "Single UNIX Specification version 3"
.RI ( SUSv3 )
である)。

.\"O The POSIX.1-2001 document is broken into four parts:
POSIX.1-2001 文書は 4つの部分に分けることができる:

.BR XBD :
.\"O Definitions, terms and concepts, header file specifications.
定義、用語と概念、ヘッダファイルの仕様。

.BR XSH :
.\"O Specifications of functions (i.e., system calls and library
.\"O functions in actual implementations).
関数の仕様 (関数とは、実際の実装でのシステムコールと
ライブラリ関数のことである)。

.BR XCU :
.\"O Specifications of commands and utilities
.\"O (i.e., the area formerly described by POSIX.2).
コマンドとユーティリティの仕様
(以前、 POSIX.2 に記載されていた内容)。

.BR XRAT :
.\"O Informative text on the other parts of the standard.
参考情報と規格のそれ以外の部分

.\"O POSIX.1-2001 is aligned with C99, so that all of the
.\"O library functions standardized in C99 are also
.\"O standardized in POSIX.1-2001.
POSIX.1-2001 は C99 と整合がとられており、
C99 で標準化されたライブラリ関数は POSIX.1-2001 でも
標準化されている。

.\"O Two Technical Corrigenda (minor fixes and improvements)
.\"O of the original 2001 standard have occurred:
.\"O TC1 in 2003 (referred to as
.\"O .IR POSIX.1-2003 ),
.\"O and TC2 in 2004 (referred to as
.\"O .IR POSIX.1-2004 ).
元の 2001 年版の標準に対する Technical Corrigenda
(正誤表; 細かな修正と改良) が二つ行われている:
2003 年の TC1
.RI ( POSIX.1-2003
と呼ばれる) と 2004 年の TC2
.RI ( POSIX.1-2004
と呼ばれる) である。
.TP
.B POSIX.1-2008, SUSv4
.\"O Work on the next revision of POSIX.1/SUS was completed and
.\"O ratified in 2008.
POSIX.1/SUS の次の改訂版に関する作業は 2008 年に完了し承認された。

.\"O The changes in this revision are not as large as those
.\"O that occurred for POSIX.1-2001/SUSv3,
.\"O but a number of new interfaces are added
.\"O and various details of existing specifications are modified.
.\"O Many of the interfaces that were optional in
.\"O POSIX.1-2001 become mandatory in the 2008 revision of the standard.
.\"O A few interfaces that are present in POSIX.1-2001 are marked
.\"O as obsolete in POSIX.1-2008, or removed from the standard altogether.
この改訂版での変更は POSIX.1-2001/SUSv3 で行われた変更ほど大きくないが、
多くの新しいインターフェイスが追加され、既存の仕様に関しても
種々の詳細が変更されている。
POSIX.1-2001 では任意 (optional) とされていたインターフェイスの多くが
2008 年版の標準では必須 (mandatory) になる。
POSIX.1-2001 に存在するインターフェイスのいくつかは、
POSIX.1-2008 では廃止予定の印が付けられたり、
標準から完全に削除されたりしている。

.\"O The revised standard is broken into the same four parts as POSIX.1-2001,
.\"O and again there are two levels of conformance: the baseline
.\"O .IR "POSIX Conformance" ,
.\"O and
.\"O .IR "XSI Conformance" ,
.\"O which mandates an additional set of interfaces
.\"O beyond those in the base specification.
改訂された標準は POSIX.1-2001 と同じく 4 つの部分に分けられ、
前回と同様に二段階の適合性を定義している。
基本セットである
.I "POSIX Conformance (POSIX 準拠)"
と、
基本仕様のインターフェイスに加えて追加のインターフェイス群が
義務付けられている
.I "XSI Conformance (XSI 準拠)"
の二つである。

.\"O In general, where the CONFORMING TO section of a manual page
.\"O lists POSIX.1-2001, it can be assumed that the interface also
.\"O conforms to POSIX.1-2008, unless otherwise noted.
一般には、マニュアルページの「準拠」の章のリストに POSIX.1-2001 が
あれば、他に注意書きがなければ、そのインターフェイスは POSIX.1-2008
にも準拠していると考えてよい。

.\"O Further information can be found on the Austin group web site,
.\"O http://www.opengroup.org/austin/ .
詳しい情報は Austin Group のウェブサイト
http://www.opengroup.org/austin/
に載っている。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR feature_test_macros (7),
.BR libc (7),
.BR posixoptions (7)
