.\" Copyright (c) 2006 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" 28 Dec 2006 - Initial Creation
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2007  Akihiro MOTOKI
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2007-05-04, Akihiro MOTOKI <amotoki@dd.iij4u.or.jp>, LDP v2.44
.\"
.TH TERMIO 7 2006-12-28 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O termio \- System V terminal driver interface
termio \- System V 端末ドライバインタフェース
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B termio
.\"O is the name of the old System V terminal driver interface.
.\"O This interface defined a
.\"O .I termio
.\"O structure used to store terminal settings, and a range of
.\"O .BR ioctl (2)
.\"O operations to get and set terminal attributes.
.B termio
は、古い System V 端末ドライバインタフェースの名前である。
このインタフェースは、
端末設定を保持するための
.I termio
構造体、および端末属性を取得・変更するための種々の
.BR ioctl (2)
操作を定義していた。

.\"O The
.\"O .B termio
.\"O interface is now obsolete: POSIX.1-1990 standardized a modified
.\"O version of this interface, under the name
.\"O .BR termios .
.\"O The POSIX.1 data structure differs slightly from the
.\"O System V version, and POSIX.1 defined a suite of functions
.\"O to replace the various
.\"O .BR ioctl (2)
.\"O operations that existed in System V.
.\"O (This was done because
.\"O .BR ioctl (2)
.\"O was unstandardized, and its variadic third argument
.\"O does not allow argument type checking.)
.B termio
インタフェースは現在では時代遅れである。
POSIX.1-1990 で、このインタフェースの修正版が
.B termios
という名前で標準化された。
POSIX.1 のデータ構造は System V 版と少し違いがある。
また、POSIX.1 は System V 版で存在した種々の
.BR ioctl (2)
操作を置き換える関数群を定義した
(このようになったのは、
.BR ioctl (2)
が標準化されていなかったことと、
.BR ioctl (2)
の第三引き数が可変長引き数で型チェックができなかったのが理由である)。

.\"O If you're looking for page called "termio", then you can probably
.\"O find most of the information that you seek in either
.\"O .BR termios (3)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR tty_ioctl (4).
"termio" という man page を探しているのであれば、
探している情報のほとんどは
.BR termios (3)
か
.BR tty_ioctl (4)
のどちらかで見つかることだろう。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR termios (3),
.BR tty_ioctl (4)
