'\"
.\" (C) Copyright 1999-2000 David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@dwheeler.com)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Fragments of this document are directly derived from IETF standards.
.\" For those fragments which are directly derived from such standards,
.\" the following notice applies, which is the standard copyright and
.\" rights announcement of The Internet Society:
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998).  All Rights Reserved.
.\" This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
.\" others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
.\" or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
.\" and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
.\" kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
.\" included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
.\" document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
.\" the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
.\" Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
.\" developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
.\" copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
.\" followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than English.
.\"
.\" Modified Fri Jul 25 23:00:00 1999 by David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@dwheeler.com)
.\" Modified Fri Aug 21 23:00:00 1999 by David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@dwheeler.com)
.\" Modified Tue Mar 14 2000 by David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@dwheeler.com)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated San 12 Mar 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        generated file          (KDE の) 生成ファイル
.\"
.TH URI 7 2000-03-14 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O uri, url, urn \- uniform resource identifier (URI), including a URL or URN
.SH 名前
uri, url, urn \- uniform resource identifier (URI), URL と URN も含む.
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.HP 0.2i
URI = [ absoluteURI | relativeURI ] [ "#" fragment ]
.HP
absoluteURI = scheme ":" ( hierarchical_part | opaque_part )
.HP
relativeURI = ( net_path | absolute_path | relative_path ) [ "?" query ]
.HP
scheme = "http" | "ftp" | "gopher" | "mailto" | "news" | "telnet" |
         "file" | "man" | "info" | "whatis" | "ldap" | "wais" | \&...
.HP
hierarchical_part = ( net_path | absolute_path ) [ "?" query ]
.HP
net_path = "//" authority [ absolute_path ]
.HP
absolute_path = "/"  path_segments
.HP
relative_path = relative_segment [ absolute_path ]
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.PP
.\"O A Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) is a short string of characters
.\"O identifying an abstract or physical resource (for example, a web page).
.\"O A Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is a URI
.\"O that identifies a resource through its primary access
.\"O mechanism (e.g., its network "location"), rather than
.\"O by name or some other attribute of that resource.
.\"O A Uniform Resource Name (URN) is a URI
.\"O that must remain globally unique and persistent even when
.\"O the resource ceases to exist or becomes unavailable.
Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)
は抽象的・物理的なリソース (web ページなど)
を識別するための短い文字列である。
Uniform Resource Locator (URL) は URI の一種で、
リソースの名前などの属性でではなく、
そのリソースに対応するアクセスメカニズムを通してリソースを指定する
(つまりネットワーク上の「場所 (location)」を指定する)。
Uniform Resource Name (URN) は URI の一種で、
これは対象のリソースが廃棄されたり利用できなくなった場合にも、
グローバルに他と重なることなく永続しなければならない。
.PP
.\"O URIs are the standard way to name hypertext link destinations
.\"O for tools such as web browsers.
.\"O The string "http://www.kernelnotes.org" is a URL (and thus it
.\"O is also a URI).
.\"O Many people use the term URL loosely as a synonym for URI
.\"O (though technically URLs are a subset of URIs).
URI は、 web ブラウザなどのツールで
ハイパーテキストリンクのリンク先を指定する時の標準的な方法である。
文字列 "http://www.kernelnotes.org" は URL である (従って
URI でもある)。多くの人々は、 URL という言葉をほぼ URI の
同義語として使っている (しかし技術的には URL は URI のサブセットである)。
.PP
.\"O URIs can be absolute or relative.
.\"O An absolute identifier refers to a resource independent of
.\"O context, while a relative
.\"O identifier refers to a resource by describing the difference
.\"O from the current context.
.\"O Within a relative path reference, the complete path segments "." and
.\"O ".." have special meanings: "the current hierarchy level" and "the
.\"O level above this hierarchy level", respectively, just like they do in
.\"O Unix-like systems.
.\"O A path segment which contains a colon
.\"O character can't be used as the first segment of a relative URI path
.\"O (e.g., "this:that"), because it would be mistaken for a scheme name;
.\"O precede such segments with ./ (e.g., "./this:that").
.\"O Note that descendants of MS-DOS (e.g., Microsoft Windows) replace
.\"O devicename colons with the vertical bar ("|") in URIs, so "C:" becomes "C|".
URI は絶対的にも相対的にも指定できる。
絶対的な指定は、リソースをコンテクストに依存しないかたちで参照する。
相対的な指定は、リソースを現在のコンテクストからの差異によって記述する。
相対パス参照では、 "." および ".." だけのパス部分 (path segment)
は特別な意味を持ち、
それぞれ「現在の階層レベル」および「現在の階層の一つ上のレベル」
として扱われる (Unix-like なシステムと同様)。
コロン文字を含むパス部分は相対 URI パスの先頭に用いることはできない
(つまり "this:that" はダメ)。スキーム名と区別できないからである。
このような場合には ./ を前置すること (つまり "./this:that" とする)。
MS-DOS の子孫 (Microsoft Windows など) は、
デバイス名のコロンを URI では垂直バー ("|") に置き換える。
したがって "C:" は "C|" となる。
.PP
.\"O A fragment identifier, if included, refers to a particular named portion
.\"O (fragment) of a resource; text after a \(aq#\(aq identifies the fragment.
.\"O A URI beginning with \(aq#\(aq refers to that fragment in the current resource.
フラグメント指定子 (fragment identifier) は、(もし含まれていれば)
リソース中の名前付けされた特定の部分 (フラグメント) を参照する。
\(aq#\(aq 指定子以降の文字列がフラグメントを指定する。
\(aq#\(aq で始まる URI は現在のリソース中のフラグメントを参照する。
.\"O .SS USAGE
.S 利用法
.\"O There are many different URI schemes, each with specific
.\"O additional rules and meanings, but they are intentionally made to be
.\"O as similar as possible.
.\"O For example, many URL schemes
.\"O permit the authority to be the following format, called here an
.\"O .I ip_server
.\"O (square brackets show what's optional):
URI のスキームには色々な種類があり、
それぞれ固有のルールや意味が追加されている。
しかしできるだけ統一したものにしようという努力もなされている。
例えば、多くの URL スキームは「機関 (authority)」に対して以下の書式
(ここでは
.I ip_server
と呼ぶことにする)
を許している (角括弧内部は省略可能)。
.HP
.IR "ip_server = " [ user " [ : " password " ] @ ] " host " [ : " port ]
.PP
.\"O This format allows you to optionally insert a username,
.\"O a user plus password, and/or a port number.
.\"O The
.\"O .I host
.\"O is the name of the host computer, either its name as determined by DNS
.\"O or an IP address (numbers separated by periods).
.\"O Thus the URI
.\"O <http://fred:fredpassword@xyz.com:8080/>
.\"O logs into a web server on host xyz.com
.\"O as fred (using fredpassword) using port 8080.
.\"O Avoid including a password in a URI if possible because of the many
.\"O security risks of having a password written down.
.\"O If the URL supplies a username but no password, and the remote
.\"O server requests a password, the program interpreting the URL
.\"O should request one from the user.
このフォーマットには、ユーザ名、ユーザ名+パスワードを指定できる。
ポート番号を追加することも可能である。
.I host
はホストコンピュータの名前で、 DNS で定義される名前か IP アドレス
(ピリオドで区切られた数字) で指定する。したがって URI
<http://fred:fredpassword@xyz.com:8080/>
は、ホスト xyz.com に fred として (パスワードを使って)
ポート 8080 を使ってログインする。
パスワードは可能なら URI には含めないほうが良いだろう。
パスワードを直書きすると様々なセキュリティ上のリスクが生じるからである。
URL にユーザ名だけを与え、パスワードを与えない場合は、
リモートサーバはパスワードを要求してくる。
URL を解釈したプログラムが、ユーザにこの入力を促すことになろう。
.PP
.\"O Here are some of the most common schemes in use on Unix-like systems
.\"O that are understood by many tools.
.\"O Note that many tools using URIs also have internal schemes or specialized
.\"O schemes; see those tools' documentation for information on those schemes.
以下に、 Unix-like なシステムで非常に良く用いられており、
多くのツールが理解するスキームを示す。
URI を使うツールの多くでは、内部スキームや特殊なスキームも
使えることが多い。そのようなスキームに関してはツールのドキュメントを見ること。
.PP
.\"O .B "http \- Web (HTTP) server"
.B "http \- Web (HTTP) サーバ"
.PP
.RI http:// ip_server / path
.br
.RI http:// ip_server / path ? query
.PP
.\"O This is a URL accessing a web (HTTP) server.
.\"O The default port is 80.
.\"O If the path refers to a directory, the web server will choose what
.\"O to return; usually if there is a file named "index.html" or "index.htm"
.\"O its content is returned, otherwise, a list of the files in the current
.\"O directory (with appropriate links) is generated and returned.
.\"O An example is <http://lwn.net>.
これは web (HTTP) サーバにアクセスするための URL である。
デフォルトのポートは 80。パスがディレクトリを参照しているときは、
返される情報は web サーバが選択する。通常は、
"index.html" や "index.htm" のようなファイルがあれば、その内容が返される。
なければ、カレントディレクトリのリストが (適切なリンクとともに) 生成されて
返される。例としては <http://lwn.net> など。
.PP
.\"O A query can be given in the archaic "isindex" format, consisting of a
.\"O word or phrase and not including an equal sign (=).
.\"O A query can also be in the longer "GET" format, which has one or more
.\"O query entries of the form
.\"O .IR key = value
.\"O separated by the ampersand character (&).
問い合わせ (query) を、古い "isindex" フォーマットによって送ることもできる。
このフォーマットは単語またはフレーズからなり、等号 (=) は含まない。
より長い "GET" フォーマットでも問い合わせは行える。
このフォーマットには、一つ以上の問い合わせエントリが
.IR key = value
という形式で含まれる。それぞれのエントリはアンパサンド (&) で区切られる。
.\"O Note that
.\"O .I key
.\"O can be repeated more than once, though it's up to the web server
.\"O and its application programs to determine if there's any meaning to that.
.\"O There is an unfortunate interaction with HTML/XML/SGML and
.\"O the GET query format; when such URIs with more than one key
.\"O are embedded in SGML/XML documents (including HTML), the ampersand
.\"O (&) has to be rewritten as &amp;.
.\"O Note that not all queries use this format; larger forms
.\"O may be too long to store as a URI, so they use a different
.\"O interaction mechanism (called POST) which does
.\"O not include the data in the URI.
.I key
は複数個指定することもできる。しかしそれに意味があるかどうかは
web サーバとアプリケーションプログラムが決める。
HTML/XML/SGML と GET 問い合わせ形式の間には、不幸な関係がある。
一つ以上のキーの含まれる URI が SGML/XML 文書 (HTML もそう)
に埋めこまれる際には、アンパサンド (&) は &amp; と書かなければならない。
全ての問い合わせがこの形式を使うわけではない。
フォームが長くなると URI に入れるには長すぎるから、
別の通信メカニズム (POST と呼ばれる) が用いられる。
POST では URI にはデータは含まれない。
.\"O See the Common Gateway Interface specification at
.\"O <http://www.w3.org/CGI> for more information.
より詳しい情報は、
<http://www.w3.org/CGI> にある
Common Gateway Interface の仕様書を見よ。
.PP
.\"O .B "ftp \- File Transfer Protocol (FTP)"
.B "ftp \- ファイル転送プロトコル (FTP)"
.PP
.RI ftp:// ip_server / path
.PP
.\"O This is a URL accessing a file through the file transfer protocol (FTP).
.\"O The default port (for control) is 21.
.\"O If no username is included, the username "anonymous" is supplied, and
.\"O in that case many clients provide as the password the requestor's
.\"O Internet email address.
.\"O An example is
.\"O <ftp://ftp.is.co.za/rfc/rfc1808.txt>.
これはファイル転送プロトコル (FTP) を通してファイルにアクセスするための
URL である。デフォルトの (制御用) ポートは 21 である。
ユーザ名がない場合には、ユーザ名 anonymous が与えられる。
そしてその場合には、クライアントの多くは要求した人の
インターネットメールアドレスをパスワードとして与える。
例としては <ftp://ftp.is.co.za/rfc/rfc1808.txt> など。
.PP
.\"O .B "gopher \- Gopher server"
.B "gofer \- Gofer サーバ"
.PP
.RI gopher:// ip_server / "gophertype selector"
.br
.RI gopher:// ip_server / "gophertype selector" %09 search
.br
.RI gopher:// ip_server / "gophertype selector" %09 search %09 gopher+_string
.br
.PP
.\"O The default gopher port is 70.
.\"O .I gophertype
.\"O is a single-character field to denote the
.\"O Gopher type of the resource to
.\"O which the URL refers.
.\"O The entire path may also be empty, in
.\"O which case the delimiting "/" is also optional and the gophertype
.\"O defaults to "1".
デフォルトの gopher ポートは 70 である。
.I gophertype
は 1 文字からなるフィールドで、
URL が参照している Gopher のリソースタイプを示す。
パス全体が空であってもよく、その場合は区切りの "/" も省略できる。
このとき gophertype のデフォルトは "1" になる。
.PP
.\"O .I selector
.\"O is the Gopher selector string.
.\"O In the Gopher protocol,
.\"O Gopher selector strings are a sequence of octets which may contain
.\"O any octets except 09 hexadecimal (US-ASCII HT or tab), 0A hexadecimal
.\"O (US-ASCII character LF), and 0D (US-ASCII character CR).
.I selector
は Gopher セレクタ文字列である。Gopher プロトコルでは、
Gopher セレクタ文字列はオクテット文字からなり、
16進数の 09 (US-ASCII の HT または tab)、 0A (US-ASCII の LF 文字)、
0D (US-ASCII の CR 文字) 以外ならどんなオクテットも指定できる。
.PP
.\"O .B "mailto \- Email address"
.B "mailto \- 電子メールアドレス"
.PP
.RI mailto: email-address
.PP
.\"O This is an email address, usually of the form
.\"O .IR name @ hostname .
.\"O See
.\"O .BR mailaddr (7)
.\"O for more information on the correct format of an email address.
.\"O Note that any % character must be rewritten as %25.
.\"O An example is <mailto:dwheeler@dwheeler.com>.
これは電子メールアドレスで、通常
.IR name @ hostname
という形式をとる。電子メールアドレスの正しいフォーマットに関する
より詳しい情報は
.BR mailaddr (7)
を見よ。 % 文字はすべて %25 と書き直さなければならないことに注意。
例としては <mailto:dwheeler@dwheeler.com> など。
.PP
.\"O .B "news \- Newsgroup or News message"
.B "news \- ニュースグループ・ニュースメッセージ"
.PP
.RI news: newsgroup-name
.br
.RI news: message-id
.PP
.\"O A
.\"O .I newsgroup-name
.\"O is a period-delimited hierarchical name, such as
.\"O "comp.infosystems.www.misc".
.\"O If <newsgroup-name> is "*" (as in <news:*>), it is used to refer
.\"O to "all available news groups".
.\"O An example is <news:comp.lang.ada>.
.I newsgroup-name
はピリオドで区切られた階層的な名前である。例えば
"comp.infosystems.www.misc" など。
<newsgroup-name> が "*" (つまり <news:*>) の場合には、
「参照できる全てのニュースグループ」の意味になる。
例としては <news:comp.lang.ada> など。
.PP
.\"O A
.\"O .I message-id
.\"O corresponds to the Message-ID of
.\"O .UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1036.txt
.\"O IETF RFC\ 1036,
.\"O .UE
.\"O without the enclosing "<"
.\"O and ">"; it takes the form
.\"O .IR unique @ full_domain_name .
.\"O A message identifier may be distinguished from a news group name by the
.\"O presence of the "@" character.
.I message-id
は
.UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1036.txt
IETF RFC\ 1036
.UE
の Message-ID から、囲みの "<" と ">" を取ったものに対応する。
Message-ID は
.IR unique @ full_domain_name
という形式をとる。メッセージの指定には "@" 文字が含まれるので、
ニュースグループの名前と区別できるだろう。
.PP
.\"O .B "telnet \- Telnet login"
.B "telnet \- telnet ログイン"
.PP
.RI telnet:// ip_server /
.PP
.\"O The Telnet URL scheme is used to designate interactive text services that
.\"O may be accessed by the Telnet protocol.
.\"O The final "/" character may be omitted.
.\"O The default port is 23.
.\"O An example is <telnet://melvyl.ucop.edu/>.
Telnet URL スキームは対話的なテキストサービスに Telnet プロトコルを
通してアクセスするために用いられる。最後の "/" 文字は省略してよい。
例としては <telnet://melvyl.ucop.edu/> など。
.PP
.\"O .B "file \- Normal file"
.B "file \- 通常のファイル"
.PP
.RI file:// ip_server / path_segments
.br
.RI file: path_segments
.PP
.\"O This represents a file or directory accessible locally.
.\"O As a special case,
.\"O .I host
.\"O can be the string "localhost" or the empty
.\"O string; this is interpreted as "the machine from which the URL is
.\"O being interpreted".
.\"O If the path is to a directory, the viewer should display the
.\"O directory's contents with links to each containee;
.\"O not all viewers currently do this.
.\"O KDE supports generated files through the URL <file:/cgi-bin>.
.\"O If the given file isn't found, browser writers may want to try to expand
.\"O the filename via filename globbing
.\"O (see
.\"O .BR glob (7)
.\"O and
.\"O .BR glob (3)).
これはローカルに直接アクセスできるファイルを示す。
特殊なケースとして、
.I host
には "localhost" という文字列を用いたり、空文字にしてもよい。
これは「URI が解釈されたマシン」とみなされる。
path がディレクトリの場合は、ビューアはディレクトリの内容を
リンクを張ったかたちで表示するとよいだろう。
しかし現在は、まだ全てのビューアがこの動作をするわけではない。
KDE は生成ファイル (generated file) を URL <file:/cgi-bin>
の形式でサポートしている。
与えられたファイルが見付からなかった場合は、
ファイル名をグロブによって展開すると良いかもしれない
.RB ( glob (7)
および
.BR glob (3)
を見よ)。
.PP
.\"O The second format (e.g., <file:/etc/passwd>)
.\"O is a correct format for referring to
.\"O a local file.
.\"O However, older standards did not permit this format,
.\"O and some programs don't recognize this as a URI.
.\"O A more portable syntax is to use an empty string as the server name,
.\"O for example,
.\"O <file:///etc/passwd>; this form does the same thing
.\"O and is easily recognized by pattern matchers and older programs as a URI.
.\"O Note that if you really mean to say "start from the current location," don't
.\"O specify the scheme at all; use a relative address like <../test.txt>,
.\"O which has the side-effect of being scheme-independent.
.\"O An example of this scheme is <file:///etc/passwd>.
二つめの書式 (例えば <file:/etc/passwd>) もローカルファイルを参照する
正しいフォーマットである。しかし古い標準ではこの書式を許していなかったので、
これを URI として認識しないプログラムも存在する。
より汎用的な文法は、サーバ名に空文字を用いるもの、
つまり <file:///etc/passwd> のようなものである。
この形式も指す内容は同じであり、パターンマッチやより古いプログラムでも
URI として認識されやすい。
もし意図するところが「現在の場所からスタート」なら、
スキームは一切用いるべきではない。
<../test.txt> のような、スキームに依存しない相対リンクを用いること。
このスキームの例としては <file:///etc/passwd> など。
.PP
.\"O .B "man \- Man page documentation"
.B "man \- man ページ文書"
.PP
.RI man: command-name
.br
.RI man: command-name ( section )
.PP
.\"O This refers to local online manual (man) reference pages.
.\"O The command name can optionally be followed by a
.\"O parenthesis and section number; see
.\"O .BR man (7)
.\"O for more information on the meaning of the section numbers.
.\"O This URI scheme is unique to Unix-like systems (such as Linux)
.\"O and is not currently registered by the IETF.
.\"O An example is <man:ls(1)>.
これはローカルのオンラインマニュアル (man) リファレスページを参照する。
command-name には括弧とセクション番号を追加してもよい。
セクション番号の意味について詳しく知りたい場合は
.BR man (7)
をみよ。この URI スキームは Unix-like なシステム (Linux など)
に特有のものであり、現在はまだ IETF による登録はされていない。
例としては <man:ls(1)> など。
.PP
.\"O .B "info \- Info page documentation"
.B "info \- info ページ文書"
.PP
.RI info: virtual-filename
.br
.RI info: virtual-filename # nodename
.br
.RI info:( virtual-filename )
.br
.RI info:( virtual-filename ) nodename
.PP
.\"O This scheme refers to online info reference pages (generated from
.\"O texinfo files),
.\"O a documentation format used by programs such as the GNU tools.
.\"O This URI scheme is unique to Unix-like systems (such as Linux)
.\"O and is not currently registered by the IETF.
.\"O As of this writing, GNOME and KDE differ in their URI syntax
.\"O and do not accept the other's syntax.
.\"O The first two formats are the GNOME format; in nodenames all spaces
.\"O are written as underscores.
.\"O The second two formats are the KDE format;
.\"O spaces in nodenames must be written as spaces, even though this
.\"O is forbidden by the URI standards.
.\"O It's hoped that in the future most tools will understand all of these
.\"O formats and will always accept underscores for spaces in nodenames.
.\"O In both GNOME and KDE, if the form without the nodename is used the
.\"O nodename is assumed to be "Top".
.\"O Examples of the GNOME format are <info:gcc> and <info:gcc#G++_and_GCC>.
.\"O Examples of the KDE format are <info:(gcc)> and <info:(gcc)G++ and GCC>.
このスキームは、オンラインの info リファレンスページ
(texinfo ファイルから生成される) を参照する。 info ページは
GNU ツールなどのプログラムで用いられている文書フォーマットである。
この URI スキームは Unix-like なシステム (Linux など)
に特有のものであり、現在はまだ IETF による登録はされていない。
この文書の執筆時において、 GNOME と KDE はそれぞれ異なる文法の URI
を用いており、お互い相手の文法を受け入れない。
最初の 2 つの書式は GNOME の書式である。ノード名 (nodename)
のスペースはすべてアンダースコアに変換される。
3 つめと 4 つめは KDE の書式である。ノード名のスペースは
そのままスペースで書かれる
(URI の標準では禁止されているのだが)。
将来は多くのツールがこれらの書式すべてを理解するようになり、
ノード名のアンダースコア、スペースを両方とも理解できるように
なることを期待したい。 GNOME でも KDE でも、
ノード名が省略された場合は、ノード名として "Top" が用いられる。
GNOME 書式の例としては <info:gcc> や <info:gcc#G++_and_GCC> など、
KDE 書式の例としては <info:(gcc)> や <info:(gcc)G++ and GCC> など。
.PP
.\"O .B "whatis \- Documentation search"
.B "whatis \- 文書検索"
.PP
.RI whatis: string
.PP
.\"O This scheme searches the database of short (one-line) descriptions of
.\"O commands and returns a list of descriptions containing that string.
.\"O Only complete word matches are returned.
.\"O See
.\"O .BR whatis (1).
.\"O This URI scheme is unique to Unix-like systems (such as Linux)
.\"O and is not currently registered by the IETF.
このスキームは、コマンドに関する短い (1 行の) 説明を集めた
データベースを検索し、 string を含む文字列をリストして返す。
単語が完全にマッチした結果だけが返される。
.BR whatis (1)
を見よ。
この URI スキームは Unix-like なシステム (Linux など)
に特有のものであり、現在はまだ IETF による登録はされていない。
.PP
.\"O .B "ghelp \- GNOME help documentation"
.B "ghelp \- GNOME ヘルプ文書"
.PP
.RI ghelp: name-of-application
.PP
.\"O This loads GNOME help for the given application.
.\"O Note that not much documentation currently exists in this format.
与えられた application に対応する GNOME help をロードする。
この書式を用いた文書はまだあまり多くない。
.PP
.\"O .B "ldap \- Lightweight Directory Access Protocol"
.B "ldap \- 軽量ディレクトリアクセスプロトコル"
.PP
.RI ldap:// hostport
.br
.RI ldap:// hostport /
.br
.RI ldap:// hostport / dn
.br
.RI ldap:// hostport / dn ? attributes
.br
.RI ldap:// hostport / dn ? attributes ? scope
.br
.RI ldap:// hostport / dn ? attributes ? scope ? filter
.br
.RI ldap:// hostport / dn ? attributes ? scope ? filter ? extensions
.PP
.\"O This scheme supports queries to the
.\"O Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), a protocol for querying
.\"O a set of servers for hierarchically organized information
.\"O (such as people and computing resources).
.\"O More information on the LDAP URL scheme is available in
.\"O .UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2255.txt
.\"O RFC\ 2255.
.\"O .UE
.\"O The components of this URL are:
このスキームは Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
へのクエリーをサポートする。 LDAP は複数のサーバに分散した、
階層化された情報 (人々や計算資源など) に問い合わせるための
プロトコルである。 LDAP の URL スキームに関するより詳しい情報は
.UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2255.txt
RFC\ 2255
.UE
で見ることができる。
この URL の各部は以下の通り:
.IP hostport 12
.\"O the LDAP server to query, written as a hostname optionally followed by
.\"O a colon and the port number.
.\"O The default LDAP port is TCP port 389.
.\"O If empty, the client determines which the LDAP server to use.
クエリーを行う LDAP サーバ。ホスト名を書く。続けてコロンとポート番号を
追加することもできる。 LDAP のデフォルトのポートは TCP ポート 389 である。
省略されると、どの LDAP サーバを用いるかはクライアントが決定する。
.IP dn
.\"O the LDAP Distinguished Name, which identifies
.\"O the base object of the LDAP search (see
.\"O .UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2253.txt
.\"O RFC\ 2253
.\"O .UE
.\"O section 3).
LDAP の Distintuished Name (識別名)。
LDAP 検索の base オブジェクトを指定するものである (
.UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2253.txt
RFC\ 2253
.UE
の section 3 を見よ)。
.IP attributes
.\"O a comma-separated list of attributes to be returned;
.\"O see RFC\ 2251 section 4.1.5.
.\"O If omitted, all attributes should be returned.
コンマ区切りの、返される属性 (attribute) のリスト。
RFC\ 2251 の section 4.1.5 を見よ。省略されると全ての属性が返される。
.IP scope
.\"O specifies the scope of the search, which can be one of
.\"O "base" (for a base object search), "one" (for a one-level search),
.\"O or "sub" (for a subtree search).
.\"O If scope is omitted, "base" is assumed.
検索のスコープを指定する。
"base" (base オブジェクト検索), "one" (1 レベル検索),
"sub" (サブツリー検索) のいずれかを指定する。
省略すると "base" が仮定される。
.IP filter
.\"O specifies the search filter (subset of entries
.\"O to return).
.\"O If omitted, all entries should be returned.
.\"O See
.\"O .UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2254.txt
.\"O RFC\ 2254
.\"O .UE
.\"O section 4.
検索フィルタ (返されるエントリのサブセット) を指定する。
省略されると、全てのエントリが返される。
.UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2254.txt
RFC\ 2254
.UE
の section 4 を見よ。
.IP extensions
.\"O a comma-separated list of type=value
.\"O pairs, where the =value portion may be omitted for options not
.\"O requiring it.
.\"O An extension prefixed with a \(aq!\(aq is critical
.\"O (must be supported to be valid), otherwise it is noncritical (optional).
コンマで区切られた type=value ペアのリスト。
ここで =value の部分は、それを要求しないオプションに対しては
省略できる。 \(aq!\(aq が前置された extension は critical
(サポートしていなければならない) であり、
そうでなければ critical ではない (省略できる)。
.PP
.\"O LDAP queries are easiest to explain by example.
.\"O Here's a query that asks ldap.itd.umich.edu for information about
.\"O the University of Michigan in the U.S.:
LDAP のクエリーは、例とともに説明するのが最も簡単である。
次の例は、 ldap.itd.umich.edu に、
U.S. にある University of Michigan の情報を尋ねる例である。
.PP
.nf
ldap://ldap.itd.umich.edu/o=University%20of%20Michigan,c=US
.fi
.PP
.\"O To just get its postal address attribute, request:
郵便用の住所属性だけを取得する場合は、
次のようにリクエストする:
.PP
.nf
ldap://ldap.itd.umich.edu/o=University%20of%20Michigan,c=US?postalAddress
.fi
.PP
.\"O To ask a host.com at port 6666 for information about the person
.\"O with common name (cn) "Babs Jensen" at University of Michigan, request:
host.com のポート 6666 に、 University of Michigan にいる
common name (cn) が "Babs Jenson" の人の情報を尋ねる場合は、
次のようにリクエストする:
.PP
.nf
ldap://host.com:6666/o=University%20of%20Michigan,c=US??sub?(cn=Babs%20Jensen)
.fi
.PP
.\"O .B "wais \- Wide Area Information Servers"
.B "wais \- 広域情報サービス"
.PP
.RI wais:// hostport / database
.br
.RI wais:// hostport / database ? search
.br
.RI wais:// hostport / database / wtype / wpath
.PP
.\"O This scheme designates a WAIS database, search, or document
.\"O (see
.\"O .UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1625.txt
.\"O IETF RFC\ 1625
.\"O .UE
.\"O for more information on WAIS).
.\"O Hostport is the hostname, optionally followed by a colon and port number
.\"O (the default port number is 210).
このスキームは WAIS のデータベース、検索、文書を指定する
(WAIS に関する詳しい情報は
.UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1625.txt
IETF RFC\ 1625
.UE
を見よ)。
hostport は、ホスト名にコロンとポート番号を付加したものである
(コロン + ポート番号は省略可。デフォルトのポート番号は 210 である)。
.PP
.\"O The first form designates a WAIS database for searching.
.\"O The second form designates a particular search of the WAIS database
.\"O .IR database .
.\"O The third form designates a particular document within a WAIS
.\"O database to be retrieved.
.\"O .I wtype
.\"O is the WAIS designation of the type of the object and
.\"O .I wpath
.\"O is the WAIS document-id.
最初の書式は WAIS のデータベースに対する検索の指定である。
二つめの書式は特定の WAIS データベース
.I database
に対する検索の指定である。
三つめの書式は WAIS データベースにある特定の文書を取出す指定である。
.I wtype
は WAIS のオブジェクト形式指定であり、
.I wpath
は WAIS document-id である。
.PP
.\"O .B "other schemes"
.B その他のスキーム
.PP
.\"O There are many other URI schemes.
.\"O Most tools that accept URIs support a set of internal URIs
.\"O (e.g., Mozilla has the about: scheme for internal information,
.\"O and the GNOME help browser has the toc: scheme for various starting
.\"O locations).
.\"O There are many schemes that have been defined but are not as widely
.\"O used at the current time
.\"O (e.g., prospero).
.\"O The nntp: scheme is deprecated in favor of the news: scheme.
.\"O URNs are to be supported by the urn: scheme, with a hierarchical name space
.\"O (e.g., urn:ietf:... would identify IETF documents); at this time
.\"O URNs are not widely implemented.
.\"O Not all tools support all schemes.
他にも多くの URI スキームが存在する。
URI を受付けるほとんどのツールは、内部 URI のセットをサポートする
(例えば Mozilla は内部情報用の about: というスキームを受付けるし、
GNOME ヘルプブラウザはいろいろな出発点用に toc: というスキームを持っている)。
定義されたスキームはたくさんあるが、現時点で広く用いられてはいない
(例えば prospero とか)。
nntp: スキームは news: スキームが好んで用いられるようになったので
使わないほうが良い。 URN は urn: スキームによって、階層的な名前空間
(例えば urn:ietf:... は IETF 文書を示す)
としてサポートされるべきであるが、現時点では URN はあまり用いられていない。
全てのツールが全てのスキームをサポートしているわけではない。
.\"O .SS Character Encoding
.SS 文字エンコード
.PP
.\"O URIs use a limited number of characters so that they can be
.\"O typed in and used in a variety of situations.
URI では、色々な状況下で入力できるように、文字の種類を制限している。
.PP
.\"O The following characters are reserved, that is, they may appear in a
.\"O URI but their use is limited to their reserved purpose
.\"O (conflicting data must be escaped before forming the URI):
以下の文字は予約されている。すなわち、これらの文字は
URI に登場することがあるが、それらの利用法 (解釈のされ方) は
予約された目的に制限されている (衝突するデータは
URI にする前にエスケープしなければならない)。
.IP
   ; / ? : @ & = + $ ,
.PP
.\"O Unreserved characters may be included in a URI.
.\"O Unreserved characters
.\"O include upper and lower case English letters,
.\"O decimal digits, and the following
.\"O limited set of punctuation marks and symbols:
未予約文字 (unreserved character) は URI に使ってよい。
これには英字の大文字と小文字、10 進の数字、および
以下の句読文字・記号が含まれる
.IP
 \- _ . ! ~ * ' ( )
.PP
.\"O All other characters must be escaped.
.\"O An escaped octet is encoded as a character triplet, consisting of the
.\"O percent character "%" followed by the two hexadecimal digits
.\"O representing the octet code (you can use upper or lower case letters
.\"O for the hexadecimal digits).
.\"O For example, a blank space must be escaped
.\"O as "%20", a tab character as "%09", and the "&" as "%26".
.\"O Because the percent "%" character always has the reserved purpose of
.\"O being the escape indicator, it must be escaped as "%25".
.\"O It is common practice to escape space characters as the plus symbol (+)
.\"O in query text; this practice isn't uniformly defined
.\"O in the relevant RFCs (which recommend %20 instead) but any tool accepting
.\"O URIs with query text should be prepared for them.
.\"O A URI is always shown in its "escaped" form.
他の文字はすべてエスケープしなければならない。
エスケープされたオクテットは 3 文字からなる:
先頭にパーセント文字 "%"、それに続けてオクテットコードを表す
2 文字の 16 進数字である (16 進数の英字は大文字小文字どちらでも良い)。
例えば空白文字は "%20" のようにエスケープしなければならず、
タブ文字は "%09"、 "&" は "%26" となる。
パーセント文字 "%" は常にエスケープを示す予約された目的に用いられるので、
"%" 自身を表すには "%25" とエスケープしなければならない。
クエリーのテキストでは、スペース文字をプラス記号 (+) でエスケープすることも
一般に良く行われる。この慣例は関連 RFC で実際に定義されているわけではない
(代わりに %20 を推奨している) が、クエリーテキストを受付ける
ツールは、この書式への対応を用意しておくべきであろう。
URI は、常に「エスケープされた」かたちで表示される。
.PP
.\"O Unreserved characters can be escaped without changing the semantics
.\"O of the URI, but this should not be done unless the URI is being used
.\"O in a context that does not allow the unescaped character to appear.
.\"O For example, "%7e" is sometimes used instead of "~" in an HTTP URL
.\"O path, but the two are equivalent for an HTTP URL.
未予約文字もエスケープすることができ、これによって
URI の意味するところが変わるわけではない。
しかしURI にその非エスケープ文字が現れることが許されないような
特殊な場合を除いて、これは避けるべきである。
例えば、 HTTP URL の path において
"%7e" が "~" の代わりに用いられることがあるが、
この二つは HTTP URL としては等価である。
.PP
.\"O For URIs which must handle characters outside the US ASCII character set,
.\"O the HTML 4.01 specification (section B.2) and
.\"O IETF RFC\ 2718 (section 2.2.5) recommend the following approach:
US ASCII キャラクタセット以外の文字を URI として扱う場合、
HTML 4.1 規格 (section B.2) 及び IETF RFC\ 2718 (section 2.2.5) は
以下の手法を用いるよう推奨している。
.IP 1. 4
.\"O translate the character sequences into UTF-8 (IETF RFC\ 2279) \(em see
.\"O .BR utf-8 (7)
.\"O \(em and then
キャラクタ列を UTF-8 (IETF RFC\ 2279,
.BR utf-8 (7)
参照) に変換し、
.IP 2.
.\"O use the URI escaping mechanism, that is,
.\"O use the %HH encoding for unsafe octets.
URI エスケープ機構を用いる。
つまり、安全でないオクテットを %HH でエンコードする。
.\"O .SS Writing a URI
.SS "URI を書くには"
.\"O When written, URIs should be placed inside double quotes
.\"O (e.g., "http://www.kernelnotes.org"),
.\"O enclosed in angle brackets (e.g., <http://lwn.net>),
.\"O or placed on a line by themselves.
.\"O A warning for those who use double-quotes:
.\"O .B never
.\"O move extraneous punctuation (such as the period ending a sentence or the
.\"O comma in a list)
.\"O inside a URI, since this will change the value of the URI.
.\"O Instead, use angle brackets instead, or
.\"O switch to a quoting system that never includes extraneous characters
.\"O inside quotation marks.
.\"O This latter system, called the 'new' or 'logical' quoting system by
.\"O "Hart's Rules" and the "Oxford Dictionary for Writers and Editors",
.\"O is preferred practice in Great Britain and hackers worldwide
.\"O (see the
.\"O Jargon File's section on Hacker Writing Style,
.\"O .IR http://www.fwi.uva.nl/~mes/jargon/h/HackerWritingStyle.html ,
.\"O for more information).
.\"O Older documents suggested inserting the prefix "URL:"
.\"O just before the URI, but this form has never caught on.
URI を書く時には、ダブルクォートの内部に書く
(例: "http://www.kernelnotes.org") か、
angle ブラケットで囲む (例: <http://lwn.net>) か、
一行に URI だけを書くかする。
ダブルクォートを使う人に警告:
\fB絶対に\fP句読点 (文末のピリオドやリスト区切りのコンマ) を
URI の内部に移動してはならない。
代わりに angle ブラケットを使うか、
外にある文字をクォーテーションマークの内部に
決して含めないような引用方式に切替えること。
後者の方式は "Hart's Rules" や
"Oxford Dictionary for Writers and Editors" によれば
「新しい (new) 引用方式」あるいは「論理的 (logical) な引用方式」
と呼ばれており、 イギリス人や世界中のハッカー達はこちらの慣習を好んでいる
(より詳しい情報は
Hacker Writing Style の Jargon File のセクション
.I http://www.fwi.uva.nl/~mes/jargon/h/HackerWritingStyle.html
を見よ)。
古い文書では、 "URL:" という文字列を URI の直前に挿入することを
勧めているものもあるが、しかしこの形式はまったく流行しなかった。
.PP
.\"O The URI syntax was designed to be unambiguous.
.\"O However, as URIs have become commonplace, traditional media
.\"O (television, radio, newspapers, billboards, etc.) have increasingly
.\"O used abbreviated URI references consisting of
.\"O only the authority and path portions of the identified resource
.\"O (e.g., <www.w3.org/Addressing>).
.\"O Such references are primarily
.\"O intended for human interpretation rather than machine, with the
.\"O assumption that context-based heuristics are sufficient to complete
.\"O the URI (e.g., hostnames beginning with "www" are likely to have
.\"O a URI prefix of "http://" and hostnames beginning with "ftp" likely
.\"O to have a prefix of "ftp://").
URI の書式は曖昧さを排除するように設計されている。
しかし URI が広まるにつれ、昔ながらのメディア (TV、ラジオ、新聞、
看板などなど) は URI 参照を省略したかたち、すなわち
機関部とパス部だけでリソースを指定することが多くなっている
(例: <www.w3.org/Addressing>)。
このような参照はマシンというよりは人間向けのもので、
コンテキストベースの推測によって URI の補完が可能であることを
あてにしているのである (例えば "www" ではじまるホスト名なら
"http://" がつくだろうし、 "ftp" ではじまるホスト名なら
"ftp://" がつくだろう)。
.\"O Many client implementations heuristically resolve these references.
.\"O Such heuristics may
.\"O change over time, particularly when new schemes are introduced.
.\"O Since an abbreviated URI has the same syntax as a relative URL path,
.\"O abbreviated URI references cannot be used where relative URIs are
.\"O permitted, and can only be used when there is no defined base
.\"O (such as in dialog boxes).
.\"O Don't use abbreviated URIs as hypertext links inside a document;
.\"O use the standard format as described here.
多くのクライアントの実装では、この種の参照を推測によって解決する。
このような推測は時代とともに変わりうる。
特に新しいスキームが導入されるとそうである。
URI の省略形では相対 URL パスの区別が付けられないので、
省略形 URI 参照は相対 URI の利用できるところでは使えない。
つまり定義済みのベース (ダイアログボックスなど)
がない場合に限って利用できる。
.\"nakano: この文脈での dialog box とは？
文書内部でのハイパーテキストリンクには省略形 URI を使ってはならない。
上述の標準フォーマットを使うこと。
.\"O .SH "CONFORMING TO"
.SH 準拠
.PP
.I http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2396.txt
(IETF RFC\ 2396),
.UE
.I http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40
(HTML 4.0).
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Any tool accepting URIs (e.g., a web browser) on a Linux system should
.\"O be able to handle (directly or indirectly) all of the
.\"O schemes described here, including the man: and info: schemes.
.\"O Handling them by invoking some other program is
.\"O fine and in fact encouraged.
Linux システムで URI を受付けるツール (例えば web ブラウザなど) は、
上にあげた全てのスキームを (直接または間接に) 扱えるべきである。
man: や info: も含めて、である。
スキームの処理に他のプログラムを実行するのは良いことだし、
実はすすんでそうすべきである。
.PP
.\"O Technically the fragment isn't part of the URI.
技術的には、フラグメントは URI の一部ではない。
.PP
.\"O For information on how to embed URIs (including URLs) in a data format,
.\"O see documentation on that format.
.\"O HTML uses the format <A HREF="\fIuri\fP">
.\"O .I text
.\"O </A>.
.\"O Texinfo files use the format @uref{\fIuri\fP}.
.\"O Man and mdoc have the recently added UR macro, or just include the
.\"O URI in the text (viewers should be able to detect :// as part of a URI).
URI (URL も含む) をデータフォーマットに埋めこむ方法に関する情報は、
そのフォーマットのドキュメントを見よ。 HTML は
<A HREF="\fIuri\fP">\fItext\fP</A>
を用いる。 texinfo は @uref{\fIuri\fP} という書式を用いる。
man と mdoc は、最近追加された UR マクロを使う。
あるいは URI をそのままテキストに埋めこむ
(ビューアが :// を URI の一部と解釈できなければならない)。
.PP
.\"O The GNOME and KDE desktop environments currently vary in the URIs
.\"O they accept, in particular in their respective help browsers.
.\"O To list man pages, GNOME uses <toc:man> while KDE uses <man:(index)>, and
.\"O to list info pages, GNOME uses <toc:info> while KDE uses <info:(dir)>
.\"O (the author of this man page prefers the KDE approach here, though a more
.\"O regular format would be even better).
.\"O In general, KDE uses <file:/cgi-bin/> as a prefix to a set of generated
.\"O files.
デスクトップ環境である GNOME と KDE は、
それぞれ受付ける URI が (特にそれぞれのヘルプブラウザにおいて)
異なっている。
man ページをリストするには、
GNOME では <toc:man> を用い、 KDE では <man:(index)> を用いる。
また info ページをリストするには、
GNOME では <toc:info> を用い、 KDE では <info:(dir)> を用いる
(本 man ページの著者は KDE のアプローチのほうが好みである。
しかしより標準的な書式の方が更に良いが)。
一般に KDE は生成ファイル (generated file) のプレフィックスとして
<file:/cgi-bin/> を用いる。
.\"nakano: 意味ワカラン... KDE に詳しい人〜
.\"O KDE prefers documentation in HTML, accessed via the
.\"O <file:/cgi-bin/helpindex>.
.\"O GNOME prefers the ghelp scheme to store and find documentation.
.\"O Neither browser handles file: references to directories at the time
.\"O of this writing, making it difficult to refer to an entire directory with
.\"O a browsable URI.
KDE は HTML の文書を
<file:/cgi-bin/helpindex> 経由でアクセスするのが好みなようである。
GNOME は文書の保管・検索に ghelp スキームを用いる方法を取っているようだ。
どちらのブラウザも、現時点では file: によるディレクトリ参照を扱えない。
したがってディレクトリ全体をブラウズ可能な URI で参照することが難しい。
.\"O As noted above, these environments differ in how they handle the
.\"O info: scheme, probably the most important variation.
.\"O It is expected that GNOME and KDE
.\"O will converge to common URI formats, and a future
.\"O version of this man page will describe the converged result.
.\"O Efforts to aid this convergence are encouraged.
先に述べたように、これら二つの環境では info: スキームの
扱いが異なっている (おそらく最も重要な差異であろう)。
GNOME と KDE が共通 URI フォーマットに収斂することが望ましい。
この man ページが、将来はその収斂した結果を記述できることを望む。
この作業への助力を喚起したい。
.\"O .SS Security
.SS セキュリティ
.PP
.\"O A URI does not in itself pose a security threat.
.\"O There is no general guarantee that a URL, which at one time
.\"O located a given resource, will continue to do so.
.\"O Nor is there any
.\"O guarantee that a URL will not locate a different resource at some
.\"O later point in time; such a guarantee can only be
.\"O obtained from the person(s) controlling that namespace and the
.\"O resource in question.
URI そのものはセキュリティの脅威を引き起こすものではない。
ある時点ではリソースの場所を与えていた URL が、
ずっとそうでありつづけるという保証は一般にはない。
またある URL が、将来には別のリソースを示さないとも限らない。
このような保証は、その名前空間とリソースとを管理している個人に
帰するものに過ぎない。
.PP
.\"O It is sometimes possible to construct a URL such that an attempt to
.\"O perform a seemingly harmless operation, such as the
.\"O retrieval of an entity associated with the resource, will in fact
.\"O cause a possibly damaging remote operation to occur.
.\"O The unsafe URL
.\"O is typically constructed by specifying a port number other than that
.\"O reserved for the network protocol in question.
.\"O The client unwittingly contacts a site that is in fact
.\"O running a different protocol.
.\"O The content of the URL contains instructions that, when
.\"O interpreted according to this other protocol, cause an unexpected
.\"O operation.
.\"O An example has been the use of a gopher URL to cause an
.\"O unintended or impersonating message to be sent via a SMTP server.
無害に見える操作 (リソースに関連づけられたエンティティの取得など)
によって、実際にはリモートにダメージを与える動作を引き起こすような
URL を記述することも場合によっては可能である。
危険な URL の典型的なものは、そのネットワークプロトコルに
予約されているポート番号とは異なるポートを指定しているものである。
URL の内容には命令が含まれていて、
そのプロトコルにしたがって解釈されたとき、
予期されない動作を引起こすのである。
例をあげると、 gopher の URL によって、意図しないメッセージや
なりすましメッセージなどが SMTP サーバ経由で送信されるようなことがあった。
.PP
.\"O Caution should be used when using any URL that specifies a port
.\"O number other than the default for the protocol, especially when it is
.\"O a number within the reserved space.
そのプロトコルのデフォルト以外のポート番号を指定している
URL を用いるときには注意すべきである。
特にその番号が予約空間の内部にある場合には。
.PP
.\"O Care should be taken when a URI contains escaped delimiters for a
.\"O given protocol (for example, CR and LF characters for telnet
.\"O protocols) that these are not unescaped before transmission.
.\"O This might violate the protocol, but avoids the potential for such
.\"O characters to be used to simulate an extra operation or parameter in
.\"O that protocol, which might lead to an unexpected and possibly harmful
.\"O remote operation to be performed.
URI に、そのプロトコルに対するデリミタがエスケープされたかたちで入っている
場合も注意が必要である
(例えば telnet プロトコルに対する CR 文字や LF 文字など)。
なぜならこれらは転送前にエスケープが外されないからである。
これはプロトコルに反しており、予期しない、おそらくは害になるような
リモート動作を引起こす結果となりかねない。
.PP
.\"O It is clearly unwise to use a URI that contains a password which is
.\"O intended to be secret.
.\"O In particular, the use of a password within
.\"O the "userinfo" component of a URI is strongly recommended against except
.\"O in those rare cases where the "password" parameter is intended to be public.
秘密にしておくべきパスワードを含んだ URI を使うのが
賢くないのは明らかである。特に、パスワードを URI の
"userinfo" の部分に使うのは絶対に避けるべきである。
ただしその "password" のパラメータを意図的に公開したい場合は別であるが。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.PP
.\"O Documentation may be placed in a variety of locations, so there
.\"O currently isn't a good URI scheme for general online documentation
.\"O in arbitrary formats.
.\"O References of the form
.\"O <file:///usr/doc/ZZZ> don't work because different distributions and
.\"O local installation requirements may place the files in different
.\"O directories
.\"O (it may be in /usr/doc, or /usr/local/doc, or /usr/share,
.\"O or somewhere else).
文書は様々な場所に置かれうる。したがって現時点では、
任意のフォーマットで書かれた一般のオンライン文書に対する良い URI スキームが
存在しない。
<file:///usr/doc/ZZZ> 形式の参照は使えない。なぜなら
ディストリビューションやローカルへのインストールの際の条件によって、
ファイルは異なるディレクトリに置かれることがあるからである
(/usr/doc か /usr/local/doc か /usr/share かその他の場所か、などなど)。
.\"O Also, the directory ZZZ usually changes when a version changes
.\"O (though filename globbing could partially overcome this).
.\"O Finally, using the file: scheme doesn't easily support people
.\"O who dynamically load documentation from the Internet (instead of
.\"O loading the files onto a local file system).
また、ディレクトリ ZZZ は通常バージョンが変わると異なったものになる
(ファイル名のグロブによってある程度克服できるだろうが)。
最後にもう一つ、文書をインターネットから (ローカルのファイルシステムに
ファイルをロードするのではなく) 動的にロードする人々は、
なかなか file: スキームを使ってくれない。
.\"O A future URI scheme may be added (e.g., "userdoc:") to permit
.\"O programs to include cross-references to more detailed documentation
.\"O without having to know the exact location of that documentation.
.\"O Alternatively, a future version of the file-system specification may
.\"O specify file locations sufficiently so that the file: scheme will
.\"O be able to locate documentation.
将来には新たな URI スキーム (例えば "userdoc:" のような) が追加され、
より詳しい文書へのクロスリファレンスが、
その文書の正確な場所をプログラムが知らなくても可能になるかもしれない。
あるいは、ファイルシステム規格の将来の版で
ファイルの場所の指定をより厳密にして、
file: スキームによる文書の位置指定が可能になるかもしれない。
.PP
.\"O Many programs and file formats don't include a way to incorporate
.\"O or implement links using URIs.
プログラムやファイルフォーマットの多くでは、
URI を使ったリンクを取り込んだり実装したりする方法がない。
.PP
.\"O Many programs can't handle all of these different URI formats; there
.\"O should be a standard mechanism to load an arbitrary URI that automatically
.\"O detects the users' environment (e.g., text or graphics,
.\"O desktop environment, local user preferences, and currently executing
.\"O tools) and invokes the right tool for any URI.
プログラムの多くは、これらの URI フォーマットをすべては扱えない。
ユーザの環境 (テキストかグラフィックか、
デスクトップ環境、ローカルユーザの好み、
現在実行されているツール) などを自動的に検知して、
任意の URI をロードし、その URI に適したツールを起動するような
標準的な仕組みがあるといいのだろうが。
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHOR
.\" .SH 著者
.\"O .\" David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@dwheeler.com) wrote this man page.
.\" この man ページは David A. Wheeler (dwheeler@ida.dwheeler.com) が書いた。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR lynx (1),
.BR man2html (1),
.BR mailaddr (7),
.BR utf-8 (7),
.UR http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2255.txt
IETF RFC\ 2255
.UE
