.\" Copyright 1995-2000 David Engel (david@ods.com)
.\" Copyright 1995 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Copyright 2000 Ben Collins (bcollins@debian.org)
.\"    Redone for GLibc 2.2
.\" Copyright 2000 Jakub Jelinek (jakub@redhat.com)
.\"    Corrected.
.\" Most of this was copied from the README file.
.\" Do not restrict distribution.
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat May 23 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Wed Jan 6 1999 by NAKANO Takeo 
.\" Updated & Modified Wed Jan 16 21:05:41 JST 2002
.\"                 by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH LDD 1 2000-10-30 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ldd \- print shared library dependencies
.SH 名前
ldd \- 共有ライブラリへの依存関係を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR ldd " [OPTION]... FILE..."
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O prints the shared libraries required by each program or shared library
.\"O specified on the command line.
.B ldd
はコマンドラインで指定したプログラムや共有ライブラリについて、
それぞれで必要とされる共有ライブラリを表示する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-\-version
.\"O Print the version number of
.\"O .BR ldd .
.B ldd
のバージョン番号を表示する。
.TP
.B \-v\ \-\-verbose
.\"O Print all information, including, for example,
.\"O symbol versioning information.
シンボルのバージョン情報などを含めた全ての情報を表示する。
.TP
.B \-u\ \-\-unused
.\"O Print unused direct dependencies.
.\"O (Since glibc 2.3.4.)
使用されていない直接の依存関係を表示する
(glibc 2.3.4 以降)。
.TP
.B \-d\ \-\-data\-relocs
.\"O Perform relocations and report any missing objects (ELF only).
リロケーションを実行し、足りないオブジェクトについてレポートする (ELF のみ)。
.TP
.B \-r\ \-\-function\-relocs
.\"O report any missing objects or functions (ELF only).
足りないオブジェクトや関数についてレポートする (ELF のみ)。
.TP
.B \-\-help
.\"O Usage information.
使用法を表示する。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The standard version of
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O comes with glibc2.
.\"O Libc5 came with an older version, still present
.\"O on some systems.
.\"O The long options are not supported by the libc5 version.
標準的なバージョンの
.B ldd
は glibc2 に付属している。
libc5 には古いバージョンのものが付属しており、
これが入っているシステムもまだ存在する。
libc5 バージョンではロングオプションがサポートされていない。
.\"O On the other hand, the glibc2 version does not support
.\"O .B \-V
.\"O and only has the equivalent
.\"O .BR \-\-version .
一方、glibc2 バージョンでは
.B \-V
をサポートしておらず、これと同じ意味の
.B \-\-version
しかサポートしていない。
.LP
.\"O The libc5 version of this program will use the name of a library given
.\"O on the command line as-is when it contains a \(aq/\(aq; otherwise it
.\"O searches for the library in the standard locations.
.\"O To run it
.\"O on a shared library in the current directory, prefix the name with "./".
libc5 バージョンのプログラムでは、
コマンドラインで与えられたライブラリ名に
\(aq/\(aq が含まれている場合は、ライブラリ名をそのまま用いる。
\(aq/\(aq が含まれていない場合は、標準的なパスからライブラリを検索する。
カレントディレクトリにある共有ライブラリに対して実行するには、
名前にプレフィックス "./" を付けること。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O does not work on a.out shared libraries.
.B ldd
は a.out 共有ライブラリでは動作しない。
.PP
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O does not work with some extremely old a.out programs which were
.\"O built before
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O support was added to the compiler releases.
.B ldd
は非常に古い a.out プログラム
.RB ( ldd
のサポートがコンパイラに追加される以前にビルドされたようなプログラム)
では動作しない。
.\"O If you use
.\"O .B ldd
.\"O on one of these programs, the program will attempt to run with
.\"O \fIargc\fP = 0 and the results will be unpredictable.
このようなプログラムに対して
.B ldd
を用いると、プログラムは \fIargc\fP = 0 で実行される。結果は予想不可能である。
.\"O .\" .SH AUTHOR
.\" .SH 著者
.\" David Engel.
.\" Roland McGrath and Ulrich Drepper.
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR ld.so (8),
.BR ldconfig (8)
