.TH IP6TABLES-SAVE 8 "Jan 30, 2002" "" ""
.\"
.\" Man page written by Harald Welte <laforge@gnumonks.org>
.\" It is based on the iptables man page.
.\"
.\"	This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"	it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"	the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"	(at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"	This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"	but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"	MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"	GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"	You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"	along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"	Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Thu May  1 17:36:08 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ip6tables-save \- Save IPv6 Tables
ip6tables-save \- IPv6 テーブルを保存する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR "ip6tables-save " "[-c] [-t table]"
.br
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.PP
.\"O .B ip6tables-save
.\"O is used to dump the contents of an IPv6 Table in easily parseable format
.\"O to STDOUT. Use I/O-redirection provided by your shell to write to a file.
.B ip6tables-save
は IPv6 テーブルの内容を簡単に解析できる形式で
標準出力にダンプするために使われる。
ファイルに書き出すためには、
シェルで提供されている I/O リダイレクションを使うこと。
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-counters\fR
.\"O include the current values of all packet and byte counters in the output
全てのパケットカウンタとバイトカウンタの現在の値を出力する。
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-table\fR \fBtablename\fR
.\"O .TP
.\"O restrict output to only one table. If not specified, output includes all
.\"O available tables.
出力を 1 つのテーブルのみに制限する。
指定されない場合、得られた全てのテーブルを出力する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O None known as of iptables-1.2.1 release
iptables-1.2.1 リリースでは知られていない。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Harald Welte <laforge@gnumonks.org>
.br
Andras Kis-Szabo <kisza@sch.bme.hu>
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR ip6tables-restore "(8), " ip6tables "(8) "
.PP
.\"O The iptables-HOWTO, which details more iptables usage, the NAT-HOWTO,
.\"O which details NAT, and the netfilter-hacking-HOWTO which details the
.\"O internals.
より多くの iptables の使用法について
詳細に説明している iptables-HOWTO。
NAT について詳細に説明している NAT-HOWTO。
内部構造について詳細に説明している netfilter-hacking-HOWTO。
