.TH IP6TABLES-RESTORE 8 "Jan 30, 2002" "" ""
.\"
.\" Man page written by Harald Welte <laforge@gnumonks.org>
.\" It is based on the iptables man page.
.\"
.\"	This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"	it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"	the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"	(at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"	This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"	but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"	MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"	GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"	You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"	along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"	Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu May  1 16:13:34 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ip6tables-restore \- Restore IPv6 Tables
ip6tables-restore \- IPv6 テーブルを復元する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR "ip6tables-restore " "[-c] [-n]"
.br
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.PP
.\"O .B ip6tables-restore
.\"O is used to restore IPv6 Tables from data specified on STDIN. Use 
.\"O I/O redirection provided by your shell to read from a file
.B ip6tables-restore
は標準入力で指定されたデータから IPv6 テーブルを復元するために使われる。
ファイルから読み込むためには、
シェルで提供されている I/O リダイレクションを使うこと。
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-counters\fR
.\"O restore the values of all packet and byte counters
全てのパケットカウンタとバイトカウンタの値を復元する。
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-noflush\fR 
.\"O .TP
.\"O don't flush the previous contents of the table. If not specified, 
.\"O .B ip6tables-restore
.\"O flushes (deletes) all previous contents of the respective IPv6 Table.
これまでのテーブルの内容をフラッシュしない。
指定されない場合、
.B ip6tables-restore
は、これまでの各 IPv6 テーブルの内容を全てフラッシュ (削除) する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O None known as of iptables-1.2.1 release
iptables-1.2.1 リリースでは知られていない。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Harald Welte <laforge@gnumonks.org>
.br
Andras Kis-Szabo <kisza@sch.bme.hu>
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR ip6tables-save "(8), " ip6tables "(8) "
.PP
.\"O The iptables-HOWTO, which details more iptables usage, the NAT-HOWTO,
.\"O which details NAT, and the netfilter-hacking-HOWTO which details the
.\"O internals.
より多くの iptables の使用法について
詳細に説明している iptables-HOWTO。
NAT について詳細に説明している NAT-HOWTO。
内部構造について詳細に説明している netfilter-hacking-HOWTO。
