.ig \"-*- nroff -*-
Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.de TQ
.br
.ns
.TP \\$1
..
.\"
.\" Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.\" the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.\"
.de Tp
.ie \\n(.$=0:((0\\$1)*2u>(\\n(.lu-\\n(.iu)) .TP
.el .TP "\\$1"
..
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Apr 14 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.TH GRN 1 "8 April 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O grn \- groff preprocessor for gremlin files
.SH 名前
grn \- gremlin ファイル用の groff プリプロセッサ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BR grn
[
.B \-Cv
]
[
.BI \-T dev
]
[
.BI \-M dir
]
[
.BI \-F dir
]
[
.IR file\.\.\.
]
.PP
.\"O It is possible to have whitespace between a command line option and its
.\"O parameter.
コマンドラインオプションとそのパラメータの間には空白を含めることができる。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I grn
.\"O is a preprocessor for including
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O pictures in
.\"O .I groff
.\"O input.
.I grn
は、
.I gremlin
画像を含んでいる
.I groff
ソース用のプリプロセッサである。
.\"O .I grn
.\"O writes to standard output, processing only input lines between two that
.\"O start with
.\"O .B .GS
.\"O and
.\"O .BR .GE.
.I grn
は、入力のうち
.B .GS
と
.B .GE
に挟まれた行だけを処理して標準出力に出力する。
.\"O Those lines must contain
.\"O .I grn
.\"O commands (see below).
それぞれの行は、後述する
.I grn
コマンドを含んでいなければならない。
.\"O These commands request a
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O file, and the picture in that file is
.\"O converted and placed in the
.\"O .I troff
.\"O input stream.
これらのコマンドは
.I gremlin
ファイルを要求し、そのファイルに含まれる画像は変換されて
.I troff
入力ストリームへ挿入される。
.\"O The
.\"O .B .GS
.\"O request may be followed by a C, L, or R to center, left, or right
.\"O justify the whole
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O picture (default justification is center).
.B .GS
リクエストには C, L, R のどれかを続けることができて、それぞれ
.I gremlin
画像全体を中央、左寄せ、右寄せと配置することを意味する
 (デフォルトの配置は中央である)。
.\"O If no
.\"O .I file
.\"O is mentioned, the standard input is read.
.I file
が指定されなかった場合は、標準入力が読み込まれる。
.\"O At the end of the picture, the position on the page is the bottom of the
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O picture.
画像の処理が終了したときは、ページ位置は
.I gremlin
画像の底部になる。
.\"O If the
.\"O .I grn
.\"O entry is ended with
.\"O .B .GF
.\"O instead of
.\"O .BR .GE ,
.\"O the position is left at the top of the picture.
.I grn
エントリが
.B .GE
のかわりに
.B GF
で終了する場合は、ページ位置は画像の左上となる。
.PP
.\"O Please note that currently only the \-me macro package has support for
.\"O .BR .GS ,
.\"O .BR .GE ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR .GF .
現在は、\-me マクロパッケージだけが
.BR .GS ,
.BR .GE ,
.B GF
をサポートしていることに注意してほしい。
.PP
.\"O The following command-line options are understood:
以下のコマンドラインオプションが解釈される:
.TP
.BI \-T dev
.\"O Prepare output for printer
.\"O .IR dev .
.\"O The default device is
.\"O .BR ps .
.\"O See
.\"O .BR groff (1)
.\"O for acceptable devices.
出力デバイス
.I dev
用の出力を生成する。デフォルトのデバイスは
.B ps
である。
指定できるデバイスについては
.BR groff (1)
を参照のこと。
.TP
.BI \-M dir
.\"O Set the library to directory
.\"O .IR dir .
.\"O If a
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O file cannot be found in the current directory,
.\"O .I dir
.\"O is prepended to the filename for a second try.
.\"O The default library directory is
.\"O .BR /usr/local/share/groff/tmac .
ディレクトリ
.I dir
をライブラリディレクトリに設定する。
.I gremlin
ファイルがカレントディレクトリに見つからない場合、
.I dir
をファイル名に前置して再検索する。
デフォルトのライブラリディレクトリは
.B /usr/local/share/groff/tmac
である。
.TP
.BI \-F dir
.\"O Search
.\"O .I dir
.\"O for subdirectories
.\"O .BI dev name
.\"O .RI ( name
.\"O is the name of the device) for the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file before the normal
.\"O .BR /usr/local/share/groff/font .
.B DESC
ファイルにおける
.BI dev name
.RI ( name
はデバイス名) サブディレクトリの検索を、通常の
.B /usr/local/share/groff/font
ディレクトリより先に
.I dir
から行う。
.TP
.B \-C
.\"O Recognize
.\"O .B .GS
.\"O and
.\"O .B .GE
.\"O (resp.
.\"O .BR .GF )
.\"O even when followed by a character other than space or newline.
スペースや改行以外の文字が後に続く
.B .GS
と
.B .GE
(および
.BR .GF )
を認識する。
.\".TP
.\".B \-s
.\"This switch causes the picture to be traversed twice:
.\"The first time, only the interiors of filled polygons (as borderless
.\"polygons) are printed.
.\"The second time, the outline is printed as a series of line segments.
.\"This way, postprocessors that overwrite rather than merge picture elements
.\"(such as Postscript) can still have text and graphics on a shaded
.\"background.
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Print the version number.
バージョン番号を出力する。
.\"O .SH GRN COMMANDS
.SH grn コマンド
.\"O Each input line between
.\"O .B .GS
.\"O and
.\"O .B .GE
.\"O may have one
.\"O .I grn
.\"O command.
.B .GS
と
.B .GE
に挟まれたそれぞれの行は
.I grn
コマンドを含んでいる。
.\"O Commands consist of one or two strings separated by white space, the first
.\"O string being the command and the second its operand.
コマンドは、ひとつの文字列、または空白で区切られたふたつの文字列からなる。
最初の文字列がコマンドであり、2 番目はそのオペランドである。
.\"O Commands may be upper or lower case and abbreviated down to one character.
コマンドは大文字小文字の区別はなく、1 文字に省略される場合もある。
.PP
.\"O Commands that affect a picture's environment (those listed before
.\"O .BR default ,
.\"O see below) are only in effect for the current picture:
画像の環境に影響するコマンド (これらは後述する
.B default
以前に記述される) は、現在の画像だけに効果をおよぼす。
.\"O The environment is reinitialized to the defaults at the start of the next
.\"O picture.
環境は次の画像の開始時にデフォルトに再初期化される。
.\"O The commands are as follows:
コマンドには以下のものがある:
.TP
.BI 1\  N
.TQ
.BI 2\  N
.TQ
.BI 3\  N
.TQ
.BI 4\  N
.\"O Set
.\"O .IR gremlin 's
.\"O text size number 1 (2, 3, or 4) to
.\"O .I N
.\"O points.
.\"O The default is 12 (resp. 16, 24, and 36).
.I gremlin
のテキストサイズ番号 1 (および 2, 3, 4) を
.I N
ポイントに設定する。
デフォルトはそれぞれ 12 (および 16, 24, 36) ポイントである。
.TP
.BI roman\  f
.TQ
.BI italics\  f
.TQ
.BI bold\  f
.TQ
.BI special\  f
.\"O Set the roman (italics, bold, or special) font to
.\"O .IR troff 's
.\"O font
.\"O .I f
.\"O (either a name or number).
.\"O The default is R (resp. I, B, and S).
ローマン体フォント (およびイタリック、ボールド、スペシャル体フォント)
を、
.I troff
のフォント
.I f
に設定する
.RI ( f
は名前または番号)。
デフォルトは R (およびそれぞれ I, B, S) である。
.TP
.BI l\  f
.TQ
.BI stipple\  f
.\"O Set the stipple font to
.\"O .IR troff 's
.\"O stipple font
.\"O .I f
.\"O (name or number).
塗り潰し (stipple) フォントを
.I troff
の stipple フォント
.I f
に設定する
.RI ( f
は名前または番号)。
.\"O The command
.\"O .B stipple
.\"O may be abbreviated down as far as `st' (to avoid
.\"O confusion with
.\"O .BR special ).
コマンド
.B stipple
の省略形は `st' となる
.RB ( special
との混同を避けるため)。
.\"O There is
.\"O .I no
.\"O default for stipples (unless one is set by the default command), and it is
.\"O illegal to include a
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O picture with polygons without specifying a
.\"O stipple font.
default コマンドによってひとつを指定しないかぎり、stipple フォントの
デフォルトは無い。また、stipple フォントを指定しなければポリゴンの
.I gremlin
画像を含めることはできない。
.TP
.BI x\  N
.TQ
.BI scale\  N
.\"O Magnify the picture (in addition to any default magnification) by
.\"O .IR N ,
.\"O a floating point number larger than zero.
.\"O The command
.\"O .B scale
.\"O may be abbreviated down to `sc'.
デフォルトの拡大率にさらに追加して、画像を
.I N
倍に拡大する。
.I N
は 0 より大きい浮動小数点実数である。
コマンド
.B scale
の省略形は `sc' となる。
.TP
.BI narrow\  N
.TQ
.BI medium\  N
.TQ
.BI thick\  N
.\"O Set the thickness of
.\"O .IR gremlin 's
.\"O narrow (resp. medium and thick) lines to
.\"O .I N
.\"O times 0.15pt (this value can be changed at compile time).
.I gremlin
の細線 (narrow)、および普通線 (medium)、太線 (thick) の太さを
0.15 ポイントの
.I N
倍に設定する。0.15 ポイントという値は、コンパイル時に変更することができる。
.\"O The default is 1.0 (resp. 3.0 and 5.0), which corresponds to 0.15pt
.\"O (resp. 0.45pt and 0.75pt).
.\"O A thickness value of zero selects the smallest available line thickness.
.\"O Negative values cause the line thickness to be proportional to the current
.\"O point size.
デフォルトの
.I N
の値は 1.0 (および 3.0, 5.0) であり、それぞれ 0.15 ポイント (および
0.45 ポイント、0.75 ポイント) に相当する。
0 を指定すると、有効な線の太さのうちでもっとも小さい値が選択される。
負数を指定すると、現在のポイントサイズに比例した線の太さとなる。
.TP
.BI pointscale\  <off/on>
.\"O Scale text to match the picture.
画像にあわせてテキストの大きさを変更する。
.\"O Gremlin text is usually printed in the point size specified with the
.\"O commands
.\"O .BR 1 ,\  2 ,\  3 ,\ or\  4
.\"O regardless of any scaling factors in the picture.
gremlin のテキストは、通常は画像のスケーリング要素に関係なくコマンド
.BR 1 ,\  2 ,\  3 ,\  4
で指定されたポイントサイズで出力される。
.\"O Setting
.\"O .B pointscale
.\"O will cause the point sizes to scale with the picture (within
.\"O .IR troff 's
.\"O limitations, of course).
.B pointscale
を指定すると、画像にあわせたポイントサイズになる (当然、
.I troff
の制限の範囲内に限定される)。
.\"O An operand of anything but
.\"O .I off
.\"O will turn text scaling on.
.I off
以外の引き数によってテキストのスケーリングが有効になる。
.TP
.B default
.\"O Reset the picture environment defaults to the settings in the current
.\"O picture.
現在の画像の設定を、画像環境のデフォルトに再設定する。
.\"O This is meant to be used as a global parameter setting mechanism at the
.\"O beginning of the
.\"O .I troff
.\"O input file, but can be used at any time to reset the
.\"O default settings.
これは、
.I troff
入力ファイルの開始時におけるグローバルなパラメータ設定処理が用いられる
ことを意味するが、デフォルトの設定をリセットするときにはいつでも使用できる。
.TP
.BI width\  N
.\"O Forces the picture to be
.\"O .I N
.\"O inches wide.
画像の幅を強制的に
.I N
インチにする。
.\"O This overrides any scaling factors present in the same picture.
このコマンドは同じ画像に対する他のスケーリング要素の指定より優先される。
.RB ` width
.IR 0 '
.\"O is ignored.
という指定は無視される。
.TP
.BI height\  N
.\"O Forces picture to be
.\"O .I N
.\"O inches high, overriding other scaling factors.
画像の高さを強制的に
.I N
インチにする。他のスケーリング要素より優先される。
.\"O If both `width' and `height' are specified the tighter constraint will
.\"O determine the scale of the picture.
`width' と `height' を両方指定すると、画像のスケールの指定として
より厳密なものとなる。
.\"O .B Height
.\"O and
.\"O .B width
.\"O commands are not saved with a
.\"O .B default
.\"O command.
.B height
と
.B width
コマンドは
.B default
コマンドによって保存されない。
.\"O They will, however, affect point size scaling if that option is set.
しかし、これらは指定されたときにポイントサイズのスケーリングに影響する。
.TP
.BI file\  name
.\"O Get picture from
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O file
.\"O .I name
.\"O located the current directory (or in the library directory; see the
.\"O .B \-M
.\"O option above).
カレントディレクトリにある
.I name
という
.I gremlin
ファイルから画像を取得する (または、ライブラリディレクトリから取得する;
前述の
.B \-M
オプションを参照)。
.\"O If two
.\"O .B file
.\"O commands are given, the second one overrides the first.
.B file
コマンドがふたつ指定された場合は、2 番目のものが優先される。
.\"O If
.\"O .I name
.\"O doesn't exist, an error message is reported and processing continues from
.\"O the
.\"O .B .GE
.\"O line.
.I name
が存在しない場合は、エラーメッセージが出力され、処理は
.B .GE
行から継続される。
.\"O .SH NOTES ABOUT GROFF
.SH groff についての注意
.\"O Since
.\"O .I grn
.\"O is a preprocessor, it doesn't know about current indents, point sizes,
.\"O margins, number registers, etc.
.I grn
はプリプロセッサであるので、現在のインデント量やポイントサイズ、
マージン量、数値レジスタなどは取得できない。
.\"O Consequently, no
.\"O .I troff
.\"O input can be placed between the
.\"O .B .GS
.\"O and
.\"O .B .GE
.\"O requests.
したがって、
.B .GS
と
.B .GE
リクエストの間には
.I troff
ソースは配置できない。
.\"O However,
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O text is now processed by
.\"O .IR troff ,
.\"O so anything legal in a single line of
.\"O .I troff
.\"O input is legal in a line of
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O text (barring `.' directives at the beginning of a line).
しかし、現在は
.I gremlin
テキストは
.I troff
で処理されるので、
.I troff
ソースとして正しい 1 行は
.I gremlin
テキストとしても正しいものとなる (行頭に `.' ディレクティブがない場合)。
.\"O Thus, it is possible to have equations within a
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O figure by including in the
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O file
.\"O .I eqn
.\"O expressions enclosed by previously defined delimiters (e.g.
.\"O .IR $$ ).
よって、
.I gremlin
ファイルの
.I gremlin
図形中に数式を含めることができる。
数式
.I eqn
は、あらかじめ定義した区切り文字で括られる (たとえば
.I $$
など)。
.PP
.\"O When using
.\"O .I grn
.\"O along with other preprocessors, it is best to run
.\"O .I tbl
.\"O before
.\"O .IR grn ,
.\"O .IR pic ,
.\"O and/or
.\"O .I ideal
.\"O to avoid overworking
.\"O .IR tbl .
ほかのプリプロセッサと一緒に
.I grn
を用いるときは、
.I grn
や
.I pic
より先に
.I tbl
を実行して、
.I tbl
の余計な仕事を避けることが望ましい。
.\"O .I Eqn
.\"O should always be run last.
.I eqn
は常に最後に実行すべきである。
.PP
.\"O A picture is considered an entity, but that doesn't stop
.\"O .I troff
.\"O from trying to break it up if it falls off the end of a page.
画像がページの終りからはみだしたときは、画像はひとつであると見なされて
いるのだが
.I troff
が分割してしまうことを止めることができない。
.\"O Placing the picture between `keeps' in \-me macros will ensure proper
.\"O placement.
\-me マクロにある `keeps' の間に画像を配置することによって、
本来の画像位置を保証できる。
.PP
.\"O .I grn
.\"O uses
.\"O .IR troff 's 
.\"O number registers
.\"O .B g1
.\"O through
.\"O .B g9
.\"O and sets registers
.\"O .B g1
.\"O and
.\"O .B g2
.\"O to the width and height of the
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O figure (in device units) before entering the
.\"O .B .GS
.\"O request (this is for those who want to rewrite these macros).
.I grn
は
.I troff
の数値レジスタのうち
.B g1
から
.B g9
までを使用し、このうち
.B g1
と
.B g2
には
.B .GS
リクエストを実行する前にそれぞれ
.I gremlin
図形の幅と高さが (デバイス単位) で設定される。
これらのマクロを書き換えたいときに使用できる。
.\"O .SH GREMLIN FILE FORMAT
.SH gremlin ファイルフォーマット
.\"O There exist two distinct 
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O file formats, the original format from the
.\"O .I AED
.\"O graphic terminal version, and the
.\"O .I SUN
.\"O or
.\"O .I X11
.\"O version.
.I gremlin
ファイルフォーマットには 2 種類の異なる形式がある。
ひとつは本来の
.I AED
グラフィックターミナルの形式、もうひとつは
.I SUN
または
.I X11
形式のフォーマットである。
.\"O An extension to the
.\"O .IR SUN / X11
.\"O version allowing reference points with negative coordinates is
.\"O .B not
.\"O compatible with the
.\"O .I AED
.\"O version.
.IR SUN / X11
形式では負の座標位置を参照できるように拡張されているが、これは
.I AED
形式とは互換性が
.BR ない 。
.\"O As long as a 
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O file does not contain negative coordinates, either format will be read
.\"O correctly by either version of
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O or
.\"O .IR grn .
.I gremlin
ファイルが負の座標を含んでいないかぎり、どちらのフォーマットも
それぞれのバージョンの
.I gremlin
や
.I grn
で正しく読むことがでる。
.\"O The other difference to the
.\"O .IR SUN / X11
.\"O format is the use of names for picture objects (e.g., POLYGON, CURVE)
.\"O instead of numbers.
ほかの違いとしては、
.IR SUN / X11
形式では画像オブジェクトに数値のかわりに名前を使用できる
 (たとえば、POLYGON, CURVE など)。
.\"O Files representing the same picture are shown in Table 1 in each format.
それぞれのフォーマットで同じ画像を表現したものを表 1 に示す。
.sp
.DS
.TS
center, tab(@);
l lw(0.1i) l.
sungremlinfile@@gremlinfile
0 240.00 128.00@@0 240.00 128.00
CENTCENT@@2
240.00 128.00@@240.00 128.00
185.00 120.00@@185.00 120.00
240.00 120.00@@240.00 120.00
296.00 120.00@@296.00 120.00
*@@-1.00 -1.00
2 3@@2 3
10 A Triangle@@10 A Triangle
POLYGON@@6
224.00 416.00@@224.00 416.00
96.00 160.00@@96.00 160.00
384.00 160.00@@384.00 160.00
*@@-1.00 -1.00
5 1@@5 1
0@@0
-1@@-1
.T&
css.
.sp
.\"O Table 1. File examples
表 1. ファイル例
.TE
.DE
.sp
.IP \(bu
.\"O The first line of each
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O file contains either the string
.\"O .B gremlinfile
.\"O .RI ( AED
.\"O version) or
.\"O .B sungremlinfile
.\"O .RI ( SUN / X11 )
それぞれの
.I gremlin
ファイルの最初の行は、文字列
.B gremlinfile
.RI ( AED
形式) または
.B sungremlinfile
.RI ( SUN / X11 )
となる。
.IP \(bu
.\"O The second line of the file contains an orientation, and
.\"O .B x
.\"O and
.\"O .B y
.\"O values for a positioning point, separated by spaces.
2 行目は、画像方向および座標位置の
.B x
と
.B y
の値をそれぞれ空白で区切って指定する。
.\"O The orientation, either
.\"O .B 0
.\"O or
.\"O .BR 1 ,
.\"O is ignored by the
.\"O .IR SUN / X11
.\"O version.
画像方向
.RB ( 0 または 1 の値をとる)
は
.IR SUN / X11
バージョンでは無視される。
.\"O .B 0
.\"O means that
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O will display things in horizontal format (drawing area wider than it is
.\"O tall, with menu across top).
.B 0
は
.I gremlin
を横方向に表示する (表示領域は、幅が高さより長くなり、メニューは上部にくる)。
.\"O .B 1
.\"O means that
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O will display things in vertical format (drawing area taller than it is wide,
.\"O with menu on left side).
.B 1
は
.I gremlin
を縦方向に表示する (表示領域は、高さが幅より長くなり、メニューは左側にくる)。
.\"O .B x
.\"O and
.\"O .B y
.\"O are floating point values giving a positioning point to be used when this
.\"O file is read into another file.
.B x
と
.B y
は浮動小数点実数で、このファイルが別のファイルから読み込まれたときに使用される
座標位置を指定する。
.\"O The stuff on this line really isn't all that important; a value of ``1 0.00
.\"O 0.00'' is suggested.
この行の要素はどれもさほど重要ではないので、
``1 0.00 0.00'' という値にしておけばよい。
.IP \(bu
.\"O The rest of the file consists of zero or more element specifications.
.\"O After the last element specification is a line containing the string ``-1''.
ファイルの残りは要素仕様が記述される。
最後の要素仕様の次は、文字列 ``-1'' という行になる。
.\"O .SH ELEMENT SPECIFICATIONS
.SH 要素仕様
.IP \(bu
.\"O The first line of each element contains a single decimal number giving the
.\"O type of the element
.\"O .RI ( AED
.\"O version) or its ASCII name
.\"O .RI ( SUN / X11
.\"O version).
それぞれの要素の最初の行は、要素のタイプを意味する数値
.RI ( AED
形式) またはその名前
.RI ( SUN / X11
形式) となる。
.\"O See Table 2.
表 2 を参照。
.sp
.DS
.TS
center, tab(@);
css
ccc
nll.
.\"O \fIgremlin\fP File Format \(mi Object Type Specification
\fIgremlin\fP ファイルフォーマット \(mi オブジェクトタイプ指定
.sp
.\"O \fIAED\fP Number@\fISUN\fP/\fIX11\fP Name@Description
\fIAED\fP 数値@\fISUN\fP/\fIX11\fP 名前@説明
.\"O 0@BOTLEFT@bottom-left-justified text
.\"O 1@BOTRIGHT@bottom-right-justified text
.\"O 2@CENTCENT@center-justified text
.\"O 3@VECTOR@vector
.\"O 4@ARC@arc
.\"O 5@CURVE@curve
.\"O 6@POLYGON@polygon
.\"O 10@TOPLEFT@top-left-justified text
.\"O 11@TOPCENT@top-center-justified text
.\"O 12@TOPRIGHT@top-right-justified text
.\"O 13@CENTLEFT@left-center-justified text
.\"O 14@CENTRIGHT@right-center-justified text
.\"O 15@BOTCENT@bottom-center-justified text
0@BOTLEFT@下方左寄せのテキスト
1@BOTRIGHT@下方右寄せのテキスト
2@CENTCENT@中央寄せのテキスト
3@VECTOR@ベクトル
4@ARC@弧
5@CURVE@曲線
6@POLYGON@ポリゴン
10@TOPLEFT@上方左寄せのテキスト
11@TOPCENT@上方中心寄せのテキスト
12@TOPRIGHT@上方右寄せのテキスト
13@CENTLEFT@中央左寄せのテキスト
14@CENTRIGHT@中央右寄せのテキスト
15@BOTCENT@下方中央寄せのテキスト
.T&
css.
.sp
.\"O Table 2.
.\"O Type Specifications in \fIgremlin\fP Files
表 2.
\fIgremlin\fP ファイルのタイプ指定
.TE
.DE
.sp
.IP \(bu
.\"O After the object type comes a variable number of lines, each specifying a
.\"O point used to display the element.
オブジェクトタイプのあとには、要素が表示される座標を指定する行が続く。
.\"O Each line contains an x-coordinate and a y-coordinate in floating point
.\"O format, separated by spaces.
それぞれの行には X 座標と Y 座標が浮動小数点実数形式で、
空白で区切られて指定される。
.\"O The list of points is terminated by a line containing the string ``-1.0
.\"O -1.0''
.\"O .RI ( AED
.\"O version) or a single asterisk, ``*''
.\"O .RI ( SUN / X11
.\"O version).
座標のリストの終端は、文字列 ``-1.0 -1.0''
.RI ( AED
形式) という行か、単一のアスタリスク ``*''
.RI ( SUN / X11
形式) の行となる。
.IP \(bu
.\"O After the points comes a line containing two decimal values, giving the
.\"O brush and size for the element.
座標の次には、ふたつの 10 進数値を含む行がくる。
これらは、要素のブラシとサイズを指定している。
.\"O The brush determines the style in which things are drawn.
ブラシはオブジェクトが描画されるときのスタイルを決定する。
.\"O For vectors, arcs, and curves there are six legal brush values:
ベクトル、弧、曲線は次の 6 種類のブラシの値をとることができる:
.sp
.DS
.TS
center, tab(@);
ncw(0.1i)l.
.\"O 1 \(mi@@thin dotted lines
.\"O 2 \(mi@@thin dot-dashed lines
.\"O 3 \(mi@@thick solid lines
.\"O 4 \(mi@@thin dashed lines
.\"O 5 \(mi@@thin solid lines
.\"O 6 \(mi@@medium solid lines
1 \(mi@@細い点線 (dotted lines)
2 \(mi@@細い一点破線 (dot-dashed lines)
3 \(mi@@太い実線 (solid lines)
4 \(mi@@太い破線 (dashed lines)
5 \(mi@@太い実線 (solid lines)
6 \(mi@@普通の実線 (solid lines)
.TE
.DE
.sp
.\"O For polygons, one more value, 0, is legal.
ポリゴンでは、ひとつ追加されて 0 という値が有効である。
.\"O It specifies a polygon with an invisible border.
これは、不可視の境界を意味する。
.\"O For text, the brush selects a font as follows:
テキストでは、ブラシの選択は以下のフォントを意味する:
.sp
.DS
.TS
center, tab(@);
ncw(0.1i)l.
.\"O 1 \(mi@@roman (R font in groff)
.\"O 2 \(mi@@italics (I font in groff)
.\"O 3 \(mi@@bold (B font in groff)
.\"O 4 \(mi@@special (S font in groff)
1 \(mi@@ローマン体 (groff の R フォント)
2 \(mi@@イタリック体 (groff の I フォント)
3 \(mi@@ボールド体 (groff の B フォント)
4 \(mi@@スペシャル体 (groff の S フォント)
.TE
.DE
.sp
.\"O If you're using
.\"O .I grn
.\"O to run your pictures through
.\"O .IR groff ,
.\"O the font is really just a starting font:
.I groff
を通して
.I grn
で画像を処理している場合は、フォント指定は初期状態の指定となる:
.\"O The text string can contain formatting sequences like
.\"O ``\\fI''
.\"O or
.\"O ``\\d''
.\"O which may change the font (as well as do many other things).
テキスト文字列には、``\\fI'' や ``\\d'' といったフォントを変更する
フォーマットシーケンスを含めることができる (他のものも同様)。
.\"O For text, the size field is a decimal value between 1 and 4.
テキストでは、サイズの指定は 1 から 4 までの 10 進数値である。
.\"O It selects the size of the font in which the text will be drawn.
これは、テキストが描画されるときのフォントサイズを意味する。
.\"O For polygons, this size field is interpreted as a stipple number to fill the
.\"O polygon with.
ポリゴンでは、このサイズ指定はポリゴンの塗り潰し方法を指定する値として
扱われる。
.\"O The number is used to index into a stipple font at print time.
数値は出力時の stipple フォントのインデックスが使用される。
.IP \(bu
.\"O The last line of each element contains a decimal number and a string of
.\"O characters, separated by a single space.
それぞれの要素の最後の行は、ひとつの空白で区切られた 10 進数値と文字列となる。
.\"O The number is a count of the number of characters in the string.
数値は文字列中の文字数を示す。
.\"O This information is only used for text elements, and contains the text
.\"O string.
この情報はテキスト要素とテキスト文字列を含む要素だけに使われる。
.\"O There can be spaces inside the text.
テキスト中には空白を含めることができる。
.\"O For arcs, curves, and vectors, this line of the element contains the string
.\"O ``0''.
弧や曲線、ベクトルでは、この行には文字列 ``0'' が指定される。
.\"O .SH NOTES ON COORDINATES
.SH 座標に関する注意
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O was designed for
.\"O .IR AED s,
.\"O and its coordinates reflect the
.\"O .I AED
.\"O coordinate space.
.I gremlin
は
.I AED
用に設計されたので、その座標は
.I AED
の座標空間を反映している。
.\"O For vertical pictures, x-values range 116 to 511, and y-values from 0 to
.\"O 483.
縦方向の画像では、X の値は 116 から 511 までの範囲であり、Y の値は
0 から 483 の範囲である。
.\"O For horizontal pictures, x-values range from 0 to 511 and y-values range
.\"O from 0 to 367.
横方向の画像では、X の値は 0 から 511 の範囲であり、Y の値は
0 から 367 の範囲である。
.\"O Although you needn't absolutely stick to this range, you'll get best results
.\"O if you at least stay in this vicinity.
この範囲を絶対に守らなければならないわけではないが、
最良の結果を得るにはすくなくともこの近辺におさめた方が良い。
.\"O Also, point lists are terminated by a point of (-1, -1), so you shouldn't
.\"O ever use negative coordinates.
座標のリストは (-1, -1) の座標で終端するため、負の座標位置は使用できない。
.\"O .I gremlin
.\"O writes out coordinates using format ``%f1.2''; it's probably a good idea to
.\"O use the same format if you want to modify the
.\"O .I grn
.\"O code.
.I gremlin
は座標の出力に ``%f1.2'' というフォーマットを用いているので、
.I grn
のコードを変更したいときには同じフォーマットを用いるのが良いだろう。
.\"O .SH NOTES ON SUN/X11 COORDINATES
.SH SUN/X11 座標に関する注意
.\"O There is no longer a restriction on the range of coordinates used to create
.\"O objects in the
.\"O .IR SUN / X11
.\"O version of
.\"O .IR gremlin .
.IR SUN / X11
バージョンの
.I gremlin
で生成したオブジェクトには、座標範囲についての制限はもはやない。
.\"O However, files with negative coordinates
.\"O .B will
.\"O cause problems if displayed on the
.\"O .IR AED .
しかし、負の座標位置をもつファイルを
.I AED
で表示したときに問題を引き起す
.BR だろう 。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.Tp \w'/usr/local/share/groff/font/devname/DESC'u+3n
.BI /usr/local/share/groff/font/dev name /DESC
.\"O Device description file for device
.\"O .IR name .
デバイス
.I name
のデバイス記述ファイル。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR gremlin (1),
.BR groff (1),
.BR pic (1),
.BR ideal (1)
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.PP
.\"O David Slattengren and Barry Roitblat wrote the original Berkeley
.\"O .IR grn .
David Slattengren と Barry Roitblat がオリジナルの Berkeley
.I grn
を書いた。
.PP
.\"O Daniel Senderowicz and Werner Lemberg modified it for
.\"O .IR groff .
Daniel Senderowicz と Werner Lemberg が
.I groff
用に修正した。
