'\" t
.\" The above line should force the use of tbl as a preprocessor
.\" vim: set syntax=nroff : 
.\" The above line should set vim into nroff mode
.ig
Copyright (C) 1994-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.

Modified by Francisco Andres Verdu <pandres@dragonet.es> for the grolbp
program.
..
.de TQ
.br
.ns
.TP \\$1
..
.\" Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.\" the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.de Tp
.ie \\n(.$=0:((0\\$1)*2u>(\\n(.lu-\\n(.iu)) .TP
.el .TP "\\$1"
..
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.TH GROLBP 1 "8 April 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O grolbp \- groff driver for Canon CAPSL printers (LBP-4 and LBP-8 series laser printers).
.SH 名前
grolbp \- Canon CAPSL プリンタ用 groff ドライバ (LBP-4 と LBP-8 シリーズのレーザプリンタ用)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nr a \n(.j
.ad l
.nr i \n(.i
.in +\w'\fBgrolbp 'u
.ti \niu
.B grolpb
.de OP
.ie \\n(.$-1 .RI "[\ \fB\\$1\fP" "\\$2" "\ ]"
.el .RB "[\ " "\\$1" "\ ]"
..
.OP \-l
.OP \-\-landscape
.OP \-v
.OP \-\-version
.OP \-c n
.OP \-\-copies= numcopies
.OP \-p paper_size
.OP \-\-papersize= paper_size
.OP \-o orientation
.OP \-\-orientation= orientation
.OP \-F dir
.OP \-\-fontdir= dir
.OP \-h
.OP \-\-help
.RI "[\ " files\|.\|.\|. "\ ]"
.br
.ad \na
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B grolbp
.\"O is a driver for
.\"O .B groff
.\"O that produces output in CAPSL and VDM format suitable for Canon LBP\-4 and
.\"O LBP\-8 printers.
.B grolbp
は、Canon LBP\-4 と LBP\-8 プリンタに最適な CAPSL および VDM フォーマットの
出力を生成する
.B groff
のドライバである。
.LP
.\"O For compatibility with grolj4 there is an additional drawing command
.\"O available:
grolj4 との互換性のために、以下の描画コマンドが追加されている:
.TP
.BI \eD'R\  dh\ dv '
.\"O Draw a rule (i.e.\ a solid black rectangle), with one corner at the current
.\"O position, and the diagonally opposite corner at the current position
.\"O .RI +( dh , dv ).
罫線 (黒く塗りつぶした矩形) を描画する。
罫線の位置は、現在の座標とその
.RI +( dh , dv )
の座標を対角とする。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O Note that there can be whitespace between a one-letter option and its
.\"O argument; on the other hand, there must be whitespace and/or an equal sign
.\"O (`=') between a long-name option and its argument.
一文字のオプションとその引き数との間には空白を含めることができる。
また、長い名前のオプションは引き数との間に、空白か等号 (`=') を入れなければ
ならない (両方指定してもかまわない)。
.TP
.BI \-c numcopies
.TQ
.BI \-\-copies= numcopies
.\"O Print
.\"O .I numcopies
.\"O copies of each page.
それぞれのページを
.I numcopies
枚ずつ、出力する。
.TP
.B \-l
.TQ
.B \-\-landscape
.\"O Print the document with a landscape orientation.
ドキュメントを横方向 (landscape orientation) に出力する。
.TP
.BI \-p paper_size
.TQ
.BI \-\-papersize= paper_size
.\"O Set the paper size to
.\"O .IR paper_size ,
.\"O which must be a valid paper size description as indicated in the section
.\"O .BR "PAPER SIZES" .
用紙サイズを
.I paper_size
に設定する。
.B 用紙サイズ
のセクションに示した有効な用紙サイズを指定すること。
.TP
.BI \-o orientation
.TQ
.BI \-\-orientation= orientation
.\"O Print the document with
.\"O .I orientation
.\"O orientation, which must be `portrait' or `landscape'.
ドキュメントを
.I orientation
方向に出力する。
.I orientation
は、`portrait' (縦方向) か `landscape' (横方向) の引き数をとる。
.TP
.B \-v
.TQ
.B \-\-version
.\"O Print the version number.
バージョン番号を出力する。
.TP
.BI \-F dir
.TQ
.BI \-\-fontdir= dir
.\"O Search directory
.\"O .IB dir /devlbp
.\"O for font and device description files.
フォントおよびデバイスの記述ファイルを
.IB dir /devlbp
から検索する。
.TP
.B \-h
.TQ
.B \-\-help
.\"O Print a short help text.
短いヘルプを出力する。
.\"O .SH TYPEFACES
.SH タイプフェース
.\"O The driver supports the Dutch, Swiss and Swiss-Narrow scalable typefaces,
.\"O each one in the Regular, Bold, Italic and Bold-Italic styles.
.\"O Additionally, the Courier and Elite monospaced typefaces at the sizes 8 and
.\"O 12 points (for Courier) resp. 8 and 10 points (for Elite) are supported,
.\"O each one in the Regular, Bold and Italic styles.
このドライバは、Dutch、Swiss、Swiss-Narrow のスケーラブルタイプフェースを
サポートしている。それぞれのタイプフェースはレギュラー体 (Regular)、
ボールド体 (Bold)、イタリック体 (Italic)、
ボールド・イタリック体 (Bold-Italic) を持つ。
さらに、Courier と Elite のモノスペースタイプフェースがある。
Courier は 8 ポイントと 12 ポイント、Elite は 8 ポイントと 10 ポイントを
サポートしている。これらのタイプフェースには、Regular, Bold, Italic がある。
.PP
.\"O The following chart summarizes the font names you can use to access these
.\"O fonts:
以下の表に、これらのフォントを使用するときのフォント名を示す。
.PP
.TS
tab(|) allbox center;
c c c c c
ab c c c c
.
.\"O Typeface | Regular | Bold | Italic | Bold-Italic
タイプフェース | Regular | Bold | Italic | Bold-Italic
Dutch | TR | TB | TI | TBI
Swiss | HR | HB | HI | HBI
Swiss Narrow | HNR | HNB | HNI | HNBI
Courier | CR | CB | CI |
Elite | ER | EB | EI |
.TE
.PP
.\"O .SH PAPER SIZES
.SH 用紙サイズ
.\"O The paper size can be set in the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file or with command line options to
.\"O .BR grolbp .
用紙サイズは、
.B DESC
ファイルまたは
.B grolbp
のコマンドラインオプションで設定できる。
.\"O If the paper size is specified both ways, the command line options take
.\"O precedence over the contents of the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file (this applies to the page orientation too).
用紙サイズが両方で指定された場合は、コマンドラインオプションの方が
.B DESC
ファイルの設定より優先される (ページ方向の設定も同様)。
.PP
.\"O To set the paper size in the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file, insert in that file a line containing
.\"O .B papersize
.\"O .IR desired_papersize ,
.\"O where
.\"O .I desired_papersize
.\"O is:
.B DESC
ファイルに用紙サイズを設定する場合は、ファイルに
.B papersize
.I desired_papersize
という行を挿入する。ここで
.I desired_papersize
(設定する用紙サイズ) は以下のとおり:
.IP \(bu 4
.\"O One of the recognized paper sizes: `a4', `letter', `legal' or `executive'.
規定された用紙サイズ: たとえば `a4', `letter', `legal', `executive' など。
.IP \(bu 4
.\"O A custom defined paper size, as described in the
.\"O .B CUSTOM PAPER SIZES
.\"O subsection below.
以下の
.B 任意の用紙サイズ
のサブセクションで説明する、任意に定義した用紙サイズ。
.IP \(bu 4
.\"O The name of a file (e.g.
.\"O .IR /etc/papersize )
.\"O whose first line must be the desired paper size in one of the above formats.
ファイル名 (たとえば
.IR /etc/papersize )。
このファイルの先頭行は、上記のフォーマットのどちらかで必要な用紙サイズ
を指定していなければならない。
.PP
.\"O If there are various papersize lines in the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file, only the first valid one is used.
.B DESC
ファイルに複数の用紙サイズ設定行がある場合は、最初の設定が使用される。
.PP
.\"O To set the paper size in the command line, add
コマンドラインで用紙サイズを設定する場合は、
.sp 1
.in +2m
.BI \-p \ desired_papersize
.in -2m
.sp 1
.\"O or
または
.sp 1
.in +2m
.BI \-\-papersize= desired_papersize
.in -2m
.sp 1
.\"O to the other
.\"O .B grolbp
.\"O options, where
.\"O .B desired_papersize
.\"O is in the same format as in the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file.
というオプションを
.B grolbp
に指定する。ここで、
.B desired_papersize
は
.B DESC
ファイルの指定と同じ形式である。
.PP
.\"O Paper sizes are case insensitive (i.e., `A4' is the same as `a4').
用紙サイズは、大文字小文字の区別はない (たとえば、`A4' と `a4' は同じである)。
.PP
.\"O If no paper size is specified in the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file or the command line, a default size of A4 is used.
.B DESC
ファイルにもコマンドラインにも用紙サイズの指定がない場合は、
デフォルトのサイズである A4 が使用される。
.TP
.\"O .SH CUSTOM PAPER SIZES
.SH 任意の用紙サイズ
.\"O Custom defined paper sizes are in the form
.\"O .BI cust length x width
.\"O where
.\"O .I length
.\"O and
.\"O .I width
.\"O are the dimensions of the paper you want to to use, specified in printer
.\"O units (1/300 of an inch).
任意の用紙サイズは、
.BI cust length x width
という形式で指定する。ここで、
.I length
(長さ) と
.I width
(幅) は使用する用紙の寸法で、プリンタ単位 (1/300 インチ) で指定する。
.\"O For instance, to print in a postcard sized paper which is two inches long
.\"O and four inches wide you can insert a line containing
たとえば、長さ 2 インチ・幅 4 インチのハガキサイズの用紙に出力する
ためには、以下の指定を
.B DESC
ファイルの先頭に挿入する。
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B papersize cust600x1200
.in -2m
.sp 1
.\"O at the beginning of the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file.
.\"O .SH PAGE ORIENTATION
.SH ページ方向
.\"O As with the page size, the orientation of the printed page
.\"O .RB ( portrait
.\"O or
.\"O .BR landscape )
.\"O can be set in the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file or with command line options.
.\"O It is also case insensitive.
用紙サイズと同様に、印刷されるページの方向
.RB ( portrait
または
.BR landscape )
も
.B DESC
ファイルやコマンドラインオプションで設定することができる。
これもまた、大文字小文字の区別はない。
.PP
.\"O To set the orientation in the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file, insert a line with the following content:
.B DESC
ファイルにページ方向を設定するには、以下のような内容の行を挿入する:
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B orientation
.RB [ portrait | landscape ]
.in -2m
.sp 1
.\"O As with paper sizes, only the first valid orientation command in the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file is used.
用紙サイズの場合と同様に、
.B DESC
ファイルにおける最初の有効なページ方向コマンドが使用される。
.PP
.\"O To set the page orientation with command line options you can use the
.\"O .B \-o
.\"O or
.\"O .B \-\-orientation
.\"O option with the same parameters
.\"O .RB ( portrait
.\"O or
.\"O .BR landscape )
.\"O as in the
.\"O .B DESC
.\"O file.
コマンドラインオプションでページ方向を設定するには、
.B DESC
ファイルと同じパラメータ
.RB ( portrait
または
.BR landscape )
を、
.B \-o
または
.B \-\-orientation
オプションに設定すればよい。
.\"O Or you can use the
.\"O .B \-l
.\"O option to force the pages to be printed in landscape.
あるいは、
.B \-l
オプションによって強制的にページを横方向に印刷することができる。
.\"O .SH FONT FILE FORMAT
.SH フォントファイルフォーマット
.\"O In addition to the usual commands described in
.\"O .BR groff_font (5),
.\"O .B grolbp
.\"O provides the command
.\"O .I lbpname
.\"O which sets the font name sent to the printer when requesting this font.
.BR groff_font (5)
に記述してある通常のコマンドに加えて、
.B grolbp
は
.I lbpname
というコマンドを用意している。
このコマンドは、あるフォントをプリンタに要求するときに、
プリンタに送信するそのフォント名を設定する。
.\"O The syntax of this command is:
コマンドの書式は以下のとおり:
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B lbpname
.I printer_font_name
.in -2m
.IP \(bu
.\"O For bitmapped fonts,
.\"O .I printer_font_name
.\"O has the form
ビットマップフォントの場合は、
.I printer_font_name
は以下の形式となる:
.sp 1
.in +2m
.RI N\(la base_fontname \(ra\(la font_style \(ra
.in -2m
.sp 1
.\"O .I base_fontname 
.\"O is the font name as it appears in the printers font listings without the
.\"O first letter, up to (but not including) the font size.
ここで、
.I base_fontname
はプリンタのフォントリストで示されるフォント名のうち、先頭文字を除いた
フォントサイズまでの部分である (フォントサイズは含まれない)。
.\"O .I font_style
.\"O can be one of the letters
.\"O .BR R ,
.\"O .BR I ,
.\"O or
.\"O .BR B ,
.\"O indicating the font styles Roman, Italic and Bold respectively.
.I font_style
は、
.BR R ,
.BR I ,
.B B
のうちのひとつで、それぞれローマン体、イタリック体、ボールド体の
フォントスタイルを意味する。
.IP
.\"O For instance, if the printer's 
.\"O .I font listing A
.\"O shows font `Nelite12I.ISO_USA', the corresponding entry in the font
.\"O description file is
たとえば、プリンタの
.I font listing A
で示される `Nelite12I.ISO_USA' というフォントは、フォント記述ファイルで
一致するエントリでは以下のようになる:
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B lbpname NeliteI
.in -2m
.IP
.\"O Note that you may need to modify
.\"O .B grolbp
.\"O to add support for new bitmapped fonts, since the available font names and
.\"O font sizes of bitmapped fonts (as documented above) are hard-coded into the
.\"O program.
注意: 新しいビットマップフォントのサポートを追加するためには、
.B grolbp
を修正しなければいけない。
前述したビットマップフォントの有効なフォント名とフォントサイズは
プログラム内にハードコーディングされている。
.IP \(bu
.\"O For scalable fonts,
.\"O .I printer_font_name
.\"O is identical to the font name as it appears in the printer's 
.\"O .IR "font listing A" .
スケーラブルフォントの場合は、
.I printer_font_name
はプリンタの
.I font listing A
に示されたフォント名を指定する。
.IP
.\"O For instance, to select the `Swiss' font in bold style, which appears in
.\"O the printer's
.\"O .I font listing A
.\"O as `Swiss-Bold', the required
.\"O .B lbpname
.\"O command line is
たとえば、ボールド体の `Swiss' フォントを選択するときに、このフォントが
プリンタの
.I font listing A
に `Swiss-Bold' と示されているならば、要求される
.B lbpname
のコマンドラインは以下のようになる:
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B lbpname Swiss-Bold
.in -2m
.sp 1
.PP
.\"O The argument of
.\"O .B lbpname
.\"O is case sensitive.
.B lbpname
の引き数は大文字小文字が区別される。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.B /usr/local/share/groff/font/devlbp/DESC
.\"O Device description file.
デバイス記述ファイル
.TP
.BI /usr/local/share/groff/font/devlbp/ F
.\"O Font description file for font
.\"O .IR F .
フォント
.I F
のフォント記述ファイル
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR groff (1),
.BR troff (1),
.BR groff_out (5),
.BR groff_font (5),
.BR groff_char (7)
.\"
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:


