.ig \"-*- nroff -*-
Copyright (C) 1994-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.\" Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.\" the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.de Tp
.ie \\n(.$=0:((0\\$1)*2u>(\\n(.lu-\\n(.iu)) .TP
.el .TP "\\$1"
..
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.TH HPFTODIT 1 "8 April 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O hpftodit \- create font description files for use with groff \-Tlj4
.SH 名前
hpftodit \- groff \-Tlj4 で用いられるフォント記述ファイルを生成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B hpftodit
[
.B \-sv
]
[
.BI \-i n
]
.I tfm_file
.I map_file
.I font
.PP
.\"O It is possible to have whitespace between the
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O command line option and its parameter.
.B \-i
コマンドラインオプションとそのパラメータの間には空白を含めることができる。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B hpftodit
.\"O creates a font file for use with
.\"O .B
.\"O groff \-Tlj4\fR
.\"O from an HP tagged font metric file.
.B hpftodit
は、
.B
groff \-Tlj4\fR
で用いられるフォントファイルを HP のタグ付きフォントメトリックファイル
から生成する。
.I tfm_file
.\"O is the name of the tagged font metric file for the font.
はフォントのタグ付きフォントメトリックファイルの名前である。
.I map_file
.\"O is a file giving the groff names for characters in the font;
.\"O this file should consist of a sequence of lines of the form:
はフォント文字の groff 名を指定するファイルである:
このファイルは以下のような形式の一連の行から構成される。
.IP
.I
n c1 c2 \fR.\|.\|.
.LP
.\"O where
.\"O .I n
.\"O is a decimal integer giving the MSL number of the character,
.\"O and
.\"O .IR c1 ,
.\"O .IR c2 ,.\|.\|.
.\"O are the groff names of the character.
ここで、
.I n
は文字の MSL 番号を意味する 10 進数、
.IR c1 ,
.IR c2 ,.\|.\|.
は文字の groff 名である。
.\"O .I font
.\"O is the name of the groff font file.
.\"O The groff font file is written to
.\"O .IR font .
.I font
は groff フォントファイル名である。
groff フォントファイルは
.I font
に出力される。
.LP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O option should be given if the font is special
.\"O (a font is
.\"O .I special
.\"O if
.\"O .B troff
.\"O should search it whenever
.\"O a character is not found in the current font.)
.B \-s
オプションは、フォントがスペシャルの場合に指定しなければいけない
(現在のフォントに文字が見つからないときに
.B troff
が検索をするフォントが
.I スペシャル
フォントである)。
.\"O If the font is special,
.\"O it should be listed in the
.\"O .B fonts
.\"O command in the DESC file;
フォントがスペシャルの場合、DESC ファイルに
.B fonts
コマンドを記述しなければならない。
.\"O if it is not special, there is no need to list it, since
.\"O .B troff
.\"O can automatically mount it when it's first used.
スペシャルフォントでなければ記述する必要はなく、
.B troff
はそのフォントを最初に使用するときに自動的にマウントできる。
.LP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B \-i
.\"O option is used,
.\"O .B hpftodit
.\"O will automatically generate an italic correction,
.\"O a left italic correction and a subscript correction
.\"O for each character
.\"O (the significance of these parameters is explained in
.\"O .BR groff_font (5)).
.B \-i
オプションが使用された場合、
.B hpftodit
は、自動的にそれぞれの文字のイタリック補正、逆イタリック補正、
添字補正を生成する
(これらのパラメータの意味は
.BR groff_font (5)
で説明されている)。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Print the version number.
バージョン番号を出力する。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O The font is special.
.\"O The effect of this option is to add the
.\"O .B special
.\"O command to the font file.
フォントがスペシャルである。このオプションの効果として
フォントファイルに
.B special
コマンドが追加される。
.TP
.BI \-i n
.\"O Generate an italic correction for each character so that 
.\"O the character's width plus the character's italic correction
.\"O is equal to
.\"O .I n
.\"O design units
.\"O plus the amount by which the right edge of the character's bounding
.\"O is to the right of the character's origin.
それぞれの文字のイタリック補正を生成する。
文字幅と文字のイタリック補正の合計は、
.I n
デザイン単位と文字の右境界が元の文字から右に移動する量の合計と等しい。
.\"O If this would result in a negative italic correction, use a zero
.\"O italic correction instead.
.\"O There are 8782 design units per em for Intellifont fonts.
この結果が逆イタリック補正となる場合は代わりにゼロイタリック補正を
用いる。
Intellifont フォントでは 1 全角文字 (em) あたり 8782 デザイン単位である。
.IP
.\"O Also generate a subscript correction equal to the 
.\"O product of the tangent of the slant of the font and
.\"O four fifths of the x-height of the font.
.\"O If this would result in a subscript correction greater than the italic
.\"O correction, use a subscript correction equal to the italic correction
.\"O instead.
添字補正も生成され、これはフォントの傾きのタンジェントと
フォントの高さ (x-height) の 4/5 の積と等しい。
この結果として添字補正がイタリック補正より大きくなる場合は、代わりに
イタリック補正と等しい添字補正を用いる。
.IP
.\"O Also generate a left italic correction for each character
.\"O equal to
.\"O .I n
.\"O design units
.\"O plus the amount by which the left edge of the character's bounding box
.\"O is to the left of the character's origin.
.\"O The left italic correction may be negative.
同時にそれぞれの文字の逆イタリック補正も生成され、
.I n
デザイン単位と文字境界の左側が元から左に移動する量の合計に等しい。
逆イタリック補正は負数になるだろう。
.IP
.\"O This option is normally needed only with italic (or oblique) fonts.
このオプションは、普通はイタリック (または傾斜) フォントの場合だけに
必要である。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.Tp \w'\fB/usr/local/share/groff/font/devlj4/DESC'u+2n
.B /usr/local/share/groff/font/devlj4/DESC
.\"O Device description file.
デバイス記述ファイル
.TP
.BI /usr/local/share/groff/font/devlj4/ F
.\"O Font description file for font
.\"O .IR F .
フォント
.I F
のフォント記述ファイル
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.LP
.\"O This program was written without the benefit of complete, official
.\"O documentation on the tagged font metric format.
.\"O It is therefore likely that it will fail to work on tfm files that are
.\"O dissimilar to those for the internal fonts on the Laserjet 4,
.\"O with which it was tested:
.\"O .LP
.\"O TrueType tfm files are not supported.
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR groff (1),
.BR grolj4 (1),
.BR groff_font (5)


