.ig \"-*- nroff -*-
Copyright (C) 1989-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar 12 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.TH SOELIM 1 "8 April 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O soelim \- interpret .so requests in groff input
soelim \- groff 入力の .so リクエストを処理する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B soelim
[
.B \-Cv
]
[
.BI \-I dir
]
[
.IR files \|.\|.\|.\|
]
.PP
.\"O It is possible to have whitespace between the
.\"O .B \-I
.\"O command line option and its parameter.
.B \-I
コマンドラインオプションとそのパラメータの間に空白を含めることが
できる。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B soelim
.\"O reads
.\"O .I files
.\"O and replaces lines of the form
.\"O .IP
.\"O .BI .so\  file
.\"O .LP
.\"O by the contents of
.\"O .IR file .
.B soelim
はコマンドラインで指定されたファイルを読み込み、
.IP
.BI .so\  file
.LP
という形式の行を
.I file
の内容に置き換える。
.\"O It is useful if files included with
.\"O .B so
.\"O need to be preprocessed.
ファイルに、プリプロセスが必要な
.B so
が含まれているときに役に立つ。
.\"O Normally,
.\"O .B soelim
.\"O should be invoked with the
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O option of
.\"O .BR groff .
通常は、
.B soelim
は
.B groff
の
.B \-s
オプションによって呼び出される。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-C
.\"O Recognize
.\"O .B .so
.\"O even when followed by a character other than space or newline.
空白や改行以外の文字が続く
.B .so
も認識する。
.TP
.BI \-I dir
.\"O This option may be used to specify a directory to search for
.\"O files (both those on the command line and those named in
.\"O .B \&.so
.\"O lines).
このオプションで、ファイルを検索するディレクトリが指定できる
 (コマンドラインのファイルと
.B \&.so
行で指定されたファイルの両方が対象となる)。
.\"O The current directory is always searched first.
カレントディレクトリは、つねに最初に検索される。
.\"O This option may be specified more than once,
.\"O the directories will be searched in the order specified.
.\"O No directory search is performed for files specified using an absolute path.
このオプションは複数指定することができ、ディレクトリは指定された順番で
検索される。
絶対パスで指定されたファイルについては、ディレクトリ検索は実行されない。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Print the version number.
バージョン番号を出力する。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR groff (1)


