.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Wed Jun 21 02:18:21 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	archive		アーカイブ
.\"WORD:	vanilla		簡潔な
.\"WORD:	mandatory	必須の
.\"WORD:	verbose		詳細な
.\"WORD:	submitter	作成者
.\"WORD:	switch		オプション
.\"WORD:	pack		パックする
.\"WORD:	unpack		ファイルを取り出す
.\"WORD:	header		ヘッダー
.\"WORD:	stock		格納する
.\"WORD:	protection	アクセス権
.\"WORD:	feature		機能
.\"
.TH SHAR 1 "September 10, 1995"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O shar \- create shell archives
shar \- シェルアーカイブを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
shar [ options ] file ...
shar \-S [ options ]
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Shar
.\"O creates "shell archives" (or shar files) which are in text format
.\"O and can be mailed.  These files may be unpacked later by executing them
.\"O with /bin/sh.  The resulting archive is sent to standard out unless the
.\"O \f2\-o\f1 option is given.  A wide range of features provide extensive
.\"O flexibility in manufacturing shars and in specifying shar "smartness".
.\"O Archives may be "vanilla" or comprehensive.
shar は「シェルアーカイブ (shar ファイル)」を作成する。
これはテキスト形式なので、メールで送ることができる。
これらのファイルをほどくには、 /bin/sh を使って実行すればよい。
作成されたアーカイブは、\f2\-o\f1 オプションで指示されない限り、
標準出力に送られる。
shar には様々な機能があるので、 shar ファイルの作成や
shar の「賢さ (smartness)」の指定は、非常に柔軟に行うことができる。
アーカイブは、「簡潔 (vanilla)」にも詳細にもできる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.PP
.\"O Options have a one letter version starting with \- or a long version starting
.\"O with \-\-.  The exception is \f2\-\-help\f1, \f2\-\-version\f1,
.\"O \f2\-\-no-i18n\f1 and \f2\-\-print-text-domain-dir\f1 which does not
.\"O have short versions.
.\"O Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.
.\"O Options can be given in any order.  Some options depend on each other:
オプションには、\- で始まる 1 文字のバージョンと、
\-\- で始まる長いバージョンがある。
\f2\-\-help\f1, \f2\-\-version\f1,
\f2\-\-no-i18n\f1, \f2\-\-print-text-domain-dir\f1 は例外で、
短いバージョンがない。
長いオプションに必須の引き数は、短いオプションでも必須である。
オプションはどのような順番でも与えることができる。
互いに依存しているオプションもある。たとえば、
.nf
.\"O 	The \f2\-o\f1 option is required if the \f2\-l\f1 or \f2\-L\f1 option is used.
.\"O 	The \f2\-n\f1 option is required if the \f2\-a\f1 option is used.
.\"O 	See \f2\-V\f1 below.
	\f2\-l\f1 や \f2\-L\f1 オプションを使う場合、\f2\-o\f1 オプションが必要である。
	\f2\-a\f1 オプションを使う場合、\f2\-n\f1 オプションが必要である。
	下記の \f2\-V\f1 オプションも参照すること。
.fi
.\"O .SS "Giving feedback:"
.SS フィードバックを与える：
.IP "\f2\-\-help\f1"
.\"O Print a help summary on standard output, then immediately exits.
ヘルプを標準出力に表示し、すぐに終了する。
.IP "\f2\-\-version\f1"
.\"O Print the version number of the program on standard output,
.\"O then immediately exits.
プログラムのバージョン番号を標準出力に表示し、すぐに終了する。
.IP "\f2\-q\f1 \f2\-\-quiet\f1 \f2\-\-silent\f1"
.\"O Do not output verbose messages locally when producing the archive.
アーカイブを作成するとき、詳細なメッセージを出力しない。
.\"O .SS "Selecting files:"
.SS ファイルの選択：
.IP "\f2\-p\f1  \f2\-\-intermix-type\f1"
.\"O Allow positional parameter options.  The options \f2\-B\f1, \f2\-T\f1,
.\"O \f2-z\f1 and \f2\-Z\f1 may be embedded, and files to the right of the
.\"O option will be processed in the specified mode.
指定位置に依存するパラメーターオプションの使用を許す。
\f2\-B\f1, \f2\-T\f1, \f2-z\f1, \f2\-Z\f1 オプションを
(ファイルリストに) 入れてよい。
このオプションの後ろのファイルはすべて、指示されたモードで処理される。
.IP "\f2\-S\f1  \f2\-\-stdin-file-list\f1"
.\"O Read list of files to be packed from the standard input rather
.\"O than from the command line.  Input must be in a form similar to
.\"O that generated by the find command, one filename per line.  This
.\"O switch is especially useful when the command line will not hold
.\"O the list of files to be packed.  For example:
コマンドラインからではなく、標準入力からパックするファイルの一覧を読み込む。
入力は find コマンドで生成される形式と同じく、
1 行に 1 つのファイル名でなければならない。
パックするファイルの一覧をコマンドラインに書けない場合に、
このオプションは非常に役立つ。たとえば、
.nf

find . \-type f \-print | sort | shar \-S \-Z \-L50 \-o /tmp/big

.fi
.\"O If \f2\-p\f1 is specified on the command line, then the options
.\"O \f2\-B\f1, \f2\-T\f1, \f2\-z\f1 and \f2\-Z\f1 may be
.\"O included in the standard input (on a line separate from filenames).
.\"O The maximum number of lines of standard input, file names and
.\"O options, may not exceed 1024.
\f2\-p\f1 が指定された場合、
\f2\-B\f1, \f2\-T\f1, \f2\-z\f1, \f2\-Z\f1 オプションを
標準入力に入れることができる (行はファイル名で区切られる)。
標準入力の行数、ファイル名、オプションは最大 1024 を越えてはならない。
.\"O .SS "Splitting output:"
.SS 出力の分割：
.IP "\f2\-o\f1 XXX  \f2\-\-output-prefix=\f1XXX"
.\"O Save the archive to files XXX.01 thru XXX.nn instead of sending it to
.\"O standard out.
.\"O Must be used when the \f2\-l\f1 or the \f2\-L\f1 switches are used.
アーカイブを標準出力に送らず、ファイル XXX.01 から XXX.nn に保存する。
\f2\-l\f1 または \f2\-L\f1 オプションを使う場合、
このオプションを使うこと。
.IP "\f2\-l\f1 XX  \f2\-\-whole-size-limit=\f1XX"
.\"O Limit the output file size to XXk bytes but don't split input files.
出力ファイルのサイズを XX キロバイトに制限しようとする
(このサイズより小さくなる場合は、
複数の入力ファイルをまとめた出力ファイルを作成する)。
しかし、(1 つの入力ファイルをアーカイブしたサイズが
これより大きくなる場合でも) 入力ファイルを途中で分割しない。
.IP "\f2\-L\f1 XX  \f2\-\-split-size-limit=\f1XX"
.\"O Limit output file size to XXk bytes and split files if necessary.  The archive
.\"O parts created with this option must be unpacked in correct order.
出力ファイルのサイズを XX キロバイトに制限し、必要ならば分割する。
このオプションで作られた、分割形式のアーカイブファイルは、
正しい順番でファイルを取り出さなければならない。
.\"O .SS "Controlling the shar headers:"
.SS shar ヘッダーの制御：
.IP "\f2\-n\f1 name  \f2\-\-archive-name=\f1name"
.\"O Name of archive to be included in the header of the shar files.
.\"O See the \f2\-a\f1 switch.
shar ファイルのヘッダーにアーカイブ名を入れる。
\f2\-a\f1 オプションを参照すること。
.IP "\f2\-s\f1 who@where  \f2\-\-submitter=\f1who@where"
.\"O Override automatically determined submitter name.
自動的に決定される作成者名を上書きする。
.IP "\f2\-a\f1  \f2\-\-net-headers\f1"
.\"O Allows automatic generation of headers:
次のようなヘッダーを自動生成する。
.nf
	Submitted-by: who@where
	Archive-name: <name>/part##
.fi
.\"O The <name> must be given with the \f2\-n\f1 switch.
.\"O If name includes a '/' "/part" isn't used.  Thus:
<name> は \f2\-n\f1 オプションで指示しなければならない。
name に '/' が含まれている場合、"/part" は使われない。つまり、

.RS 10m
.nf
.ta 30n
.\"O \-n xyzzy	produces:
\-n xyzzy	の場合：
	xyzzy/part01
	xyzzy/part02

.\"O \-n xyzzy/patch	produces:
\-n xyzzy/patch	の場合：
	xyzzy/patch01
	xyzzy/patch02

.\"O \-n xyzzy/patch01.	produces:
\-n xyzzy/patch01.	の場合：
	xyzzy/patch01.01
	xyzzy/patch01.02
.RE
.fi
.IP ""
.\"O The who@where can be
.\"O explicitly stated with the \f2\-s\f1 switch if the default isn't appropriate.
.\"O Who@where is essentially built as `whoami`@`uname`.
who@where がデフォルトでは不適切な場合、\f2\-s\f1
オプションを使って明示的に宣言できる。
who@where は本来 `whoami`@`uname` で作られる。
.IP "\f2\-c\f1  \f2\-\-cut-mark\f1"
.\"O Start the shar with a cut line.  A line saying 'Cut here' is placed at the
.\"O start of each output file.
shar ファイルを cut line で始める。'Cut here' と書かれた行が、
各出力ファイルの先頭に置かれる。
.\"O .SS "Selecting how files are stocked:"
.SS ファイルの格納法の選択：
.IP "\f2\-M\f1  \f2\-\-mixed-uuencode\f1"
.\"O Mixed mode.  Determine if the files are text or binary and archive
.\"O correctly (default).  Files found to be binary are uudecoded prior to packing
.\"O (USE OF UUENCODE IS NOT APPRECIATED BY MANY ON THE NET).
混合モード。ファイルがテキストなのかバイナリなのかを決定し、
正しくアーカイブを作る (デフォルトである)。
バイナリであるとわかったファイルは、パックする前に uuencode される
(ネットワーク上の多くの人に、uuencode の使用は煙たがられる)。
.IP "\f2\-T\f1  \f2\-\-text-files\f1"
.\"O Treat all files as text.
すべてのファイルをテキストとして扱う。
.IP "\f2\-B\f1  \f2\-\-uuencode\f1"
.\"O Treat all files as binary, use uuencode prior to packing.  This increases the
.\"O size of the archive.  The recipient must have uudecode in order to unpack.
.\"O (USE OF UUENCODE IS NOT APPRECIATED BY MANY ON THE NET).
すべてのファイルをバイナリとして扱い、パックする前に uuencode する。
このオプションは、アーカイブのサイズを増大させる。
受信者は、ファイルを取り出すために uudecode を持っていなければならない
(ネットワーク上の多くの人に、uuencode の使用は煙たがられる)。
.IP "\f2\-z\f1  \f2\-\-gzip\f1"
.\"O Gzip and uuencode all files prior to packing.  The recipient must have
.\"O uudecode and gzip in order to unpack
.\"O (USE OF UUENCODE AND GZIP IS NOT APPRECIATED BY MANY ON THE NET).
パックする前に、すべてのファイルを gzip して uuencode する。
受信者は、ファイルを取り出すために uudecode と gzip を持っていなければならない
(ネットワーク上の多くの人に、uuencode と gzip の
使用は煙たがられる)。
.IP "\f2\-g\f1 LEVEL  \f2\-\-level-for-gzip=\f1LEVEL"
.\"O When doing compression, use '\-LEVEL' as a parameter to gzip.  Default is 9.
.\"O The \f2\-g\f1 option turns on the \f2\-z\f1 option by default.
圧縮するとき、'\-LEVEL' を gzip のパラメーターとして使う。
デフォルトは 9 である。
\f2\-g\f1 オプションは、デフォルトで \f2\-z\f1 オプションをオンにする。
.IP "\f2\-Z\f1  \f2\-\-compress\f1"
.\"O Compress and uuencode all files prior to packing.  The recipient must have
.\"O uudecode and compress in order to unpack
.\"O (USE OF UUENCODE AND COMPRESS IS NOT APPRECIATED BY MANY ON THE NET).
.\"O Option \f2\-C\f1 is synonymous to \f2\-Z\f1, but is being deprecated.
パックする前に、すべてのファイルを compress して uuencode する。
受信者は、ファイルを取り出すために
uudecode と compress を持っていなければならない
(ネットワーク上の多くの人に、uuencode と compress の
使用は煙たがられる)。
\f2\-C\f1 オプションは、\f2\-Z\f1 と同義であるが、推奨されない。
.IP "\f2\-b\f1 BITS  \f2\-\-bits-per-code=\f1BITS"
.\"O When doing compression, use '\-bBITS' as a parameter to compress.
.\"O The \f2\-B\f1 option turns on the \f2\-Z\f1 option by default.  Default value
.\"O is 12.
圧縮するとき、'\-bBITS' を compress のパラメーターとして使う。
\f2\-B\f1 オプションは、デフォルトで \f2\-Z\f1 オプションをオンにする。
デフォルトの値は 12 である。
.\"O .SS "Protecting against transmission errors:"
.SS 転送エラーに対する保護：
.IP "\f2\-w\f1  \f2\-\-no-character-count\f1"
.\"O Do NOT check each file with 'wc \-c' after unpack.  The default is to check.
ファイルを取り出すした後、'wc \-c' を使って各ファイルをチェックしない。
デフォルトではチェックする。
.IP "\f2\-D\f1  \f2\-\-no-md5-digest\f1"
.\"O Do NOT use 'md5sum' digest to verify the unpacked files. The default is to
.\"O check.
取り出したファイルを検査するために \&'md5sum' ダイジェストを使わない。
デフォルトでは、チェックする。
.IP "\f2\-F\f1  \f2\-\-force-prefix\f1"
.\"O Forces the prefix character (normally 'X' unless the parameter to the \f2\-d\f1
.\"O option starts with 'X') to be prepended to every line even if
.\"O not required.  This option may slightly increase the size of the archive,
.\"O especially if \f2\-B\f1 or \f2\-Z\f1 is used.
必要がない場合でも、強制的にプレフィックス文字
(\f2\-d\f1 オプションの引き数が 'X' で始まっていない限り、通常は 'X') を
すべての行の行頭におく。
特に \f2\-B\f1 や \f2\-Z\f1 が使われる場合、
このオプションはアーカイブのサイズを少し増加させる。
.IP "\f2\-d\f1 XXX  \f2\-\-here-delimiter=\f1XXX"
.\"O Use XXX to delimit the files in the shar instead of SHAR_EOF.
.\"O This is for those who want to personalize their shar files.
SHAR_EOF のかわりに XXX を shar アーカイブの中のファイルの境界に使う。
このオプションは、shar ファイルをその人独自のものにしたい人のためにある。
.\"O .SS "Producing different kinds of shars:"
.SS 何種類かの shar ファイルの作成：
.IP "\f2\-V\f1  \f2\-\-vanilla-operation\f1"
.\"O Produce "vanilla" shars which rely only upon the existence of sed and
.\"O echo in the unsharing environment.  In addition, "if test" must also
.\"O be supported unless the \f2\-x\f1 option is used.  The \f2\-V\f1 silently
.\"O disables options offensive to the "network cop" (or "brown shirt"),
.\"O but does warn you if it is specified with \f2\-B\f1, \f2-z\f1,
.\"O \f2\-Z\f1, \f2\-p\f1 or \f2\-M\f1 (any of which does or might
.\"O require uudecode, gzip or compress in the unsharing environment).
unshar をする環境に sed と echo だけがあれば良いような、
「簡潔な (vanilla)」shar ファイルを生成する。
さらに、\f2\-x\f1 オプションを使わないときは、
"if test" をサポートしなければならない。
\f2\-V\f1 オプションは、"network cop" (または、"brown shirt"
(訳註：やたらと検閲したがる人)) が
不快に感じるオプションを暗黙のうちに不可にする。
しかし、\f2\-B\f1, \f2-z\f1, \f2\-Z\f1, \f2\-p\f1, \f2\-M\f1
オプションと同時に指定されると、警告を発する
(これらのオプションは、unshar をする環境に
uudecode, gzip, compress を必要とする)。
.IP "\f2\-P\f1  \f2\-\-no-piping\f1"
.\"O Use temporary files instead of pipes in the shar file.
shar ファイル (の展開) にパイプではなく一時ファイルを使う。
.IP "\f2\-x\f1  \f2\-\-no-check-existing\f1"
.\"O Overwrite existing files without checking.
.\"O If neither \f2\-x\f1 nor \f2\-X\f1 is specified, the unpack will
.\"O check for and not overwrite existing files when unpacking the archive.
.\"O If \f2\-c\f1 is passed as a parameter to the script when unpacking:
チェックせずに、既に存在するファイルを上書きする。
\f2\-x\f1 も \f2\-X\f1 も指定されない場合は、
アーカイブからファイルを取り出すときに、
既に存在するファイルをチェックして上書きしない。
ファイルを取り出すとき、

.RS 10m
sh archive -c
.RE
.IP ""
.\"O then existing files will be overwritten unconditionally.
というように、\f2\-c\f1 がスクリプトへの引き数として渡されると、
既に存在するファイルが無条件に上書きされる。
.IP "\f2\-X\f1  \f2\-\-query-user\f1"
.\"O When unpacking, interactively ask the user if files should be overwritten.
.\"O (DO NOT USE FOR SHARS SUBMITTED TO THE NET).
ファイルを取り出すとき、ファイルの上書きをユーザーに対話的に尋ねる。
(ネットワーク上に送信する shar ファイルに使ってはならない)。
.IP "\f2\-m\f1  \f2\-\-no-timestamp\f1"
.\"O Avoid generating 'touch' commands to restore the file modification
.\"O dates when unpacking files from the archive.
アーカイブからファイルを取り出すときに 'touch' コマンドを生成しない。
ファイル修正日時は復元されない。
.IP "\f2\-Q\f1  \f2\-\-quiet-unshar\f1"
.\"O Verbose OFF.  Disables the inclusion of comments to be output when the archive
.\"O is unpacked.
詳細出力をしない。
ファイルを取り出すときに出力されるコメントをアーカイブに含めない。
.IP "\f2\-f\f1  \f2\-\-basename\f1"
.\"O Restore by filename only, rather than path.  This option causes only file
.\"O names to be used, which is useful when building a shar from several
.\"O directories, or another directory.  Note that if a directory name is passed
.\"O to shar, the substructure of that directory will be restored whether \f2\-f\f1
.\"O is specified or not.
パスを考慮せず、ファイル名だけで復元をする。
このオプションはファイル名だけが使われるようにする。
shar ファイルが複数のディレクトリから作られる場合に役立つ。
ディレクトリ名が shar に渡される場合、
\f2\-f\f1 オプションが指定されているかどうかに関係なく、
そのディレクトリ以下の階層は復元されることに注意すること。
.\"O .SS "Internationalization:"
.SS 国際化：
.IP "\f2\-\-no-i18n\f1"
.\"O Do not produce internationalized shell archives, use default english messages.
.\"O By default, shar produces archives that will try to output messages in
.\"O the unpackers preferred language (as determined by the LANG/LC_MESSAGES
.\"O environmental variables) when they are unpacked.
.\"O If no message file for the unpackers language is found at unpack time,
.\"O messages will be in english.
国際化されたシェルアーカイブを作らず、デフォルトの英語メッセージを使う。
shar は通常、
アーカイブからファイルを取り出すときに
(環境変数 LANG/LC_MESSAGES で決定される) その人の好みの言語で
メッセージを出力することができるアーカイブを作る。
ファイルを取り出すとき、その人の言語のメッセージファイルがない場合は、
メッセージは英語になる。
.IP "\f2\-\-print-text-domain-dir\f1"
.\"O Prints the directory shar looks in to find messages files for different
.\"O languages, then immediately exits.
shar がいろいろな言語のメッセージファイルを見つけるための
ディレクトリを表示し、すぐに終了する。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.nf
.ta 37n
.\"O shar *.c > cprog.shar	# all C prog sources
.\"O shar \-Q *.[ch] > cprog.shar	# non-verbose, .c and .h files
.\"O shar \-B \-l28 \-oarc.sh *.arc	# all binary .arc files, into
.\"O 	# files arc.sh.01 thru arc.sh.NN
.\"O shar \-f /lcl/src/u*.c > u.sh	# use only the filenames
shar *.c > cprog.shar	# すべての C プログラムソース
shar \-Q *.[ch] > cprog.shar	# 詳細出力なし。.c と .h ファイル
shar \-B \-l28 \-oarc.sh *.arc	# すべてのバイナリ .arc ファイルを、
	# ファイル arc.sh.01 - arc.sh.NN へ
shar \-f /lcl/src/u*.c > u.sh	# ファイル名のみを使用
.ta
.fi
.\"O .SH WARNINGS
.SH 警告
.PP
.\"O No chmod or touch is ever generated for directories created when unpacking.
.\"O Thus, if a directory is given to shar, the protection and
.\"O modification dates of corresponding unpacked directory
.\"O may not match those of the original.
ファイルを取り出すとき作られるディレクトリに対して、
chmod と touch が起動されることはない。
よって、ディレクトリを shar でパックすると、
取り出されたディレクトリのアクセス権・修正日時は、
元のディレクトリのものと一致しない。
.PP
.\"O If a directory is passed to shar, it may be scanned more than once.  Therefore,
.\"O one should be careful not change the directory while shar is running.
shar にディレクトリを渡すと、
ディレクトリは 2 回以上スキャンされる。
よって、shar が動作している間にディレクトリを変更しないように
注意しなければならない。
.PP
.\"O Be careful that the output file(s) are not included in the inputs or shar
.\"O may loop until the disk fills up.  Be particularly careful when a directory
.\"O is passed to shar that the output files are not in that directory
.\"O (or a subdirectory of that directory).
出力ファイルが入力ファイルに含まれないように注意すること。
さもないと、shar はディスクが溢れるまでループする。
特に、shar にディレクトリを渡すときは、
出力ファイルをそのディレクトリ (もしくはそのサブディレクトリ) に
置かないように注意すること。
.PP
.\"O Use of the \f2\-B\f1, \f2\-z\f1 or \f2\-Z\f1, and especially
.\"O \f2\-M\f1, may slow the archive process considerably, depending on
.\"O the number of files.
\f2\-B\f1, \f2\-z\f1, \f2\-Z\f1, 特に \f2\-M\f1 を使うと、
ファイル数に応じてアーカイブプロセスが非常に遅くなる。
.PP
.\"O Use of \f2\-X\f1 produces shars which \f2WILL\f1 cause problems
.\"O with many unshar procedures.  Use this feature only for archives
.\"O to be passed among agreeable parties.  Certainly, \f2\-X\f1 is NOT
.\"O for shell archives which are to be submitted to Usenet.  Usage of
.\"O \f2\-B\f1, \f2\-z\f1 or \f2\-Z\f1 in net shars will cause you to
.\"O be flamed off the earth.  Not using \f2\-m\f1 or not using \f2\-F\f1
.\"O may also get you occasional complaints.
\f2\-X\f1 オプションを使うと、多くの unshar プロセスで
\f2\間違いなく\f1 問題を引き起こす shar ファイルが作られる。
この機能を使うのは、合意の取れた集団内で受け渡されるアーカイブのみにすること。
もちろん、\f2\-X\f1 は Usenet に発信される
シェルアーカイブのためのものではない。
\f2\-B\f1, \f2\-z\f1, \f2\-Z\f1 をネットワーク上の shar ファイルに使うと、
非常に非難されるだろう。
\f2\-m\f1 と \f2\-F\f1 を使わない場合も、時々苦情を言われるだろう。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.PP 
unshar(1)
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.PP
.\"O Error messages for illegal or incompatible options,
.\"O for non-regular, missing or inaccessible files or for (unlikely)
.\"O memory allocation failure.
不正なオプション・矛盾するオプション、
一般でないファイル・見つからないファイル・アクセスできないファイル、
(有り得ない) メモリ割り当ての失敗、に対するエラーメッセージ。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O The shar and unshar programs is the collective work of many authors.
.\"O Many people contributed by reporting problems, suggesting
.\"O various improvements or submitting actual code.  A list of
.\"O these people is in the THANKS file in the sharutils distribution.
shar と unshar プログラムは多くの著者の協同作品である。
多くの人々が、問題の報告・いろいろな改良の示唆・実際のコードの提供に
貢献してくれた。
これらの人々は sharutils ディストリビューションの
THANKS というファイルにリストされている。




