.\"   Copyright (C) 1994-1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Tue Jun 20 21:37:49 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	archive		アーカイブ
.\"WORD:	signature	署名
.\"
.TH UNSHAR 1 "September 10, 1995"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O unshar \- unpack a shar file
unshar \- shar ファイルからファイルを取り出す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
unshar [ options ] [ file ... ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.PP
.\"O Unshar scans mail messages looking for the start of a shell archive.  It
.\"O then passes the archive through a copy of the shell to unpack it.  It
.\"O will accept multiple files.  If no files are given, standard input is used.
unshar は、メールメッセージをスキャンしてシェルアーカイブのはじまりを探し、
アーカイブの部分を (内部で起動した) シェルにかけて、ファイルを取り出す。
複数のファイルも受け付ける。
ファイルが指定されない場合、標準入力が使われる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.PP
.\"O Options have a one letter version starting with \- or a long version starting
.\"O with \-\-.  The exception is \f2\-\-help\f1 and \f2\-\-version\f1,
.\"O which does not have a short version.
オプションには、\- で始まる 1 文字のバージョンと、
\-\- で始まる長いバージョンがある。
\f2\-\-help\f1, \f2\-\-version\f1 は例外で、
短いバージョンがない。
.IP "\f2\-\-version\f1"
.\"O Print the version number of the program on standard output,
.\"O then immediately exits.
プログラムのバージョン番号を標準出力に表示し、すぐに終了する。
.IP "\f2\-\-help\f1"
.\"O Print a help summary on standard output, then immediately exits.
ヘルプを標準出力に表示し、すぐに終了する。
.IP "\f2\-d\f1 DIRECTORY  \f2\-\-directory=\f1DIRECTORY"
.\"O Change directory to DIRECTORY before unpacking any files.
ファイルを取り出す前に、DIRECTORY に移動する。
.IP "\f2\-c\f1  \f2\-\-overwrite\f1"
.\"O Passed as an option to the shar file.  Many shell archive scripts
.\"O (including those produced by `shar' 3.40 and newer) accepts a \f2\-c\f1
.\"O argument to indicate that existing files should be overwritten.
shar ファイルへのオプションとして渡される。
(3.40 以降の shar で作られたような)
多くのシェルアーカイブスクリプトは、既存のファイルを上書きするための
引き数 \f2\-c\f1 を受け付ける。
.IP "\f2\-e\f1  \f2\-\-exit-0\f1"
.\"O This option exists mainly for people who collect many shell
.\"O archives into a single mail folder.  With this option, `unshar'
.\"O isolates each different shell archive from the others which have
.\"O been put in the same file, unpacking each in turn, from the
.\"O beginning of the file towards its end.  Its proper operation
.\"O relies on the fact that many shar files are terminated by a
.\"O `exit 0' at the beginning of a line.
.\"O 
.\"O Option \f2\-e\f1 is internally equivalent to \f2\-E\f1 "exit 0".
このオプションは、多くのシェルアーカイブを 1 つのメールフォルダに
集める人を主な対象として存在する。
このオプションを使うと、`unshar' は
同じフォルダファイルに入れられた各シェルアーカイブを分離し、
フォルダファイルの始めから終りへ順に、
各シェルアーカイブからファイルを取り出していく。
これらの作業が正しく行われるのは、
多くの shar ファイルの最終行の先頭が `exit 0' で終っているからである。

オプション \f2\-e\f1 は内部的には \f2\-E\f1 "exit 0" と同じである。 
.IP "\f2\-E\f1 STRING  \f2\-\-split-at=\f1STRING"
.\"O This option works like \f2\-e\f1, but it allows you to specify the
.\"O string that separates archives if `exit 0' isn't appropriate.
.\"O 
.\"O For example, noticing that most `.signatures' have a `\-\-' on a
.\"O line right before them, one can sometimes use `\f2\-\-split-at\f1=\-\-' for
.\"O splitting shell archives which lack the `exit 0' line at end.  The
.\"O signature will then be skipped altogether with the headers of the
.\"O following message.
このオプションは \f2\-e\f1 と同じように動作するが、
アーカイブの間を隔てる文字列が `exit 0' では不適切な場合に、
文字列を指定できる。

たとえば、多くの (署名ファイル) `.signature' では
署名のすぐ前に `\-\-' があるので、
`exit 0' という行が最後にないシェルアーカイブを分割するために、
`\f2\-\-split-at\f1=\-\-' がよく使われる。
そうすると、署名は次のメッセージのヘッダーとまとめて読み飛ばされる。
.IP "\f2\-f\f1  \f2\-\-force\f1"
.\"O The same as \f2\-c\f1.
\f2\-c\f1 と同じ。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
shar(1)
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O Any message from the shell may be displayed.
シェルからのすべてのメッセージが表示される。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O The shar and unshar programs is the collective work of many authors.
.\"O Many people contributed by reporting problems, suggesting
.\"O various improvements or submitting actual code.  A list of
.\"O these people is in the THANKS file in the sharutils distribution.
shar と unshar プログラムは多くの著者の協同作品である。
多くの人々が、問題の報告・いろいろな改良の示唆・実際のコードの提供に
貢献してくれた。
これらの人々は sharutils ディストリビューションの
THANKS というファイルにリストされている。


