'.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
'.\" All rights reserved.
'.\"
'.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
'.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
'.\" are met:
'.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
'.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
'.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
'.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
'.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
'.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
'.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
'.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
'.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
'.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
'.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
'.\"    without specific prior written permission.
'.\"
'.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
'.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
'.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
'.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
'.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
'.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
'.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
'.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
'.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
'.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
'.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
'.\"
'.\" Modified from
'.\"     @(#)uuencode.1	6.9 (Berkeley) 4/23/91
'.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1994-2000 
.\" NetBSD jman proj. and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Thu Nov 17 1994
.\"         by NetBSD jman proj. <jman@spa.is.uec.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Jun 20 21:37:49 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	encode		エンコード
.\"WORD:	decode		デコード
.\"
.TH uuencode 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O uuencode \- encode a binary file
uuencode \- バイナリファイルをエンコードする
.PP
.\"O uudecode \- decode a file created by uuencode
uudecode \- uuencode で作成されたファイルをデコードする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B uuencode
[\-m] [ file ] name
.PP
.B uudecode
[-o outfile] [ file ]...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I Uuencode
.\"O and
.\"O .I uudecode
.\"O are used to transmit binary files over transmission mediums
.\"O that do not support other than simple
.\"O ASCII
.\"O data.
.I uuencode
と
.I uudecode
は、単純なアスキーデータしかサポートしていない
伝送路を用いて、バイナリファイルを送るために使われる。
.PP
.\"O .I Uuencode
.\"O reads
.\"O .I file
.\"O (or by default the standard input) and writes an encoded version
.\"O to the standard output.
.\"O The encoding uses only printing
.\"O ASCII
.\"O characters and includes the
.\"O mode of the file and the operand
.\"O .I name
.\"O for use by
.\"O .I uudecode.
.\"O If
.\"O .I name
.\"O is
.\"O .I /dev/stdout
.\"O the result will be written to standard output.  By default the standard
.\"O UU encoding format will be used.  If the option
.\"O .I \-m
.\"O is given on the command line
.\"O .B base64
.\"O encoding is used instead.
.I uuencode
は
.I file
(デフォルトでは標準入力) を読み込み、
エンコードしたものを標準出力に書き出す。
エンコードには表示可能なアスキー文字のみが使われる。
このデータには
.I uudecode
が使うファイルのアクセス権とオペランド名
.I name
が含まれる。
.I name
が
.I /dev/stdout
の場合、
結果は標準出力に書き出される。
デフォルトでは、標準的な UU エンコーディング形式が使われる。
オプション 
.I \-m
がコマンドラインから指定されると、
.B base64
エンコーディングが代わりに使われる。
.PP
.\"O .I Uudecode
.\"O transforms
.\"O uuencoded
.\"O .I files
.\"O (or by default, the standard input) into the original form.
.\"O The resulting file is named
.\"O .I name
.\"O (or
.\"O .I outfile
.\"O if the \-o option is given)
.\"O and will have the mode of the original file except that setuid
.\"O and execute bits are not retained.  If
.\"O .I outfile
.\"O or
.\"O .I name
.\"O is /dev/stdout the result will be written to standard output.
.\"O .I Uudecode
.\"O ignores any leading and trailing lines.  The program can automatically decide
.\"O which of the both supported encoding schemes are used.
.I uudecode
は、uuencode された
.I files
(デフォルトでは標準入力) を元の形に変換する。
結果のファイルは、name (\-o オプションが指定された場合は、
.IR outfile )
という名前が付けられ、
setuid と実行ビットが保存されない以外は、
元のファイルと同じアクセス権を持つ。
.I outfile
や
.I name
が /dev/stdout の場合、結果は標準出力に書き出される。
.I uudecode
は、(uuencode 部分の) 前後のすべての行を無視する。
プログラムは、(UU と base64 の) どちらのエンコード形式が使われているかを、
自動的に判断することができる。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O The following example packages up a source tree, compresses it,
.\"O uuencodes it and mails it to a user on another system.
.\"O When
.\"O .I uudecode
.\"O is run on the target system, the file ``src_tree.tar.Z'' will be
.\"O created which may then be uncompressed and extracted into the original
.\"O tree.
次の例では、ソースツリーを (tar で) まとめ、compress し、
uuencode して、他のシステム上のユーザーにメールで送っている。
相手のシステムで
.I uudecode
が実行されると、ファイル ``src_tree.tar.Z'' が作られる。
このファイルは、uncompress した後、
元のソースツリーを (tar で) 取り出すことができる。
.PP
.IP
.NF
tar cf \- src_tree \&| compress \&|
uuencode src_tree.tar.Z \&| mail sys1!sys2!user
.FI
.LP
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
compress(1), mail(1), uucp(1), uuencode(5)
.\"O .SH STANDARDS
.SH 準拠
.\"O This implementation is compliant with P1003.2b/D11.
この実装は P1003.2b/D11 に準拠する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O If more than one file is given to
.\"O .I uudecode
.\"O and the \-o option is given or more than one
.\"O .I name
.\"O in the encoded files are the same the result is probably not what is expected.
.I uudecode
に 2 つ以上のファイルを渡して \-o オプションを指定した場合や、
エンコードする複数のファイル中に同じ
.I name
が 2 つ以上あった場合、結果は期待したようにはならないだろう。
.PP
.\"O The encoded form of the file is expanded by 37% for UU encoding and by 35%
.\"O for base64 encoding (3 bytes become 4 plus control information).
エンコードされた形式では、UU エンコードの場合 37%、
base64 エンコードの場合 35% サイズが大きくなる
(3 バイトのデータが 4 バイト + 制御情報になる)。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O The
.\"O .I uuencode
.\"O command appeared in
.\"O BSD 4.0.
.I uuencode
コマンドは BSD 4.0 で登場した。





