.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, 
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese version copyright (c) 2003
.\"    System Design and Research Institute Co.,Ltd. All rights reserved
.\" 
.\" Translated on Fri May  2 13:41:33 JST 2003 JST
.\"     by System Design and Research Institute Co.,Ltd <info@sdri.co.jp>
.\" Updated/Modified on Sun Feb 27 17:05:30 EST 2005
.\"     by Tatsuo Sekine <tsekine@sdri.co.jp>
.\"
.TH VSFTPD.CONF 5
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O vsftpd.conf, the config file for vsftpd
vfstpd.conf \- vsftpd の設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O vsftpd.conf may be used to control various aspects of vsftpd's behaviour. By
.\"O default, vsftpd looks for this file at the location
.\"O .BR /etc/vsftpd.conf .
vsftpd.conf は vsftpd の動作の様々な側面を制御するのに使用する。
デフォルトでは、vsftpd は
.B /etc/vsftpd.conf
という場所を探す。
.\"O However, you may override this by specifying a command line argument to
.\"O vsftpd. The command line argument is the pathname of the configuration file
.\"O for vsftpd. This behaviour is useful because you may wish to use an advanced
.\"O inetd such as
.\"O .BR xinetd
.\"O to launch vsftpd with different configuration files on a per virtual host
.\"O basis.
しかし、vsftpd のコマンドライン引数で上書きできる。
コマンドライン引数は vsftpd の設定ファイルのパスである。
設定ファイルを指定できることで、
.B xinetd
のような高等な inetd において、バーチャルホストごとに異なる設定ファイルで
vsftpdを起動したい場合には便利である。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH FORMAT
.SH 書式
.\"O The format of vsftpd.conf is very simple. Each line is either a comment or
.\"O a directive. Comment lines start with a # and are ignored. A directive line
.\"O has the format:
vsftpd.conf の書式はとても単純である。
各行はコメントかディレクティブ(指示語)のどちらかである。
# で始まる行はコメントであり、無視される。
ディレクティブ行は次のフォーマットである。

option=value

.\"O It is important to note that it is an error to put any space between the
.\"O option, = and value.
オプション(option)、=、値(value)の間に空白を入れるとエラーになるので
注意すること。

.\"O Each setting has a compiled in default which may be modified in the
.\"O configuration file.
各設定はコンパイル時に指定されたデフォルト値を持つが、
設定ファイルによって変更することが可能である。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH BOOLEAN OPTIONS
.SH 真偽値オプション
.\"O Below is a list of boolean options. The value for a boolean option may be set
.\"O to
.\"O .BR YES
.\"O or
.\"O .BR NO .
以下は引数に真偽値をとるオプションのリストである。
真偽値は
.B YES
または
.B NO
である。
.\"O 
.TP
.B anon_mkdir_write_enable
.\"O If set to YES, anonymous users will be permitted to create new directories
.\"O under certain conditions. For this to work, the option
.\"O .BR write_enable
.\"O must be activated, and the anonymous ftp user must have write permission on
.\"O the parent directory.
YES に設定した場合、anonymous(匿名)ユーザはある条件の下でディレクトリ
を新規に作成することが許可される。
実際に機能させるには
.B write_enable
オプションが有効になっていなければならず、また anonymous ftp ユーザが
親ディレクトリに対する書き込み権限を持っている必要がある。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B anon_other_write_enable
.\"O If set to YES, anonymous users will be permitted to perform write operations
.\"O other than upload and create directory, such as deletion and renaming. This
.\"O is generally not recommended but included for completeness.
YES に設定した場合、anonymous ユーザに
ファイルのアップロードとディレクトリの作成以外の書き込み操作、
すなわち削除と名前の変更を許可する。
一般的には推奨されないが、オプションの完全性のために含まれている。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B anon_upload_enable
.\"O If set to YES, anonymous users will be permitted to upload files under certain
.\"O conditions. For this to work, the option
.\"O .BR write_enable
.\"O must be activated, and the anonymous ftp user must have write permission on
.\"O desired upload locations.
YES に設定した場合、ある条件の下で anonymous ユーザに
ファイルのアップロードを許可する。
実際に機能させるには、
.B write_enable
オプションを有効にしなければならず、また anonymous ftp ユーザが
親ディレクトリに対する書き込み権限を持っている必要がある。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B anon_world_readable_only
.\"O When enabled, anonymous users will only be allowed to download files which
.\"O are world readable. This is recognising that the ftp user may own files,
.\"O especially in the presence of uploads.
YES に設定した場合、
anonymous ユーザには誰でも読み込み可になっているファイルの
ダウンロードのみを許可する。
これは、ftp ユーザがファイルを
所有できることを
(特にアップロードされたファイルがある場合に)
認めている。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B anonymous_enable
.\"O Controls whether anonymous logins are permitted or not. If enabled,
.\"O both the usernames
.\"O .BR ftp
.\"O and
.\"O .BR anonymous
.\"O are recognised as anonymous logins.
anonymous ログインを許可するかどうかを制御する。
YES にした場合、ユーザー名
.B ftp
と
.B anonymous
の両方を anonoymous ログインとして認識する。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B ascii_download_enable
.\"O When enabled, ASCII mode data transfers will be honoured on downloads.
YES に設定した場合、
ダウンロード時の ASCII モードでのデータ転送を許可する。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B ascii_upload_enable
.\"O When enabled, ASCII mode data transfers will be honoured on uploads.
YES に設定した場合、
アップロード時の ASCII モードでのデータ転送を許可する。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B async_abor_enable
.\"O When enabled, a special FTP command known as "async ABOR" will be enabled.
.\"O Only ill advised FTP clients will use this feature. Additionally, this feature
.\"O is awkward to handle, so it is disabled by default. Unfortunately, some FTP
.\"O clients will hang when cancelling a transfer unless this feature is available,
.\"O so you may wish to enable it.
YES に設定した場合、特殊な FTP コマンド "非同期 ABOR" を許可する。
この機能を使用するのは、分別のない FTP クライアントだけである。
さらに、この機能は取り扱いが難しいので、デフォルトで無効にされている。
この機能を有効にしなかった場合には、
転送を中止したときに不幸にも固まる FTP クライアントがあるので、
これを有効にしたくなるかもしれない。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B background
.\"O When enabled, and vsftpd is started in "listen" mode, vsftpd will background
.\"O the listener process. i.e. control will immediately be returned to the shell
.\"O which launched vsftpd.
YES に設定し、vsftpd が "listen" モードで起動された場合、
リスナープロセスをバックグラウンドにする。
すなわち、vsftpd を起動したシェルにすぐに制御が戻る。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B check_shell
.\"O Note! This option only has an effect for non-PAM builds of vsftpd. If disabled,
.\"O vsftpd will not check /etc/shells for a valid user shell for local logins.
注意!
このオプションは PAM 対応ではない vsftpd でのみ意味を持つ。
NO に設定した場合、ローカルユーザのログイン時の、
シェルが有効であるかどうかの /etc/shells チェックをしない。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B chmod_enable
.\"O When enables, allows use of the SITE CHMOD command. NOTE! This only applies
.\"O to local users. Anonymous users never get to use SITE CHMOD.
YES に設定した場合、SITE CHMOD コマンドを許可する。
注意!
これはローカルユーザにのみ適用される。
anonymous ユーザは、決して SITE CHMOD を使用できない。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B chown_uploads
.\"O If enabled, all anonymously uploaded files will have the ownership changed
.\"O to the user specified in the setting
.\"O .BR chown_username .
.\"O This is useful from an administrative, and perhaps security, standpoint.
YES に設定した場合、anonymous でアップロードされたファイルの所有者を
.B chown_username
で設定したユーザにする。
管理上、そして多分セキュリティの観点から便利である。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B chroot_list_enable
.\"O If activated, you may provide a list of local users who are placed in a
.\"O chroot() jail in their home directory upon login. The meaning is slightly
.\"O different if chroot_local_user is set to YES. In this case, the list becomes
.\"O a list of users which are NOT to be placed in a chroot() jail.
YES に設定した場合、ログイン後にホームディレクトリへと
chroot() されるローカルユーザのリストを指定できる。
chroot_local_user を YES に設定した場合には、意味が異なってくる。
リストはその場合、chroot() jail へと移動され\fBない\fRユーザ
のリストとなる。
.\"O By default, the file containing this list is
.\"O /etc/vsftpd.chroot_list, but you may override this with the
.\"O .BR chroot_list_file
.\"O setting.
デフォルトでは、このリストは
/etc/vsftpd.chroot_list
ファイルであるが、
.B chroot_list_file
設定によってこれを変更することができる。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B chroot_local_user
.\"O If set to YES, local users will be (by default) placed in a chroot() jail in
.\"O their home directory after login.
YES に設定した場合、ローカルユーザは(デフォルトで)ログイン後に
ホームディレクトリへと chroot() される。
.\"O .BR Warning:
.\"O This option has security implications, especially if the users have upload
.\"O permission, or shell access. Only enable if you know what you are doing.
.\"O Note that these security implications are not vsftpd specific. They apply to
.\"O all FTP daemons which offer to put local users in chroot() jails.
.BR "警告" :
このオプションはセキュリティに密接に関連する。
ユーザがアップロード権限を持っていたり、シェルでのアクセスができる場合は
特にである。
何をしているかを理解している場合にのみ有効にすること。
これらのセキュリティの問題は vsftpd に特有の問題ではないことに
注意してほしい。
ローカルユーザを chroot() jail に入れることができるすべての
FTP デーモンにおいて、この問題がある。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B connect_from_port_20
.\"O This controls whether PORT style data connections use port 20 (ftp-data) on
.\"O the server machine. For security reasons, some clients may insist that this
.\"O is the case. Conversely, disabling this option enables vsftpd to run with
.\"O slightly less privilege.
PORT でのデータ接続において、サーバが(送信元)ポートに
20(ftp-data) を使うかどうか制御する。
セキュリティ上の理由から、いくつかのクライアントはポート 20 を要求する。
逆に言えば、このオプションを無効にすることで、わずかではあるが
vsftpd をより少ない特権で動作させることができる。

.\"O Default: NO (but the sample config file enables it)
デフォルト: NO (ただし、サンプルの設定ファイルでは有効になっている)
.TP
.B deny_email_enable
.\"O If activated, you may provide a list of anonymous password e-mail responses
.\"O which cause login to be denied. By default, the file containing this list is
.\"O /etc/vsftpd.banned_emails, but you may override this with the
.\"O .BR banned_email_file
.\"O setting.
YES に設定した場合、anonymous ユーザのパスワード(e-mail アドレス)のうち、
ログインを拒否したいもののリストを設定できる。
デフォルトでは、このリストは
/etc/vsftpd.banned_emails
ファイルであるが、
.B banned_email_file
設定によってこれを変更することができる。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B dirlist_enable
.\"O If set to NO, all directory list commands will give permission denied.
NO に設定した場合、すべてのディレクトリ表示コマンドは、
アクセス拒否 (permission denied) になる。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B dirmessage_enable
.\"O If enabled, users of the FTP server can be shown messages when they first
.\"O enter a new directory. By default, a directory is scanned for the
.\"O file .message, but that may be overridden with the configuration setting
.\"O .BR message_file .
YES に設定した場合、FTP サーバ上のユーザが
新たなディレクトリに初めて入ったときに、メッセージを見せることができる。
デフォルトでは、ディレクトリの .message というファイルが調べられるが、
.B message_file
設定によってこれを変更することができる。

.\"O Default: NO (but the sample config file enables it)
デフォルト: NO (ただし、サンプルの設定ファイルでは有効になっている)
.TP
.B download_enable
.\"O If set to NO, all download requests will give permission denied.
NO に設定した場合、すべてのダウンロード要求はアクセス拒否になる。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B dual_log_enable
.\"O If enabled, two log files are generated in parallel, going by default to
.\"O .BR /var/log/xferlog
.\"O and
.\"O .BR /var/log/vsftpd.log .
YES に設定した場合、デフォルトで
.B /var/log/xferlog
と
.B /var/log/vsftpd.log
という二つのログファイルを同時に生成する。
.\"O The former is a wu-ftpd style transfer log, parseable by standard tools. The
.\"O latter is vsftpd's own style log.
前者は wu-ftpd 形式の転送ログで、標準的なツールによって解析することができる。
後者は vsftpd 独自形式のログである。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B force_dot_files
.\"O If activated, files and directories starting with . will be shown in directory
.\"O listings even if the "a" flag was not used by the client. This override
.\"O excludes the "." and ".." entries.
YES に設定した場合、クライアントが "a" フラグを使用していなくても、
ドット (.) で始まるファイルとディレクトリも、ディレクトリリストに表示する。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B guest_enable
.\"O If enabled, all non-anonymous logins are classed as "guest" logins. A guest
.\"O login is remapped to the user specified in the
.\"O .BR guest_username
.\"O setting.
YES に設定した場合、anonymous でないログインすべてを
"guest" にクラス分けする。
guest ログインは、
.B guest_username
設定で指定したユーザにマッピングする。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B hide_ids
.\"O If enabled, all user and group information in directory listings will be
.\"O displayed as "ftp".
YES に設定した場合、ディレクトリリストでのユーザ・グループの情報を
"ftp" と表示する。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B listen
.\"O If enabled, vsftpd will run in standalone mode. This means that vsftpd must
.\"O not be run from an inetd of some kind. Instead, the vsftpd executable is
.\"O run once directly. vsftpd itself will then take care of listening for and
.\"O handling incoming connections.
YES に設定した場合、スタンドアロンモードで起動する。
これは inetd などのスーパーサーバから起動してはいけないということを意味する。
その代わりに、vsftpd プログラムを一度だけ直接実行すればよい。
vsftpd 自身が、入ってくる接続を待ち、処理する面倒をみる。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B listen_ipv6
.\"O Like the listen parameter, except vsftpd will listen on an IPv6 socket instead
.\"O of an IPv4 one. This parameter and the listen parameter are mutually
.\"O exclusive.
IPv4 ソケットの代わりに IPv6 ソケットを待ち受ける点を除けば、
listen オプションと同じである。
このオプションと listen オプションは、
どちらか一方しか指定することができない。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B local_enable
.\"O Controls whether local logins are permitted or not. If enabled, normal
.\"O user accounts in /etc/passwd may be used to log in.
ローカルユーザのログインを許可するかどうかを制御する。
YES に設定した場合、/etc/passwd にある普通のユーザアカウントを
ログインに使う。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B log_ftp_protocol
.\"O When enabled, all FTP requests and responses are logged, providing the option
.\"O xferlog_std_format is not enabled. Useful for debugging.
YES に設定した場合、FTP のすべての要求と応答を記録し、
xferlog_std_format オプションを無効にする。
デバッグに便利である。
.\"O tsekine: コードを見ると、xferlog_std_format を無効に
.\"O tsekine: *自分で*設定しなければならないようなんですが…?

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B ls_recurse_enable
.\"O When enabled, this setting will allow the use of "ls -R". This is a minor
.\"O security risk, because a ls -R at the top level of a large site may consume
.\"O a lot of resources.
YES に設定した場合、"ls \-R" の使用を許可するようになる。
大きなサイトの一番上のレベルで ls \-R を実行されると、
多くの資源を消費してしまうので、
これはセキュリティ上のちょっとしたリスクである。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B no_anon_password
.\"O When enabled, this prevents vsftpd from asking for an anonymous password -
.\"O the anonymous user will log straight in.
YES に設定した場合、anonymous のパスワードを尋ねるのを止める。
すなわち、anonymous ユーザーはパスワード無しでログインする。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B one_process_model
.\"O If you have a Linux 2.4 kernel, it is possible to use a different security
.\"O model which only uses one process per connection. It is a less pure security
.\"O model, but gains you performance. You really don't want to enable this unless
.\"O you know what you are doing, and your site supports huge numbers of
.\"O simultaneously connected users.
もし Linux 2.4 カーネルを使用しているならば、
一つの接続に一つのプロセスを使用するという、
異なったセキュリティモデルを使用することができる。
これは純粋なセキュリティモデルから少し外れるが、
性能を得ることができる。
自サイトで非常に多いユーザの同時接続をサポートし、
自分が何をしているか知っている人だけが、このオプションを有効にしたくなる。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B passwd_chroot_enable
.\"O If enabled, along with
.\"O .BR chroot_local_user
.\"O , then a chroot() jail location may be specified on a per-user basis. Each
.\"O user's jail is derived from their home directory string in /etc/passwd. The
.\"O occurrence of /./ in the home directory string denotes that the jail is at that
.\"O particular location in the path.
.B chroot_local_user
と共に YES に設定した場合、
chroot() jail の場所はユーザごとになる。
jail は /etc/passwd にある各人のホームディレクトリから得られる。
ホームディレクトリを表わす文字列に /./ があれば、そのパスの場所が
jail になる。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B pasv_enable
.\"O Set to NO if you want to disallow the PASV method of obtaining a data
.\"O connection.
NO に設定した場合、データ接続の開始において PASV を許可しない。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B pasv_promiscuous
.\"O Set to YES if you want to disable the PASV security check that ensures the
.\"O data connection originates from the same IP address as the control connection.
.\"O Only enable if you know what you are doing! The only legitimate use for this
.\"O is in some form of secure tunnelling scheme, or perhaps to facilitate FXP
.\"O support.
YES に設定した場合、
PASV セキュリティーチェックを無効にし、
制御用の接続と異なる IP アドレスからのデータ接続を許可する。
何をしているかを理解している場合にのみ有効にすること。
唯一の道理にかなった利用法は、安全なトンネルの中で使うか、
そうでなければ、おそらくは FXP(訳注: リモートホスト間転送)
を容易にするためのものである。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B port_enable
.\"O Set to NO if you want to disallow the PORT method of obtaining a data
.\"O connection.
NO に設定した場合、データ接続の開始において PORT を許可しない。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B port_promiscuous
.\"O Set to YES if you want to disable the PORT security check that ensures that
.\"O outgoing data connections can only connect to the client. Only enable if
.\"O you know what you are doing!
YES に設定した場合、
PORT セキュリティーチェックを無効にし、
制御用の接続と異なる IP アドレスへのデータ接続を許可する。
何をしているかを理解している場合にのみ有効にすること。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B secure_email_list_enable
.\"O Set to YES if you want only a specified list of e-mail passwords for anonymous
.\"O logins to be accepted. This is useful as a low-hassle way of restricting
.\"O access to low-security content without needing virtual users. When enabled,
.\"O anonymous logins are prevented unless the password provided is listed in the
.\"O file specified by the
.\"O .BR email_password_file
.\"O setting. The file format is one password per line, no extra whitespace. The
.\"O default filename is /etc/vsftpd.email_passwords.
匿名ログインで許可する e-mail パスワードのリストを
指定したい場合にだけ YES に設定すること。
仮想的なユーザーを必要とせずに、
低セキュリティなコンテンツへのアクセスを制限する、
面倒の少ないやり方として便利である。
YES に設定した場合には、
.B email_password_file
で指定されるファイルに書かれているパスワードが与えられない限り、
匿名ログインを許可しない。
このファイルのフォーマットは 1 行に 1 パスワードで、
余分な空白があってはいけない。
デフォルトのファイル名は /etc/vsftpd.email_passwords である。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B session_support
.\"O This controls whether vsftpd attempts to maintain sessions for logins. If
.\"O vsftpd is maintaining sessions, it will try and update utmp and wtmp. It
.\"O will also open a pam_session if using PAM to authenticate, and only close
.\"O this upon logout. You may wish to disable this if you do not need session
.\"O logging, and you wish to give vsftpd more opportunity to run with less
.\"O processes and / or less privilege. NOTE - utmp and wtmp support is only
.\"O provided with PAM enabled builds.
vsftpd がログインセッションを維持しようとするかどうかを制御する。
vsftpd がセッションを維持する場合、utmp と wtmp を更新しようと試みる。
認証に PAM を使用している場合には、さらに pam_session を open し、
ログアウト時に close する。
セッションのログ取得が必要なく、vsftpd をより少ない処理で動作させ、
かつ(または)より少ない権限で動作させたいならば、
これを NO に設定することができる。
注 - utmp と wtmp のサポートは
PAM を有効にしてビルドした場合に限られる。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B setproctitle_enable
.\"O If enabled, vsftpd will try and show session status information in the system
.\"O process listing. In other words, the reported name of the process will change
.\"O to reflect what a vsftpd session is doing (idle, downloading etc). You
.\"O probably want to leave this off for security purposes.
有効にした場合、システムのプロセスリスト(例えば ps aux コマンド)に
セッションの状態に関する情報を表示する。
つまり、表示されるプロセス名が vsftpd のセッションがどうなっているか
(idle, downloading など)に応じて変化する。
セキュリティ上、これを off のままにしておきたいと思うのが普通である。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B syslog_enable
.\"O If enabled, then any log output which would have gone to /var/log/vsftpd.log
.\"O goes to the system log instead. Logging is done under the FTPD facility.
YES に設定した場合、/var/log/vsftpd.log に
行くはずだったすべてのログ出力を、
代わりにシステムログに出力する。
FTPD ファシリティでログ出力をする。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B tcp_wrappers
.\"O If enabled, and vsftpd was compiled with tcp_wrappers support, incoming
.\"O connections will be fed through tcp_wrappers access control. Furthermore,
.\"O there is a mechanism for per-IP based configuration. If tcp_wrappers sets
.\"O the VSFTPD_LOAD_CONF environment variable, then the vsftpd session will try
.\"O and load the vsftpd configuration file specified in this variable. 
有効にした場合、
vsftpd を tcp_wrappers をサポートしてコンパイルしてあれば、
外から来る接続は tcp_wrappers のアクセス制御が適用される。
さらに IP ごとの設定のための仕組みがある。
tcp_wrappers で環境変数 VSFTPD_LOAD_CONF をセットした場合
(訳注: /etc/hosts.allow で指定することが可能)、
その環境変数で指定したファイルを vsftpd の設定ファイルとして読み込む。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B text_userdb_names
.\"O By default, numeric IDs are shown in the user and group fields of directory
.\"O listings. You can get textual names by enabling this parameter. It is off
.\"O by default for performance reasons.
ディレクトリリストを表示した場合、
デフォルトではユーザとグループのフィールドが
ID の数値で表示される。
このオプションを YES にすれば、名前を示す文字列になる。
性能上の理由から、デフォルトは NO である。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B use_localtime
.\"O If enabled, vsftpd will display directory listings with the the time in your
.\"O local time zone. The default is to display GMT. The times returned by the
.\"O MDTM FTP command are also affected by this option.
有効にした場合、ディレクトリリストの表示にローカルのタイムゾーンを使用する。
デフォルトは GMT での表示である。
FTP の MDTM コマンドが返す時刻もこのオプションの影響を受ける。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B use_sendfile
.\"O An internal setting used for testing the relative benefit of using the
.\"O sendfile() system call on your platform.
使用しているプラットフォーム上で sendfile() システムコールを
使う場合の相対的効果を確認するための、内部的な設定。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B userlist_deny
.\"O This option is examined if
.\"O .B userlist_enable
.\"O is activated. If you set this setting to NO, then users will be denied login
.\"O unless they are explicitly listed in the file specified by
.\"O .BR userlist_file .
.\"O When login is denied, the denial is issued before the user is asked for a
.\"O password.
このオプションは
.B userlist_enable
が有効な場合にのみ意味を持つ。
NO にした場合、
.B userlist_file
で指定したファイルに明示的にリストされたユーザ以外は
ログインが拒否される。
ログインを拒否する場合、ユーザにパスワードを尋ねる前に拒否をする。

.\"O Default: YES
デフォルト: YES
.TP
.B userlist_enable
.\"O If enabled, vsftpd will load a list of usernames, from the filename given by
.\"O .BR userlist_file .
有効にした場合、
.B userlist_file
で指定したファイルをユーザ名のリストとして読み込む。
.\"O If a user tries to log in using a name in this file, they will be denied
.\"O before they are asked for a password. This may be useful in preventing
.\"O cleartext passwords being transmitted. See also
.\"O .BR userlist_deny .
このファイルに名前のあるユーザでのログインしようとすると、
パスワードを尋ねられる前に拒否される。
これは暗号化されていないパスワードが(ネットワーク上を)
転送されてしまうのを防ぐのに効果的である。
.B userlist_deny
も参照のこと。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B virtual_use_local_privs
.\"O If enabled, virtual users will use the same privileges as local users. By
.\"O default, virtual users will use the same privileges as anonymous users, which
.\"O tends to be more restrictive (especially in terms of write access).
YES に設定した場合、仮想ユーザにローカルユーザと同じ権限を使用する。
デフォルトでは、仮想ユーザは anonymous ユーザと同じ権限を持ち、
それは(特に書き込み権限に関して)より制限されたものになりがちである。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B write_enable
.\"O This controls whether any FTP commands which change the filesystem are allowed
.\"O or not. These commands are: STOR, DELE, RNFR, RNTO, MKD, RMD, APPE and SITE.
ファイルシステムを変更するようなすべての FTP コマンドを
許可するかどうかを制御する。
対象となるコマンドは
STOR, DELE, RNFR, RNTO, MKD, RMD, APPE, SITE
である。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.TP
.B xferlog_enable
.\"O If enabled, a log file will be maintained detailling uploads and downloads.
有効にした場合、ログファイルにはアップロードとダウンロードの詳細が記録される。
.\"O By default, this file will be placed at /var/log/vsftpd.log, but this location
.\"O may be overridden using the configuration setting
.\"O .BR vsftpd_log_file .
デフォルトでは、ログファイルは /var/log/vsftpd.log として置かれるが、
.B vsftpd_log_file
の設定によって変更することが可能である。

.\"O 
.\"O Default: NO (but the sample config file enables it)
デフォルト: NO (ただし、サンプルの設定ファイルでは有効になっている)
.TP
.B xferlog_std_format
.\"O If enabled, the transfer log file will be written in standard xferlog format,
.\"O as used by wu-ftpd. This is useful because you can reuse existing transfer
.\"O statistics generators. The default format is more readable, however.
有効にした場合、wu-ftpd で使われているような標準的な xferlog フォーマットで
転送ログファイルを作成する。
既存の統計情報を生成するプログラムを再利用できるので、これは便利である。
しかしデフォルトの書式は、より読み易いものである。
.\"O The
.\"O default location for this style of log file is /var/log/xferlog, but you may
.\"O change it with the setting
.\"O .BR xferlog_file .
この形式のログファイルのデフォルトの場所は /var/log/xferlog であるが、
.B xferlog_file
の設定によって、これを変更することが可能である。

.\"O Default: NO
デフォルト: NO
.\"O 
.\"O .SH NUMERIC OPTIONS
.SH 数値オプション
.\"O Below is a list of numeric options. A numeric option must be set to a non
.\"O negative integer. Octal numbers are supported, for convenience of the umask
.\"O options. To specify an octal number, use 0 as the first digit of the number.
.\"O 
以下は引数に数値をとるオプションである。
数値は非負整数でなければならない。
8 進数は umask オプションで便利なのでサポートされている。
8 進数で指定するには、先頭の数字を 0 にする。
.TP
.B accept_timeout
.\"O The timeout, in seconds, for a remote client to establish connection with
.\"O a PASV style data connection.
リモートのクライアントが PASV でデータ接続を確立するまでの
タイムアウト秒数。

.\"O Default: 60
デフォルト: 60
.TP
.B anon_max_rate
.\"O The maximum data transfer rate permitted, in bytes per second, for anonymous
.\"O clients.
anonymous (匿名) クライアントの最大データ転送レート。
秒あたりのバイト数。

.\"O Default: 0 (unlimited)
デフォルト: 0 (無制限)
.TP
.B anon_umask
.\"O The value that the umask for file creation is set to for anonymous users. NOTE! If you want to specify octal values, remember the "0" prefix otherwise the
.\"O value will be treated as a base 10 integer!
anonymous (匿名) ユーザが生成したファイルの umask 値。
注意!
8 進数で指定したければ、先頭の "0" を忘れないように。
そうしないと、指定した値は 10 進数の値として扱われてしまう。

.\"O Default: 077
デフォルト: 077
.TP
.B connect_timeout
.\"O The timeout, in seconds, for a remote client to respond to our PORT style
.\"O data connection.
PORT でのデータ接続において、リモートクライアントが応答するまでの
タイムアウト秒数。

.\"O Default: 60
デフォルト: 60
.TP
.B data_connection_timeout
.\"O The timeout, in seconds, which is roughly the maximum time we permit data
.\"O transfers to stall for with no progress. If the timeout triggers, the remote
.\"O client is kicked off.
データ転送に何ら進捗がない場合に、タイムアウトと見なすまでの秒数。
タイムアウトが発生した場合、リモートクライアントは蹴り出される。

.\"O Default: 300
デフォルト: 300
.TP
.B file_open_mode
.\"O The permissions with which uploaded files are created. Umasks are applied
.\"O on top of this value. You may wish to change to 0777 if you want uploaded
.\"O files to be executable.
ファイルがアップロードで作成された場合のファイル・パーミッション。
この値の上に umask がさらに適用される。
実行可能なファイルのアップロードを許可したければ
0777 に変更すればよい。

.\"O Default: 0666
デフォルト: 0666
.TP
.B ftp_data_port
.\"O The port from which PORT style connections originate (as long as the poorly
.\"O named
.\"O .BR connect_from_port_20
.\"O is enabled).
PORT での接続の場合の、送信元のポート
(かっこう悪い名前の
.B connect_from_port_20
が有効である場合のみ)。

.\"O Default: 20
デフォルト: 20
.TP
.B idle_session_timeout
.\"O The timeout, in seconds, which is the maximum time a remote client may spend
.\"O between FTP commands. If the timeout triggers, the remote client is kicked
.\"O off.
制御接続において、FTP コマンドが何もない場合に
タイムアウトと見なすまでの秒数。
タイムアウトが発生した場合、リモートクライアントは蹴り出される。

.\"O Default: 300
デフォルト: 300
.TP
.B listen_port
.\"O If vsftpd is in standalone mode, this is the port it will listen on for
.\"O incoming FTP connections.
スタンドアロンモードの場合の、
FTP 接続を待ち受けるポート番号。

.\"O Default: 21
デフォルト: 21
.TP
.B local_max_rate
.\"O The maximum data transfer rate permitted, in bytes per second, for local
.\"O authenticated users.
ローカルユーザの最大データ転送レート。
秒あたりのバイト数。

.\"O Default: 0 (unlimited)
デフォルト: 0 (無制限)
.TP
.B local_umask
.\"O The value that the umask for file creation is set to for local users. NOTE! If
.\"O you want to specify octal values, remember the "0" prefix otherwise the value
.\"O will be treated as a base 10 integer!
ローカルユーザが生成したファイルの umask 値。
注意!
8 進数で指定したければ、先頭の "0" を忘れないように。
そうしないと、指定した値は 10 進数の値として扱われてしまう。

.\"O Default: 077
デフォルト: 077
.TP
.B max_clients
.\"O If vsftpd is in standalone mode, this is the maximum number of clients which
.\"O may be connected. Any additional clients connecting will get an error message.
スタンドアロンモードの場合に、接続可能なクライアントの最大数を指定する。
最大数を越えて接続したクライアントには、エラーメッセージを渡す。

.\"O Default: 0 (unlimited)
デフォルト: 0 (無制限)
.TP
.B max_per_ip
.\"O If vsftpd is in standalone mode, this is the maximum number of clients which
.\"O may be connected from the same source internet address. A client will get an
.\"O error message if they go over this limit.
スタンドアロンモードの場合に、同じ送信元 IP アドレスからの接続の
最大数を指定する。
この制限を越えて接続したクライアントには、エラーメッセージを渡す。

.\"O Default: 0 (unlimited)
デフォルト: 0 (無制限)
.TP
.B pasv_max_port
.\"O The maximum port to allocate for PASV style data connections. Can be used to
.\"O specify a narrow port range to assist firewalling.
PASV でのデータ接続に割り当てるポートの最大値。
ファイアウォールで指定するポートの範囲を狭めるのに使用できる。

.\"O Default: 0 (use any port)
デフォルト: 0 (任意のポートを使用)
.TP
.B pasv_min_port
.\"O The minimum port to allocate for PASV style data connections. Can be used to
.\"O specify a narrow port range to assist firewalling.
PASV でのデータ接続に割り当てるポートの最小値。
ファイアウォールで指定するポートの範囲を狭めるのに使用できる。

.\"O Default: 0 (use any port)
デフォルト: 0 (任意のポートを使用)
.TP
.B trans_chunk_size
.\"O You probably don't want to change this, but try setting it to something like
.\"O 8192 for a much smoother bandwidth limiter.
これを変更したいとは思わないだろうが、
しかし、より滑らかな帯域制御をしたければ、
これを 8192 のような値に設定してみること。

.\"O Default: 0 (let vsftpd pick a sensible setting)
デフォルト: 0 (vsftpd がふさわしい値を選ぶ)
.\"O 
.\"O .SH STRING OPTIONS
.SH 文字列オプション
.\"O Below is a list of string options.
以下は引数に文字列をとるオプションである。
.\"O 
.TP
.B anon_root
.\"O This option represents a directory which vsftpd will try to change into
.\"O after an anonymous login. Failure is silently ignored.
このオプションは、anonymous (匿名) ログイン後に変更する
ディレクトリ名を表す。
ディレクトリ変更の失敗は、静かに無視する。

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B banned_email_file
.\"O This option is the name of a file containing a list of anonymous e-mail
.\"O passwords which are not permitted. This file is consulted if the option
.\"O .BR deny_email_enable
.\"O is enabled.
anonymous ユーザのパスワード (e-mail アドレス) のうち、
許可しないもののリストのファイル名を指定する。
オプション
.B deny_email_enable
が有効の場合にのみ、このファイルは参照される。

.\"O Default: /etc/vsftpd.banned_emails
デフォルト: /etc/vsftpd.banned_emails
.TP
.B banner_file
.\"O This option is the name of a file containing text to display when someone
.\"O connects to the server. If set, it overrides the banner string provided by
.\"O the
.\"O .BR ftpd_banner
.\"O option.
誰かがサーバに接続したときに表示するテキストを格納するファイル名
を指定する。
このオプションが設定された場合、
.B ftpd_banner
で指定される文字列よりも優先される。

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B chown_username
.\"O This is the name of the user who is given ownership of anonymously uploaded
.\"O files. This option is only relevant if another option,
.\"O .BR chown_uploads ,
.\"O is set.
anonymous (匿名) でアップロードされたファイルの所有者となる
ユーザのユーザ名を指定する。
このオプションは、関連するもう一つのオプション
.B chown_uploads
が有効な場合にのみ意味を持つ。

.\"O Default: root
デフォルト: root
.TP
.B chroot_list_file
.\"O The option is the name of a file containing a list of local users which
.\"O will be placed in a chroot() jail in their home directory. This option is
.\"O only relevant if the option
.\"O .BR chroot_list_enable
.\"O is enabled. If the option
.\"O .BR chroot_local_user
.\"O is enabled, then the list file becomes a list of users to NOT place in a
.\"O chroot() jail.
ホームディレクトリ内の choot() jail に入れられる
ローカルユーザのリストを示すファイル名を指定する。
このオプションは、
.B chroot_list_enable
が有効な場合にのみ意味を持つ。もし
.B chroot_local_user
が有効であれば、このリストは chroot() jail に入れられ*ない*
ユーザのリストになる。

.\"O Default: /etc/vsftpd.chroot_list
デフォルト: /etc/vsftpd.chroot_list
.TP
.B cmds_allowed
.\"O This options specifies a comma separated list of allowed FTP commands (post
.\"O login. USER, PASS and QUIT are always allowed pre-login). Other
.\"O commands are rejected. This is a powerful method of really locking down an
.\"O FTP server. Example: cmds_allowed=PASV,RETR,QUIT
(ログイン後に)許可する FTP コマンドのリストを、コンマで区切って指定する
(USER, PASS, QUIT は、ログイン前なら常に許可する)。
指定しなかったコマンドは拒否する。
本当に FTP サーバを閉じ込めるのに強力な手段となる。
例: cmds_allowed=PASV,RETR,QUIT

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B deny_file
.\"O This option can be used to set a pattern for filenames (and directory names
.\"O etc.) which should not be accessible in any way. The affected items are not
.\"O hidden, but any attempt to do anything to them (download, change into
.\"O directory, affect something within directory etc.) will be denied. This option
.\"O is very simple, and should not be used for serious access control - the
.\"O filesystem's permissions should be used in preference. However, this option
.\"O may be useful in certain virtual user setups. In particular aware that if
.\"O a filename is accessible by a variety of names (perhaps due to symbolic
.\"O links or hard links), then care must be taken to deny access to all the names.
すべての手段でアクセスを許可しない、
ファイル名(やディレクトリ名)のパターンを指定する。
この影響をうけるファイル/ディレクトリを隠しはしないが、
それらに対するあらゆる試み
(ダウンロード、そのディレクトリへの変更、ディレクトリ内で何か影響するものなど)
を拒否する。
このオプションはとても単純なので、本格的なアクセス制御に用いるべきではない。
そのような場合には、まず先にファイルシステムのアクセス制御を用いること。
しかしながら、ある種の仮想ユーザの設定には便利である。

.\"O Access will be denied to items if their name contains the string given by
.\"O hide_file, or if they match the regular expression specified by hide_file.

.\"O Note that vsftpd's regular expression matching code is a simple implementation
.\"O which is a subset of full regular expression functionality. Because of this,
.\"O you will need to carefully and exhaustively test any application of this
.\"O option. And you are recommended to use filesystem permissions for any
.\"O important security policies due to their greater reliability. Example:
.\"O deny_file={*.mp3,*.mov,.private}
deny_file で指定した文字列を含むか、deny_file で指定した
正規表現にマッチする名前を持つものへのアクセスが拒否される。
vsftpd の正規表現のコードは単純な実装で、完全な正規表現の部分集合
になっているので、注意すること。
よって、このオプションの使用するときは、注意深く、
徹底的にテストする必要がある。
また、あらゆる重要なセキュリティティーポリシーに対し、
ファイルシステムのパーミッションを使用することを、
その偉大な信頼性から推奨する。
例: deny_file={*.mp3,*.mov,.private}

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B email_password_file
.\"O This option can be used to provide an alternate file for usage by the
.\"O .BR secure_email_list_enable
.\"O setting.
.B secure_email_list_enable
を設定したときの代替ファイルを設定する。

.\"O Default: /etc/vsftpd.email_passwords
デフォルト: /etc/vsftpd.email_passwords
.TP
.B ftp_username
.\"O This is the name of the user we use for handling anonymous FTP. The home
.\"O directory of this user is the root of the anonymous FTP area.
anonymous FTP を取り扱うときに使用するユーザのユーザ名を指定する。
指定したユーザのホームディレクトリが anonymous FTP のルートとして
使用される。

.\"O Default: ftp
デフォルト: ftp
.TP
.B ftpd_banner
.\"O This string option allows you to override the greeting banner displayed
.\"O by vsftpd when a connection first comes in.
接続が最初に来たときに vsftpd が表示する挨拶メッセージを指定する。

.\"O Default: (none - default vsftpd banner is displayed)
デフォルト: (なし。vsftpd のデフォルトのバナーが表示される)
.TP
.B guest_username
.\"O See the boolean setting
.\"O .BR guest_enable
.\"O for a description of what constitutes a guest login. This setting is the
.\"O real username which guest users are mapped to.
guest ログインの説明については、真偽値設定の
.B guest_enable
を参照して欲しい。
このオプションでは、guest ユーザが実際に割り当てられるユーザ名を指定する。

.\"O Default: ftp
デフォルト: ftp
.TP
.B hide_file
.\"O This option can be used to set a pattern for filenames (and directory names
.\"O etc.) which should be hidden from directory listings. Despite being hidden,
.\"O the files / directories etc. are fully accessible to clients who know what
.\"O names to actually use. Items will be hidden if their names contain the string
.\"O given by hide_file, or if they match the regular expression specified by
.\"O hide_file. Note that vsftpd's regular expression matching code is a simple
.\"O implementation which is a subset of full regular expression functionality.
.\"O Example: hide_file={*.mp3,.hidden,hide*,h?}
ディレクトリリストから隠すべきファイル名(やディレクトリ名)
のパターンを指定する。
ファイル / ディレクトリは隠されているが、
ファイル名を知っているクライアントからは自由にアクセス可能である。
hide_file で指定した文字列を含むか、hide_file で指定した
正規表現にマッチする名前を持つものが隠される。
vsftpd の正規表現のコードは単純な実装で、完全な正規表現の部分集合
になっているので、注意すること。
例: hide_file={*.mp3,.hidden,hide*,h?}

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B listen_address
.\"O If vsftpd is in standalone mode, the default listen address (of all local
.\"O interfaces) may be overridden by this setting. Provide a numeric IP address.
スタンドアロンモードの場合に、listen するアドレスを指定する。
デフォルトは、すべてのローカルインタフェースである。
IP アドレスを(数値で)指定すること。

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B listen_address6
.\"O Like listen_address, but specifies a default listen address for the IPv6
.\"O listener (which is used if listen_ipv6 is set). Format is standard IPv6
.\"O address format.
listen_address と同様だが、(listen_ipv6 が指定された場合に使用される)
IPv6 での接続を待つアドレスを指定する。
フォーマットは、標準的な IPv6 アドレスである。

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B local_root
.\"O This option represents a directory which vsftpd will try to change into
.\"O after a local (i.e. non-anonymous) login. Failure is silently ignored.
ローカルログイン(すなわち、非 anonymous ログイン)の後に
変更するディレクトリを指定する。
ディレクトリ変更の失敗は、静かに無視する。

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B message_file
.\"O This option is the name of the file we look for when a new directory is
.\"O entered. The contents are displayed to the remote user. This option is
.\"O only relevant if the option
.\"O .BR dirmessage_enable
.\"O is enabled.
ユーザが新たなディレクトリに入った場合に
探すファイルの名前を指定する。
中身がリモートのユーザに表示される。
このオプションは
.B dirmessage_enable
オプションが有効の場合にのみ意味を持つ。

.\"O Default: .message
デフォルト: .message
.TP
.B nopriv_user
.\"O This is the name of the user that is used by vsftpd when it want to be
.\"O totally unprivileged. Note that this should be a dedicated user, rather
.\"O than nobody. The user nobody tends to be used for rather a lot of important
.\"O things on most machines.
特権を必要としなくなった場合に vsftpd が使用するユーザの
ユーザ名を指定する。
注意: nobody を使うのではなく、専用のユーザを使用すべきである。
多くのマシンでは、どちらかと言えば、むしろ多くの重要な事に
 nobody ユーザが使われる。

.\"O Default: nobody
デフォルト: nobody
.TP
.B pam_service_name
.\"O This string is the name of the PAM service vsftpd will use.
vsftpd が使用する PAM サービス名を指定する。

.\"O Default: ftp
デフォルト: ftp
.TP
.B pasv_address
.\"O Use this option to override the IP address that vsftpd will advertise in
.\"O response to the PASV command. Provide a numeric IP address.
PASV コマンドへの応答において、vsftpd が伝える IP アドレスを指定する。
IP アドレスを(数値で)指定すること。

.\"O Default: (none - the address is taken from the incoming connected socket)
デフォルト: (なし。接続されたソケットからアドレスが決められる)
.TP
.B secure_chroot_dir
.\"O This option should be the name of a directory which is empty. Also, the
.\"O directory should not be writable by the ftp user. This directory is used
.\"O as a secure chroot() jail at times vsftpd does not require filesystem access.
このオプションは空のディレクトリの名前にすべきである。
また、そのディレクトリは ftp ユーザが書き込めてはいけない。
ここで指定するディレクトリは、
ファイルシステムへのアクセスが必要ないときに使用する、
安全な chroot() jail に使われる。

.\"O Default: /usr/share/empty
デフォルト: /usr/share/empty
.TP
.B user_config_dir
.\"O This powerful option allows the override of any config option specified in
.\"O the manual page, on a per-user basis. Usage is simple, and is best illustrated
.\"O with an example. If you set
.\"O .BR user_config_dir
.\"O to be
.\"O .BR /etc/vsftpd_user_conf
.\"O and then log on as the user "chris", then vsftpd will apply the settings in
.\"O the file
.\"O .BR /etc/vsftpd_user_conf/chris
.\"O for the duration of the session. The format of this file is as detailed in
.\"O this manual page! PLEASE NOTE that not all settings are effective on a
.\"O per-user basis. For example, many settings only prior to the user's session
.\"O being started. Examples of settings which will not affect any behviour on
.\"O a per-user basis include listen_address, banner_file, max_per_ip, max_clients,
.\"O xferlog_file, etc.
この強力なオプションによって、
マニュアルページにあるいかなる設定オプションも
ユーザーごとに上書きすることができる。
使い方は簡単で、以下の例で示す。
.B user_config_dir
を
.B /etc/vsftpd_userr_conf
に設定し、ユーザ "chris" がログインした場合、
そのセッションの間
.B /etc/vsftpd_user_conf/chris
というファイルにある設定が適用される。
このファイルの書式は、
このマニュアルページにかかれているものと同じである。
ただし、すべての設定がユーザーごとに効果があるわけではないことに
注意してほしい。
例えば、多くの設定はユーザーのセッションが開始される前に使用される。
設定例の中で、ユーザーごとの動作に影響しないものには、
listen_address, banner_file, max_per_ip, max_clients,
xferlog_file などが含まれる。

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B user_sub_token
.\"O This option is useful is conjunction with virtual users. It is used to
.\"O automatically generate a home directory for each virtual user, based on a
.\"O template. For example, if the home directory of the real user specified via
.\"O .BR guest_username
.\"O is
.\"O .BR /home/virtual/$USER ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR user_sub_token
.\"O is set to
.\"O .BR $USER ,
.\"O then when virtual user fred logs in, he will end up (usually chroot()'ed) in
.\"O the directory
.\"O .BR /home/virtual/fred .
.\"O This option also takes affect if
.\"O .BR local_root
.\"O contains
.\"O .BR user_sub_token .
このオプションは、仮想ユーザーと組み合わせるときに便利である。
テンプレートを元に、各仮想ユーザーのホームディレクトリを自動的に生成するのに使用する。
例えば、
.BR guest_username
によって実ユーザーのホームディレクトリが
.BR /home/virtual/$USER
に設定されていて、
.B user_sub_token
が
.B $USER
に設定されていれば、仮想ユーザー fred がログインすると、最終的に
(通常は chroot() されて)
.B /home/virtual/fred
ディレクトリに移動される。
このオプションは、
.B local_root
が
.B user_sub_token
を含んでいる場合にも効果がある。

.\"O Default: (none)
デフォルト: (なし)
.TP
.B userlist_file
.\"O This option is the name of the file loaded when the
.\"O .BR userlist_enable
.\"O option is active.
.B userlist_enable
オプションが有効な場合に読み込まれるファイルの
ファイル名を指定する。

.\"O Default: /etc/vsftpd.user_list
デフォルト: /etc/vsftpd.user_list
.TP
.B vsftpd_log_file
.\"O This option is the name of the file to which we write the vsftpd style
.\"O log file. This log is only written if the option
.\"O .BR xferlog_enable
.\"O is set, and
.\"O .BR xferlog_std_format
.\"O is NOT set. Alternatively, it is written if you have set the option
.\"O .BR dual_log_enable .
.\"O One further complication - if you have set
.\"O .BR syslog_enable ,
.\"O then this file is not written and output is sent to the system log instead.
vsftpd スタイルの転送ログを記録するファイルのファイル名を指定する。
.B xferlog_enable
が設定されていて、かつ
.B xferlog_std_format
が設定されていない場合にのみ、このログは記録される。
もしくは
.BR dual_log_enable
オプションを設定すれば記録される。
もう一つさらに複雑なこととして、
.B syslog_enable
を設定した場合にはファイルには出力されず、出力は
システムログへと送られる。

.\"O Default: /var/log/vsftpd.log
デフォルト: /var/log/vsftpd.log
.TP
.B xferlog_file
.\"O This option is the name of the file to which we write the wu-ftpd style
.\"O transfer log. The transfer log is only written if the option
.\"O .BR xferlog_enable
.\"O is set, along with
.\"O .BR xferlog_std_format .
.\"O Alternatively, it is written if you have set the option
.\"O .BR dual_log_enable .
wu-ftpd スタイルの転送ログを記録するファイルのファイル名を指定する。
転送ログは
.B xferlog_enable
と
.B xferlog_std_format
が設定されている場合にのみ記録される。
もしくは
.BR dual_log_enable
オプションを設定すれば記録される。

.\"O Default: /var/log/xferlog
デフォルト: /var/log/xfer.log
.\"O 
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
chris@scary.beasts.org
