.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat May 15 18:06:37 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:
.\"
.TH CONVERTQUOTA 8 "Fri Aug 20 1999"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O convertquota \- convert quota from old file format to new one
convertquota \- quota を古いフォーマットから新しいフォーマットに変換する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B convertquota
[
.B -ug
] [
.B -e
|
.B -f
]
.I filesystem
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B convertquota
.\"O converts old quota files
.\"O .BR quota.user
.\"O and
.\"O .BR quota.group
.\"O to files
.\"O .BR aquota.user
.\"O and
.\"O .BR aquota.group
.\"O in new format currently used by 2.4.0-ac? and newer or by SuSE or Red Hat Linux 2.4 kernels on
.\"O .IR filesystem .
.B convertquota
は、
.I filesystem
にある古い quota ファイル
.B quota.user
と
.B quota.group
を、2.4.0-ac? 以降や SuSE または Red Hat Linux の
カーネル 2.4 で現在使われている新しいフォーマットのファイル
.BR aquota.user
と
.BR aquota.group
に変換する。
.PP
.\"O New file format allows using quotas for 32-bit uids / gids, setting quotas for root,
.\"O accounting used space in bytes (and so allowing use of quotas in ReiserFS) and it
.\"O is also architecture independent. This format introduces Radix Tree (a simple form of tree
.\"O structure) to quota file.
新しいファイルフォーマットでは、
32 ビットのユーザー ID・グループ ID の使用、root に対する quota 設定、
バイト単位での使用容量の集計 (さらに ReiserFS での quota の使用) が可能であり、
アーキテクチャに依存しない。
このフォーマットでは、quota ファイルに Radix ツリー
(簡単な形式のツリー構造) が導入された。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B -u
.\"O convert user quota file. This is the default.
ユーザー quota ファイルを変換する。
これがデフォルトである。
.TP
.B -g
.\"O convert group quota file.
グループ quota ファイルを変換する。
.TP
.B -f
.\"O convert from old file format to new one. This is the default.
古いファイルフォーマットから新しいファイルフォーマットへ変換する。
これがデフォルトである。
.TP
.B -e
.\"O convert new file format from big endian to little endian.
新しいファイルフォーマットを
ビッグエンディアンからリトルエンディアンに変換する。
.TP
.B -V
.\"O print version information.
バージョン情報を表示する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP 20
.B aquota.user
.\"O new user quota file
新しいユーザー quota ファイル。
.TP
.B aquota.group
.\"O new group quota file
新しいグループ quota ファイル。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR quota (1),
.BR setquota (8),
.BR edquota (8),
.BR quotacheck (8),
.BR quotaon (8),
.BR repquota (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Jan Kara \<jack@suse.cz\>
