.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Kazuyoshi Furutaka and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 1997
.\"	by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"	by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Sat May  8 18:36:50 JST 2004
.\"	by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH EDQUOTA 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O edquota \- edit user quotas
edquota \- ユーザーの quota を編集する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B edquota
[
.B \-p
.I protoname
] [
.BR \-u \ |
.B \-g
] [
.B \-r
] [
.B \-F
.I format-name
] [
.B \-f
.I filesystem
]
.IR username .\|.\|.
.LP
.B edquota
[
.BR \-u \ |
.B \-g
] [
.B \-F
.I format-name
] [
.B \-f
.I filesystem
]
.B \-t
.LP
.B edquota
[
.BR \-u \ |
.B \-g
] [
.B \-F
.I format-name
] [
.B \-f
.I filesystem
]
.B \-T
.IR username \ |
.IR groupname .\|.\|.
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.IX  "edquota command"  ""  "\fLedquota\fP \(em edit user quotas"
.IX  edit "user quotas \(em \fLedquota\fP"
.IX  "user quotas"  "edquota command"  ""  "\fLedquota\fP \(em edit user quotas"
.IX  "disk quotas"  "edquota command"  ""  "\fLedquota\fP \(em edit user quotas"
.IX  "quotas"  "edquota command"  ""  "\fLedquota\fP \(em edit user quotas"
.IX  "filesystem"  "edquota command"  ""  "\fLedquota\fP \(em edit user quotas"
.\"O .B edquota
.\"O is a quota editor.  One or more users or groups may be specified on the command
.\"O line.  For each user or group a temporary file is created with an
.\"O .SM ASCII
.\"O representation of the current disk quotas for that user or group and an editor
.\"O is then invoked on the file.  The quotas may then be modified, new
.\"O quotas added, etc.
.B edquota
は quota のエディタである。
1 つ以上のユーザーまたはグループをコマンドライン上で指定することができる。
各ユーザーまたはグループ毎に、現在のディスク quota に対応した
.SM ASCII
形式のテンポラリファイルを作り、エディタを起動してそのファイルを開く。
この上で、quota の変更や新しい quota の追加などができる。
.\"O Setting a quota to zero indicates that no quota should be imposed.
quota を 0 に設定すると、quota を適用しないという意味になる。
.PP
.\"O Users are permitted to exceed their soft limits for a grace period that
.\"O may be specified per filesystem.  Once the grace period has expired, the
.\"O soft limit is enforced as a hard limit.
ユーザーはある猶予期間、ソフトリミットを超過することが許可されている。
猶予期間はファイルシステム毎に指定することができる。
猶予期間を過ぎると、ソフトリミットはハードリミットとして執行される。
.PP
.\"O The current usage information in the file is for informational purposes;
.\"O only the hard and soft limits can be changed.
ファイルに書かれている現在の使用状況の情報は、情報を提供するためのものである。
ハードリミットとソフトリミットのみが変更できる。
.PP
.\"O Upon leaving the editor,
.\"O .B edquota
.\"O reads the temporary file and modifies the binary quota files to reflect
.\"O the changes made.
エディタを終了すると、
.B edquota
はテンポラリファイルを読み込んだ後、
バイナリの quota ファイルを更新して変更点を反映させる。
.LP
.\"O The editor invoked is
.\"O .BR vi (1)
.\"O unless either the
.\"O .SB EDITOR
.\"O or the
.\"O .SB VISUAL
.\"O environment variable specifies otherwise.
環境変数
.SB EDITOR
または
.SB VISUAL
で他のものが指定されない限り、
起動されるエディタは
.BR vi (1)
である。
.LP
.\"O Only the super-user may edit quotas.
スーパーユーザーのみが quota を編集することができる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Edit also non-local quota use rpc.rquotad on remote server to set quota.
リモートサーバ上の rpc.rquotad を使って、ローカルでない quota を編集する。
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-n
.\"O option is equivalent, and is maintained for backward compatibility.
.B \-n
オプションも同じ意味であるが、後方互換性のためにメンテナンスされている。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Edit the user quota. This is the default.
ユーザーの quota を編集する。これがデフォルトである。
.TP
.B \-g
.\"O Edit the group quota.
グループの quota を編集する。
.TP
.B \-p \f2protoname\f1
.\"O Duplicate the quotas of the prototypical user
.\"O specified for each user specified.  This is the normal
.\"O mechanism used to initialize quotas for groups of users.
ひな型として指定されたユーザーの quota 設定を、
指定したユーザーの quota に複製する。
多数のユーザーの quota を設定する場合、通常この方法を用いる。
.TP
.B \-F \f2format-name\f1
.\"O Edit quota for specified format (ie. don't perform format autodetection).
指定されたフォーマットの quota を編集する
(つまり、フォーマットの自動判定を行わない)。
.\"O Possible format names are:
.\"O .B vfsold
.\"O (version 1 quota),
.\"O .B vfsv0
.\"O (version 2 quota),
.\"O .B rpc
.\"O (quota over NFS),
.\"O .B xfs
.\"O (quota on XFS filesystem)
指定可能なフォーマット名は以下の通り:
.B vfsold
(バージョン 1 の quota),
.B vfsv0
(バージョン 2 の quota),
.B rpc
(NFS 越しの quota),
.B xfs
(XFS ファイルシステム上の quota)。
.TP
.B \-f \f2filesystem\f1
.\"O Perform specified operations only for given filesystem (default is to perform
.\"O operations for all filesystems with quota).
指定したファイルシステムにのみ指定した操作を行う
(デフォルトでは quota がある全てのファイルシステムに操作を行う)。
.TP
.B \-t
.\"O Edit the soft time limits for each filesystem.
.\"O In old quota format if the time limits are zero, the default time limits in
.\"O .B <linux/quota.h>
.\"O are used. In new quota format time limits must be specified (there is no default
.\"O value set in kernel). Time units of 'seconds', 'minutes', 'hours', 'days', 'weeks', and 'months'
.\"O are understood. Time limits are printed in the greatest possible time unit such that
.\"O the value is greater than or equal to one.
各ファイルシステムのソフトタイムリミットを編集する。
古い quota フォーマットでは、
タイムリミットがゼロの場合、
.B <linux/quota.h>
中のデフォルトタイムリミットが用いられる。
新しい quota フォーマットではタイムリミットを指定しなければならない
(カーネルに設定されているデフォルトの値はない)。
時間の単位には 'seconds' (秒)・'minutes' (分)・'hours' (時)・
'days' (日)・'weeks' (週)・'months' (月) を用いることができる。
タイムリミットの表示単位には、値が 1 以上となるうち最大のものが用いられる。
.TP
.B \-T
.\"O Edit time for the user/group when softlimit is enforced. Possible values
.\"O are 'unset' or number and unit. Units are same as used in
.\"O .B \-t
.\"O option.
ユーザーとグループのソフトリミットを実施する時間を編集する。
指定可能な値は、'unset' または数値と単位である。
単位は
.B \-t
オプションで使われるものと同じである。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.\"O .BR aquota.user " or " aquota.group
.BR aquota.user " または " aquota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 2 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 2 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.\"O .BR quota.user " or " quota.group
.BR quota.user " または " quota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 1 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 1 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.B /etc/mtab
.\"O mounted filesystems table
マウントされているファイルシステムテーブル。
.PD
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR quota (1),
.BR vi (1),
.BR quotactl (2),
.BR quotacheck (8),
.BR quotaon (8),
.BR repquota (8)
