.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat May 15 19:52:27 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH QUOT 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O quot \- summarize filesystem ownership
quot \- ファイルシステムの所有者を要約する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
\f3quot\f1 [ \f3\-acfguvi\f1 ] [ filesystem... ]
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .IR quot
.\"O displays the number of kilobytes in the named
.\"O .I filesystem
.\"O currently owned by each user or group. Note that this utility
.\"O currently works only for XFS.
.I quot
は指定された
.I filesystem
で各ユーザーとグループに現在所有されている
(ファイルの) キロバイト数を表示する。
このユーティリティは現在のところ XFS でしか動作しない点に注意すること。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Generate a report for all mounted filesystems giving the number of
.\"O kilobytes used by each user or group.
マウントされた全てのファイルシステムについて、
各ユーザーとグループが使用している
キロバイト数を表示するレポートを生成する。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Display three columns giving file size in kilobytes, number of
.\"O files of that size, and cumulative total of kilobytes
.\"O in that size or smaller file.
キロバイト単位のファイルサイズ、
そのサイズのファイル数、
そのサイズまたはそれ以下のサイズのファイルの合計のキロバイト数、
という 3 つの列を表示する。
.\"O The last row is used as an overflow
.\"O bucket and is the total of all files greater than 500 kilobytes.
最後の行は、溢れたものを入れるバケツとして使われ、
500 キロバイト以上の全ファイルの合計を表示する。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Display count of kilobytes and number of files owned by each user or group.
各ユーザーまたはグループに所有されるファイルの
キロバイト数とファイル数を表示する。
.TP
.B \-g
.\"O Report on groups.
グループについて報告する。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Report on users (the default).
ユーザーについて報告する (これがデフォルトである)。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Display three columns containing the number of kilobytes not accessed in
.\"O the last 30, 60, and 90 days.
最近 30, 60, 90 日の間にアクセスされていないファイルの
キロバイト数を含む 3 つの列を表示する。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Ignore mountpoints mounted by automounter.
automount でマウントされたマウントポイントを無視する。
.TP
.B \-T
.\"O Avoid truncation of user names longer than 8 characters.
8 文字以上のユーザー名を切り詰めない。
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Do not sort the output.
出力をソートしない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
/etc/mtab
.\"O mounted filesystem table
マウントされたファイルシステムのテーブル。
.TP
/etc/passwd
.\"O default set of users
デフォルトのユーザーのセット。
.TP
/etc/group
.\"O default set of groups
デフォルトのグループのセット。
.PD
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
du(1),
ls(1).
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Currently, only the XFS filesystem type is supported.
現在のところ XFS ファイルシステムタイプのみがサポートされている。
