.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Kazuyoshi Furutaka and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 1997
.\"	by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"	by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Sun May  9 13:26:36 JST 2004
.\"	by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH quotacheck 8 "Fri Jul 20 2001"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O quotacheck \- scan a filesystem for disk usage, create, check and repair quota files
quotacheck \- ファイルシステムをスキャンしディスク使用量を調べる。quota ファイルの作成・チェック・修復を行う
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B quotacheck
[
.B \-gubcfinvdMmR
] [
.B \-F
.I quota-format
]
.B \-a
|
.I filesystem
.br
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O examines each filesystem, builds a table of current disk usage, and
.\"O compares this table against that recorded in the disk quota file for the
.\"O filesystem (this step is ommitted if option
.\"O .B -c
.\"O is specified). If any inconsistencies are detected, both the quota file
.\"O and the current system copy of the incorrect quotas are updated (the
.\"O latter only occurs if an active filesystem is checked which is not advised).
.B quotacheck
は各ファイルシステムを調べて、現在のディスク使用量のテーブルを構築し、
ファイルシステムのディスク quota ファイルに記録されているテーブルと比較する
.RB ( -c
が指定された場合、最後のステップは省略される)。
.\"O By default, only user quotas are checked.
デフォルトではユーザー quota のみがチェックされる。
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O expects each filesystem to be checked to have quota files named
.\"O .I [a]quota.user
.\"O and
.\"O .I [a]quota.group
.\"O located at the root of the associated filesystem.  If a file is not
.\"O present, 
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O will create it.
.B quotacheck
はチェックされる各ファイルシステムのルートに
.I [a]quota.user
と
.I [a]quota.group
という名前の quota ファイルがあるものと仮定する。
ファイルが存在しない場合、
.B quotacheck
はこれを作成する。
.PP
.\"O If the quota file is corrupted,
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O tries to save as much data as possible.  Rescuing data may need user
.\"O intervention. With no additional options
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O will simply exit in such a situation. When in interactive mode (option
.\"O .BR -i )
.\"O , the user is asked for advice. Advice can also be provided from command
.\"O line (see option
.\"O .BR -n )
.\"O , which is useful when
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O is run automatically (ie. from script) and failure is unacceptable.
quota ファイルが壊れている場合、
.B quotacheck
は可能な限りデータを保存しようとする。
データを救い出すにはユーザーの介入が必要かもしれない。
このような状況でオプションを指定しないと、
.B quotacheck
は単純に終了する。
対話モード (オプション
.BR  -i )
では、ユーザーは意見 (advice) を尋ねられる。
意見をコマンドラインで提示することもできる (オプション
.B -n
を参照)。
これは
.B quotacheck
を自動的に (すなわち、スクリプトから) 実行し、
失敗を受け入れない場合に役に立つ。
.PP
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O should be run each time the system boots and mounts non-valid filesystems.
.\"O This is most likely to happen after a system crash.
.I quotacheck
は、システムがブートして
quota が正しく設定されていないファイルシステムをマウントする度に
必ず起動させなくてはならない。
これはシステムクラッシュ後に最も良く起こりがちである。
.PP
.\"O It is strongly recommended to run
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O with quotas turned off for the filesystem. Otherwise, possible damage
.\"O or loss to data in the quota files can result.  It is also unwise to
.\"O run
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O on a live filesystem as actual usage may change during the scan.  To
.\"O prevent this,
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O tries to remount the filesystem read-only before starting the scan.  
ファイルシステムの quota を無効にして、
.B quotacheck
を実行することを強く推奨する。
さもないと、quota ファイルのデータが損傷したり失われたりする可能性がある。
スキャン中に実使用量が変わるかもしれないので、
使用中のファイルシステムに
.B quotacheck
を実行することも賢明でない。
これを避けるため、
.B quotacheck
はスキャンを開始する前にファイルシステムを
リードオンリーで再マウントしようとする。
.\"O After the scan is done it remounts the filesystem read-write. You can
.\"O disable this with option
.\"O .BR \-m .
.B quotacheck
はスキャンが完了すると、ファイルシステムをリードライトで再マウントする。
オプション
.B \-m
により、この動作を無効にできる。
.\"O You can also make
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O ignore the failure to remount the filesystem read-only with option
.\"O .BR \-M .
オプション
.B \-M
により、ファイルシステムをリードオンリーで再マウントするときの失敗を
.B quotacheck
に無視させることもできる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b
.\"O Forces
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O to make backups of the quota file before writing the new data.
新しいデータを書き込む前に、
.B quotacheck
に quota ファイルのバックアップを作成させる。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O reports its operation as it progresses.  Normally it operates silently.
.B quotacheck
に進行している操作を表示させる。
通常は寡黙に動作する。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Enable debugging mode.  It will result in a lot of information which can
.\"O be used in debugging the program. The output is very verbose and the
.\"O scan will be slow.
デバッグモードを有効にする。
プログラムのデバッグを行なうための多くの情報を表示する。
出力はかなり詳細になり、スキャン速度も低下するだろう。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Only user quotas listed in
.\"O .I /etc/mtab
.\"O or on the filesystems specified are to be checked.  This is the default action.
.I /etc/mtab
でリストされているファイルシステム、
または指定されたファイルシステムのユーザー quota のみがチェックされる。
デフォルトの動作である。
.TP
.B \-g
.\"O Only group quotas listed in
.\"O .I /etc/mtab
.\"O or on the filesystems specified are to be checked.
.I /etc/mtab
でリストされているファイルシステム、
または指定されたファイルシステムのグループ quota のみがチェックされる。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Don't read existing quota files. Just perform a new scan and save it to disk.
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O also skips scanning of old quota files when they are not found.
既存の quota ファイルを読み込まない。
新規にスキャンを実行し、それをディスクに保存する。
.B quotacheck
は古い quota ファイルが見つからなければ、そのスキャンも飛ばす。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Forces checking and writing of new quota files on filesystems with quotas
.\"O enabled. This is not recommended as the created quota files may be out of sync.
quota が有効にされているファイルシステムに対して、
quota ファイルをチェックして、新しい quota ファイルを書き込む。
.TP
.B \-M
.\"O This flag forces checking of filesystem in read-write mode if a remount
.\"O fails. Do this only when you are sure no process will write to a
.\"O filesystem while scanning.
このフラグが指定されると、再マウントに失敗した場合に
リードライトモードでファイルシステムをチェックする。
スキャン中にファイルシステムに書き込むプロセスがないことが
確かな場合にのみ実行すべきである。
.TP
.B \-m
.\"O Don't try to remount filesystem read-only. See comment with option
.\"O .BR \-M .
ファイルシステムをリードオンリーで再マウントしない。
オプション
.B \-M
のコメントも参照すること。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Interactive mode. By default
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O exits when it finds an error. In interactive mode user is asked for
.\"O input instead.  See option
.\"O .BR \-n .
対話モード。
デフォルトでは、エラーがあった場合
.B quotacheck
は終了する。
対話モードではユーザーは入力を求められる。
オプション
.B \-n
を参照すること。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O If the quota files become corrupted, it is possible for duplicate
.\"O entries for a single user or group ID to exist.  Normally in this case,
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O exits or asks user for input. When this option is set, the first entry found
.\"O is always used (this option works in interactive mode too).
quota ファイルが壊れている場合でも、
存在する 1 つのユーザー ID またはグループ ID のエントリを
複製できる可能性がある。
通常はこのような場合、
.B quotacheck
は終了するかユーザーに入力を求める。
このオプションが設定された場合、見つかった最初のエントリが常に使われる
(このオプションは対話モードでも動作する)。
.TP
.B \-F \f2format-name\f1
.\"O Check and fix quota files of specified format (ie. don't perform format
.\"O auto-detection). This is recommended as detection might not work well on
.\"O corrupted quota files.  Possible format names are:
.\"O .B vfsold
.\"O (version 1 quota),
.\"O .B vfsv0
.\"O (version 2 quota),
.\"O .B rpc
.\"O (quota over NFS),
.\"O .B xfs
.\"O (quota on XFS filesystem)
指定されたフォーマットの quota ファイルのチェックと修正を行う
(つまり、フォーマットの自動判定を行わない)。
quota ファイルが壊れていて判定がうまく動作しない場合に推奨される。
.指定可能なフォーマット名は以下の通り:
.B vfsold
(バージョン 1 の quota),
.B vfsv0
(バージョン 2 の quota),
.B rpc
(NFS 越しの quota),
.B xfs
(XFS ファイルシステム上の quota)。
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Check all mounted non-NFS filesystems in
.\"O .B /etc/mtab
.B /etc/mtab
にある NFS 以外の全てのファイルシステムをチェックする。
.TP
.B \-R
.\"O When used together with the
.\"O .B \-a
.\"O option, all filesystems except for the root filesystem are checked for
.\"O quotas.
.B \-a
オプションとともに使った場合、
ルートファイルシステム以外の全てのファイルシステムがチェックされる。

.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O should only be run by super-user. Non-privileged users are presumably
.\"O not allowed to read all the directories on the given filesystem.
.I quotacheck
はスーパーユーザーとしてのみ実行すべきである。
恐らく非特権ユーザーは、指定されたファイルシステムの全てのディレクトリを
読むことが許可されていない。

.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR quota (1),
.BR quotactl (2),
.BR fstab (5),
.BR quotaon (8),
.BR repquota (8),
.BR convertquota (8),
.BR setquota (8),
.BR edquota (8),
.BR fsck (8),
.BR efsck (8),
.BR e2fsck (8),
.BR xfsck (8)

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 15
.\"O .B aquota.user or aquota.group
.BR aquota.user " または " aquota.group
.\"O located at filesystem root with quotas (version 2 quota, non-XFS
.\"O filesystems)
quota を設定するファイルシステムのルートに置かれる
(バージョン 2 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP 15
.\"O .B quota.user or quota.group
.BR quota.user " または " quota.group
.\"O located at filesystem root with quotas (version 1 quota, non-XFS
.\"O filesystems)
quota を設定するファイルシステムのルートに置かれる
(バージョン 1 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.B /etc/mtab
.\"O names and locations of mounted filesystems
マウントされているファイルシステムの名前と位置が書かれている。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Jan Kara \<jack@suse.cz\>
Jan Kara \<jack@suse.cz\>。
.br
.\"O Based on old
.\"O .B quotacheck
.\"O by:
.\"O .br
.\"O Edvard Tuinder \<ed@elm.net\>
.\"O .br
.\"O Marco van Wieringen \<mvw@planets.elm.net\>
このプログラムは
.br
Edvard Tuinder \<ed@elm.net\>
.br
Marco van Wieringen \<mvw@planets.elm.net\>
.br
による昔の
.B quotacheck
に基づいている。
