.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Kazuyoshi Furutaka and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 1997
.\"	by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"	by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Sat May 15 14:57:23 JST 2004
.\"	by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH REPQUOTA 8
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O repquota \- summarize quotas for a filesystem
repquota \- ファイルシステムの quota のまとめを表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /usr/sbin/repquota
[
.B \-vsiug
] [
.B \-c
|
.B \-C
] [
.B \-t
|
.B \-n
] [
.B \-F
.I format-name
]
.IR filesystem .\|.\|.
.LP
.B /usr/sbin/repquota
[
.B \-avtsiug
] [
.B \-c
|
.B \-C
] [
.B \-t
|
.B \-n
] [
.B \-F
.I format-name
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.IX  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "user quotas"  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "disk quotas"  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "quotas"  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "filesystem"  "repquota command"  ""  "\fLrepquota\fP \(em summarize quotas"
.IX  "summarize filesystem quotas repquota"  ""  "summarize filesystem quotas \(em \fLrepquota\fP"
.IX  "report filesystem quotas repquota"  ""  "report filesystem quotas \(em \fLrepquota\fP"
.IX  display "filesystem quotas \(em \fLrepquota\fP"
.LP
.\"O .B repquota
.\"O prints a summary of the disc usage and quotas for the specified file
.\"O systems.  For each user the current number of files and amount of space
.\"O (in kilobytes) is printed, along with any quotas created with
.\"O .BR edquota (8).
.B repquota
は指定したファイルシステムのディスク使用状況と quota のまとめを表示する。
各ユーザーの現在のファイル数と使用容量 (キロバイト単位) が、
.BR edquota (8)
により設定された各 quota とともに表示される。
.\"O As
.\"O .B repquota
.\"O has to translate ids of all users/groups to names (unless option
.\"O .B -n
.\"O was specified) it may take a while to
.\"O print all the information. 
(オプション
.B -n
が指定されない限り)
.B repquota
は全てのユーザーとグループの ID を名前に変換しなければならないので、
全ての情報を表示するのに時間が掛るかもしれない。
.\"O To make translating as fast as possible
.\"O .B repquota
.\"O tries to detect (by reading
.\"O .BR /etc/nsswitch.conf )
.\"O whether entries are stored in standard plain text file or in database and either
.\"O translates chunks of 1024 names or each name individually. 
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: chunk of の意味が良く分からない。
.\"Osato: 
できるだけ速く変換するため
.B repquota
は
.RB ( /etc/nsswitch.conf
を読むことにより) エントリが標準的な平文のテキストファイルまたは
データベースに格納されているかを確かめ、
1024 個の名前をまとめて変換するか 1 つの名前毎に変換する。
.\"O You can override this
.\"O autodetection by
.\"O .B -c
.\"O or
.\"O .B -C
.\"O options.
この自動検出は
.B -c
または
.B -C
オプションで上書きできる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-a
.\"O Report on all filesystems indicated in
.\"O .B /etc/mtab
.\"O to be read-write with quotas.
.B /etc/mtab
において読み書きの許可と quota が指定されている
全てのファイルシステムについて表示する。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Report all quotas, even if there is no usage. Be also more verbose about quotafile
.\"O information.
使用量ゼロのものも含めて、すべての quota を表示する。
quota ファイルの情報についても、より詳細に表示する。
.TP
.B \-c
.\"O Cache entries to report and translate uids/gids to names in big chunks by scanning
.\"O all users (default). This is good (fast) behaviour when using /etc/passwd file.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: in big chunk の意味が分からない。
.\"Osato: 
エントリをキャッシュし、全てのユーザーをスキャンして、
ユーザー ID・グループ ID を大きくまとめて名前に変換して表示する
(これがデフォルトである)。
/etc/passwd ファイルを使う場合は、優れた動作をする (速くなる)。
.TP
.B \-C
.\"O Translate individual entries. This is faster when you have users stored in database.
各エントリ毎に変換する。
ユーザーがデータベースに格納されている場合は速くなる。
.TP
.B \-t
.\"O Truncate user/group names longer than 9 characters. This results in nicer output when
.\"O there are such names.
9 文字より長いユーザー名・グループ名を切り詰める。
長い名前がある場合に表示がきれいになる。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O Don't resolve UIDs/GIDs to names. This can speedup printing a lot.
ユーザー ID・グループ ID から名前に変換しない。
これにより表示の速度をかなり上げることができる。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Try to report used space, number of used inodes and limits in more appropriate units
.\"O than the default ones.
使用容量・使用 inode・使用限度を、デフォルトの単位ではなく、
より適切な単位で表示する。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Ignore mountpoints mounted by automounter.
automount によってマウントされたマウントポイントを無視する。
.TP
.B \-F \f2format-name\f1
.\"O Report quota for specified format (ie. don't perform format autodetection).
指定されたフォーマットで quota を表示する
(つまり、フォーマットの自動判定を行わない)。
.\"O Possible format names are:
.\"O .B vfsold
.\"O (version 1 quota),
.\"O .B vfsv0
.\"O (version 2 quota),
.\"O .B xfs
.\"O (quota on XFS filesystem)
指定可能なフォーマット名は以下の通り:
.B vfsold
(バージョン 1 の quota),
.B vfsv0
(バージョン 2 の quota),
.B xfs
(XFS ファイルシステム上の quota)。
.TP
.B \-g
.\"O Report quotas for groups.
グループの quota を表示する。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O Report quotas for users. This is the default.
ユーザーの quota を表示する。これがデフォルトである。
.LP
.\"O Only the super-user may view quotas which are not their own.
スーパーユーザーのみが、他人の quota を見ることができる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.\"O .BR aquota.user " or " aquota.group
.BR aquota.user " または " aquota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 2 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 2 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.\"O .BR quota.user " or " quota.group
.BR quota.user " または " quota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 1 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 1 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.B /etc/mtab
.\"O default filesystems
デフォルトのファイルシステム。
.TP
.B /etc/passwd
.\"O default set of users
デフォルトのユーザーのセット。
.TP
.B /etc/group
.\"O default set of groups
デフォルトのグループのセット。
.PD
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR quota (1),
.BR quotactl (2),
.BR edquota (8),
.BR quotacheck (8),
.BR quotaon (8)
