.\" 
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat May 15 15:48:27 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" 
.TH RQUOTAD 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O rquotad, rpc.rquotad \- remote quota server
rquotad, rpc.rquotad \- リモート quota サーバ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B rpc.rquotad
[
.B \-sSFI
] [
.B \-p \f2port\f1
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.LP
.IX  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  daemons  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "user quotas"  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "disk quotas"  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "quotas"  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "filesystem"  "rquotad daemon"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.IX  "remote procedure call services"  "rquotad"  ""  "\fLrquotad\fP \(em remote quota server"
.\"O .B rquotad
.\"O is an
.\"O .BR rpc (3N)
.\"O server which returns quotas for a user of a local filesystem
.\"O which is mounted by a remote machine over the
.\"O .SM NFS\s0.
.B rquotad
は、
.SM NFS\s0 
によりリモートマシンにマウントされている、
ローカルファイルシステムのユーザ quota 値を返す
.BR rpc (3N)
サーバである。
.\"O It also allows setting of quotas on
.\"O .SM NFS
.\"O mounted filesystem (if configured during compilation and allowed by a command line option
.\"O .BR \-S ).
(コンパイル時に設定されていて、かつコマンドラインオプション
.B \-S
で許可されている場合)
.SM NFS
マウントされたファイルシステムの quota を設定することもできる。
.\"O The results are used by
.\"O .BR quota (1)
.\"O to display user quotas for remote filesystems and by
.\"O .BR edquota (8)
.\"O to set quotas on remote filesystems.
その返り値は、
.BR quota (1)
がリモートファイルシステムのユーザ quota を表示するのに使ったり、
.BR edquota (8)
がリモートファイルシステムに quota を設定するのに使ったりする。
.\"O .B rquotad
.\"O daemon uses tcp-wrappers library (under service name
.\"O .IR rquotad )
.\"O which allows you to specify hosts allowed/disallowed to use
.\"O the daemon (see
.\"O .BR hosts.allow (5)
.\"O manpage for more information). The
.\"O .B rquotad
.\"O daemon is normally started at boot time from the
.\"O system startup scripts.
.B rquotad
デーモンは tcp-wrapper ライブラリを
.RI ( rquotad
というサービス名で) 使う。
このライブラリにより、ユーザはデーモンの使用を許可・禁止するホストを指定できる
(より詳細な情報は man ページ
.BR hosts.allow (5)
を参照すること)。
.B rquotad
デーモンは、通常はシステムの起動スクリプトによってブート時に起動される。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
.\"O Shows version of quota tools.
quota ツールのバージョンを表示する。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-no-sequota
.\"O Don't allow setting of quotas (default). This option is available only
.\"O if utilities were compiled with the
.\"O .I rpcsetquota
.\"O option.
quota の設定を禁止する (これがデフォルトである)。
このオプションは、ユーティリティが
.I rpcsetquota
オプションを付けてコンパイルされている場合にのみ使用可能である。
.TP
.B \-S, \-\-setquota
.\"O Allow setting of quotas. This option is available only
.\"O if utilities were compiled with the
.\"O .I rpcsetquota
.\"O option.
quota の設定を許可する。
このオプションは、ユーティリティが
.I rpcsetquota
オプションを付けてコンパイルされている場合にのみ使用可能である。
.TP
.B \-F, \-\-foreground
.\"O Run daemon in foreground (may be useful for debugging purposes).
デーモンをフォアグラウンドで実行する
(デバッグ目的の場合に役立つかも知れない)。
.TP
.B \-I, \-\-autofs
.\"O Do not ignore autofs mountpoints.
autofs のマウントポイントを無視する。
.TP
.B \-p \f2port\f3, \-\-port \f2port\f1
.\"O Listen on alternate port
.\"O .IR port.
別なポート
.I port
で接続を待つ。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.\"O .B aquota.user or aquota.group
.BR aquota.user " または " aquota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 2 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 2 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.\"O .B quota.user or quota.group
.BR quota.user " または " quota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 1 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 1 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.B /etc/mtab
.\"O default filesystems
デフォルトのファイルシステム。
.PD
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
.BR quota (1),
.BR rpc (3N),
.BR nfs (5),
.BR services (5),
.BR inetd (8)
