.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000-2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat May 15 17:04:38 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH SETQUOTA 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O setquota \- set disk quotas
setquota \- ディスク quota を設定する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B setquota
[
.B \-r
]
[
.B \-u
|
.B \-g
]
[
.B \-F
.I quotaformat
]
.I name
.I block-softlimit
.I block-hardlimit
.I inode-softlimit
.I inode-hardlimit
.B \-a
|
.I filesystem...
.LP
.B setquota
[
.B \-r
]
[
.B \-u
|
.B \-g
]
[
.B \-F
.I quotaformat
]
[
.B \-p
.I protoname 
]
.I name
.B \-a
|
.I filesystem...
.LP
.B setquota
.B \-t
[
.B \-u
|
.B \-g
]
[
.B \-F
.I quotaformat
]
.I block-grace
.I inode-grace
.B \-a
|
.I filesystem...
.LP
.B setquota
.B \-T
[
.B \-u
|
.B \-g
]
[
.B \-F
.I quotaformat
]
.I name
.I block-grace
.I inode-grace
.B \-a
|
.I filesystem...
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.IX  "setquota command"  ""  "\fLsetquota\fP \(em set disk quotas"
.IX  set "disk quotas \(em \fLsetquota\fP"
.IX  "disk quotas"  "setquota command"  ""  "\fLsetquota\fP \(em set disk quotas"
.IX  "disk quotas"  "setquota command"  ""  "\fLsetquota\fP \(em set disk quotas"
.IX  "quotas"  "setquota command"  ""  "\fLsetquota\fP \(em set disk quotas"
.IX  "filesystem"  "setquota command"  ""  "\fLsetquota\fP \(em set disk quotas"
.\"O .B setquota
.\"O is a command line quota editor.
.\"O The filesystem, user/group name and new quotas for this
.\"O filesystem can be specified on the command line.
.B setquota
はコマンドラインによる quota のエディタである。
ファイルシステム・ユーザー名・グループ名・
そのファイルシステムに対する新しい quota を
コマンドラインから指定できる。
.TP
.B -r
.\"O Edit also remote quota use rpc.rquotad on remote server to set quota.
リモートサーバ上の rpc.rquotad を使って、リモートサーバの quota を編集する。
.TP
.B -F \f2quotaformat\f1
.\"O Perform setting for specified format (ie. don't perform format autodetection).
指定されたフォーマットで設定を行う
(つまり、フォーマットの自動判定を行わない)。
.\"O Possible format names are:
.\"O .B vfsold
.\"O (version 1 quota),
.\"O .B vfsv0
.\"O (version 2 quota),
.\"O .B rpc
.\"O (quota over NFS),
.\"O .B xfs
.\"O (quota on XFS filesystem)
指定可能なフォーマット名は以下の通り:
.B vfsold
(バージョン 1 の quota),
.B vfsv0
(バージョン 2 の quota),
.B rpc
(NFS 越しの quota),
.B xfs
(XFS ファイルシステム上の quota)。
.TP
.B -u
.\"O Set user quotas for named user. This is the default.
指定した名前のユーザーについてユーザーの quota を設定する。
これがデフォルトである。
.TP
.B -g
.\"O Set group quotas for named group.
指定した名前のグループについてグループの quota を設定する。
.TP
.B -p \f2protoname\f1
.\"O Use quota settings of user or group
.\"O .I protoname
.\"O to set the quota for the named user or group.
ユーザーまたはグループ
.I protoname
の設定を使って、指定した名前のユーザーまたはグループの quota を設定する。
.TP
.B -t
.\"O Set grace times for users/groups. Times
.\"O .B block-grace
.\"O and
.\"O .B inode-grace
.\"O are specified in seconds.
ユーザー・グループに対する猶予時間を設定する。
時間
.B block-grace
と
.B inode-grace
は秒で指定する。
.TP
.B -T
.\"O Alter times for individual user/group when softlimit is enforced. Times
.\"O .B block-grace
.\"O and
.\"O .B inode-grace
.\"O are specified in seconds or can be string 'unset'.
ソフトリミットが実施された場合に、
個々のユーザー・グループに対する猶予時間を変更する。
時間
.B block-grace
と
.B inode-grace
は秒で指定する。
また時間に文字列 'unset' を指定することもできる。
.TP
.B -a
.\"O Go through all filesystems with quota in
.\"O .B /etc/mtab
.\"O and perform setting.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: go through の意味が良く分からない。
.\"Osato: 
.B /etc/mtab
で quota が指定されている全てのファイルシステムについて設定を行う。
.PP
.\"O To disable a quota, set the coresponding parameter to 0. To change quotas
.\"O for several filesystems, invoke once for each filesystem.
quota を使わなくするには、対応するパラメータを 0 に設定すること。
複数のファイルシステムについて quota を設定する場合は、
各ファイルシステム毎にこのプログラムを起動すること。
.PP
.\"O Only the super-user may edit quotas.
スーパーユーザーのみが quota を編集できる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.\"O .B aquota.user or aquota.group
.BR aquota.user " または " aquota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 2 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 2 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.\"O .B quota.user or quota.group
.BR quota.user " または " quota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 1 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 1 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.B /etc/mtab
.\"O mounted filesystem table
マウントされているファイルシステムのテーブル。
.PD
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR edquota (8),
.BR quota (1),
.BR quotactl (2),
.BR quotacheck (8),
.BR quotaon (8),
.BR repquota (8)
