.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 16 12:07:45 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH WARNQUOTA 8
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O warnquota \- send mail to users over quota
warnquota \- quota を超過したユーザーにメールを送る
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B warnquota
[
.B \-ugsid
] [
.B \-F
.I quotaformat
] [
.B \-q
.I quotatab
] [
.B \-c
.I configfile
] [
.B \-a
.I adminsfile
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B warnquota
.\"O checks the disk quota for each filesystem and mails a warning
.\"O message to those users who have reached their limit.
.B warnquota
は各ファイルシステムのディスク quota を調べて、
制限に達したユーザーに警告メッセージのメールを送る。
.\"O It is typically run via
.\"O .BR cron (8).
通常は
.BR cron (8)
を用いて実行される。
.TP
.B -F \f2quotaformat\f1
.\"O Perform setting for specified format (ie. don't perform format autodetection).
指定されたフォーマットで設定を行う
(つまり、フォーマットの自動判定を行わない)。
.\"O Possible format names are:
.\"O .B vfsold
.\"O (version 1 quota),
.\"O .B vfsv0
.\"O (version 2 quota),
.\"O .B rpc
.\"O (quota over NFS),
.\"O .B xfs
.\"O (quota on XFS filesystem)
指定可能なフォーマット名は以下の通り:
.B vfsold
(バージョン 1 の quota),
.B vfsv0
(バージョン 2 の quota),
.B rpc
(NFS 越しの quota),
.B xfs
(XFS ファイルシステム上の quota)。
.TP
.B -q \f2quotatab\f1
.\"O Use
.\"O .I quotatab
.\"O instead of
.\"O .I /etc/quotatab
.\"O as file with device description strings (see example file for syntax).
デバイス記述文字列を書いたファイルとして、
.I /etc/quotatab
ではなく
.I quotatab
を使う (書式は例のファイルを参照すること)。
.TP
.B -c \f2configfile\f1
.\"O Use
.\"O .I configfile
.\"O instead of
.\"O .I /etc/warnquota.conf
.\"O as configuration file (see example file for syntax).
設定ファイルとして、
.I /etc/warnquota.conf
ではなく
.I configfile
を使う (書式は例のファイルを参照すること)。
.TP
.B -a \f2adminsfile\f1
.\"O Use
.\"O .I adminsfile
.\"O instead of
.\"O .I /etc/quotagrpadmins
.\"O as a file with administrators of the groups.
グループの管理者を書いたファイルとして、
.I /etc/quotagrpadmins
ではなく
.I adminsfile
を使う。
.TP
.B -u
.\"O check whether users are not exceeding quotas (default).
ユーザーが quota を超過していないかを調べる
(これがデフォルトである)。
.TP
.B -g
.\"O check whether groups are not exceeding quotas. If group is exceeding quota
.\"O a mail is sent to the user specified in /etc/quotagrpadmins.
グループが quota を超過していないかを調べる。
グループが quota を超過している場合、
/etc/quotagrpadmins で指定されているユーザーにメールが送られる。
.TP
.B -s
.\"O Try to report used space, number of used inodes and limits in more appropriate units
.\"O than the default ones.
使用容量・使用 inode・使用限度を、デフォルトの単位ではなく、
より適切な単位で報告する。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O ignore mountpoints mounted by automounter.
automount でマウントされたマウントポイントを無視する。
.TP
.B -d
.\"O don't attach quota report in email.
E メールに quota のレポートを添付しない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B aquota.user
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 2 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 2 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.B quota.user
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 1 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 1 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.B /etc/warnquota.conf
.\"O configuration file
設定ファイル。
.TP
.B /etc/quotatab
.\"O device description
デバイスの記述。
.TP
.B /etc/quotagrpadmins
.\"O administrators of the groups
グループの管理者。
.TP
.B /etc/mtab
.\"O default filesystems
デフォルトのファイルシステム。
.TP
.B /etc/passwd
.\"O default set of users
デフォルトのユーザーのセット。
.PD
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR quota (1),
.BR cron (8),
.BR edquota (8).
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O .BR warnquota (8)
.\"O was written by Marco van Wieringen <mvw@planets.elm.net>, modifications by Jan Kara <jack@suse.cz>.
.\"O This reference page written by Heiko Schlittermann <heiko@lotte.sax.de>, modifications by Jan Kara
.BR warnquota (8)
は Marco van Wieringen <mvw@planets.elm.net> によって書かれ、
Jan Kara <jack@suse.cz> によって修正された。
このリファレンスページは
Heiko Schlittermann <heiko@lotte.sax.de> によって書かれ、
Jan Kara によって修正された。
