.\" xapm.1 -- 
.\" Created: Thu Jan 11 16:29:49 1996 by r.faith@ieee.org
.\" Revised: Sun Apr 21 16:37:42 1996 by r.faith@ieee.org
.\" Copyright 1996 Rickard E. Faith (r.faith@ieee.org)
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" 
.TH XAPM 1 "11 Jan 1996" "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
xapm \- display Advanced Power Management (APM) BIOS information
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xapm [ ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xapm
puts up an X window that displays the remaining battery life.  The left
side of the window contains a printed time or percentage, and the right
side of the window contains a bar indicating the percentage.  Clicking on
the left side of the window will toggle the display between time and
percent.
.SH "OPTIONS AND RESOURCES"
In addition to standard Xt options, the following options are available:
.TP
.B \-V
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BI \-highcolor " color"
The color of the bar when the battery percentage is above
.IR highvalue .
Defaults to "green". (*highColor)
.TP
.BI \-lowcolor " color"
The color of the bar when the battery percentage is between
.I lowvalue
and
.IR highvalue .
Defaults to "yellow". (*lowColor)
.TP
.BI \-criticalcolor " color"
The color of the bar when the battery percentage is below
.IR lowvalue .
Defaults to "red".  This color is also used to flash the alphanumeric part
of the display when the power status is critical. (*criticalCOlor)
.TP
.BI \-highvalue " highvalue"
Set
.IR highvalue .
The default is 50. (*highValue)
.TP
.BI \-lowvalue " lowvalue"
Set
.IR lowvalue .
The default is 10. (*lowValue)
.TP
.BI \-chargingcolor " color"
The color of the printed display when charging.  The default is
"blue".  Use
.B \-foreground
to change the color used when on battery power. (*chargingColor)
.TP
.BI \-delay " delay"
Sets the number of seconds delay between each update.  The default is
1. (*delay)
.TP
.B \-percent
Display percentage on startup, instead of time remaining. (*percent, boolean)
.SH BUGS
There is no way to inhibit the alphanumeric display or the bar display.
When the battery percentage is low, using a bright color to warn you of
impending doom may be futile because the bar is too short.  Because of the
form widget's desire to maintain proportions, dynamic resizing of the
window may not do what you want it to do.
.SH FILES
.I /proc/apm
.SH AUTHOR
This program was written by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) and may be freely
distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License.  There is
ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY for this program.  The current maintainer is Avery
Pennarun (apenwarr@worldvisions.ca).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR apm "(1), "apmd (8)
