.\"
.\" nfsd(7) - The nfsd filesystem
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2003 Neil Brown <neilb@cse.unsw.edu.au>
.\" Licensed for public use under the terms of the FSF
.\" General Public License (GPL) version 2.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2006 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jun  4 06:13:28 JST 2006 
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp> catch up to v1.0.7
.\"
.TH nfsd 7 "3 July 2003"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O nfsd \- special filesystem for controlling Linux NFS server
nfsd \- Linux NFS を制御する特殊ファイルシステム
.\"O .SH SYNPOSIS
.SH 書式
.B "mount -t nfsd nfsd /proc/fs/nfsd"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B nfsd
.\"O filessytem is a special filesystem which provides access to the Linux
.\"O NFS server.  The filesystem consists of a single directory which
.\"O contains a number of files.  These files are actually gateways into
.\"O the NFS server.  Writing to them can affect the server.  Reading from
.\"O them can provide information about the server.
.B nfsd
ファイルシステムは Linux NFS サーバーへのアクセスを提供する
特殊ファイルシステムである。
このファイルシステムは複数個のファイルを含む 1 つのディレクトリで構成される。
これらのファイルが実際には NFS サーバーへのゲートウェイになる。
これらのファイルに書き込むことにより、サーバーに影響を及ぼすことができる。
これらのファイルを読み出すことにより、サーバーの情報が提供される。
.P
.\"O This file system is only available in Linux 2.6 and later series
.\"O kernels (and in the later parts of the 2.5 development series leading
.\"O up to 2.6).  This man page does not apply to 2.4 and earlier.
このファイルシステムは Linux 2.6 以降
(と開発版である 2.5 系の後期から 2.6 まで) のカーネルでのみ利用可能である。
この man ページは 2.4 以前には適用されない。
.P
.\"O As well as this filesystem, there are a collection of files in the
.\"O .B procfs
.\"O filesystem (normally mounted at
.\"O .BR /proc )
.\"O which are used to control the NFS server.
.\"O This manual page describes all of these files.
このファイルシステムだけではなく、
.B procfs
ファイルシステム (通常は
.B /proc
にマウントされている) にも NFS サーバーを制御するためのファイル群がある。
この man ページは、これら全てのファイルについて記述している。
.P
.\"O The
.\"O .I exportfs
.\"O and
.\"O .I mountd
.\"O programs (part of the nfs-utils package) expect to find this
.\"O filesystem mounted at
.\"O .B /proc/fs/nfsd
.\"O or
.\"O .BR /proc/fs/nfs .
.I exportfs
と
.I mountd
プログラム (nfs-utils パッケージの一部) は、このファイルシステムが
.B /proc/fs/nfsd
または
.B /proc/fs/nfs
にマウントされていることを想定している。
.\"O If it is not mounted, they will fall-back on 2.4 style functionality.
.\"O This involves accessing the NFS server via a systemcall.  This
.\"O systemcall is scheduled to be removed after the 2.6 kernel series.
マウントされていない場合、これらのプログラムは 2.4 系の機能に戻る。
2.4 系の機能には、システムコール経由で
NFS サーバーにアクセスすることが含まれる。
このシステムコールは 2.6 カーネルより後の系列では削除される予定である。
.\"O .SH DETAILS
.SH 詳細
.\"O The three files in the
.\"O .B nfsd
.\"O filesystem are:
.B nfsd
ファイルシステムに含まれる 3 つのファイルは、以下の通りである:
.TP
.B exports
.\"O This file contains a list of filesystems that are currently exported
.\"O and clients that each filesystem is exported to, together with a list
.\"O of export options for that client/filesystem pair.  This is similar
.\"O to the
.\"O .B /proc/fs/nfs/exports
.\"O file in 2.4.
このファイルには、現在エクスポートされているファイルシステムと
各ファイルシステムがエクスポートされている先のクライアントの一覧が、
クライアントとファイルシステムのペア毎のエクスポートオプションの
リストと共に含まれている。
これは 2.4 における
.B /proc/fs/nfs/exports
ファイルと似ている。
.\"O One difference is that a client doesn't necessarily correspond to just
.\"O one host.  It can respond to a large collection of hosts that are
.\"O being treated identically.
1 つの違いは、1 つのクライアントが 1 つのホストと対応する
必要がないという点である。
これにより同一に扱うべき多くのホストに対して応答できる。

.\"O Each line of the file contains a path name, a client name, and a
.\"O number of options in parentheses.  Any space, tab, newline or
.\"O back-slash character in the path name or client name will be replaced
.\"O by a backslash followed by the octal ASCII code for that character.
ファイルの各行には、パス名・クライアント名・
括弧で括られたオプションが含まれる。
パス名またはクライアント名に含まれる
スペース・タブ・改行・バックスラッシュ文字は、
バックスラッシュとそれらの文字の 8 進数 ASCII コードに置き換えられる。

.TP
.B threads
.\"O This file represents the number of
.\"O .B nfsd
.\"O thread currently running.  Reading it will show the number of
.\"O threads.  Writing an ASCII decimal number will cause the number of
.\"O threads to be changed (increased or decreased as necessary) to achieve
.\"O that number.
このファイルは現在実行されている
.B nfsd
スレッドの数を表している。
このファイルを読み出すとスレッド数が表示される。
ASCII の 10 進数を書き込むと、その数になるようにスレッド数が変更される
(必要に応じて増加または減少させる)。

.TP
.B filehandle
.\"O This is a somewhat unusual file  in that what is read from it depends
.\"O on what was just written to it.  It provides a transactional interface
.\"O where a program can open the file, write a request, and read a
.\"O response.  If two separate programs open, write, and read at the same
.\"O time, their requests will not be mixed up.
これは多少変わったファイルで、ファイルから読み出されるものは、
ファイルに書き込まれるものに依存している。
このファイルはトランザクションのインタフェースを提供する。
プログラムはこのインタフェースでファイルのオープン・
リクエストの書き込み・レスポンスの読み出しができる。
2 つの別々のプログラムがオープン・書き込み・読み出しを同時に行った場合でも、
リクエスト同士は混同されない。

.\"O The request written to
.\"O .B filehandle
.\"O should be a client name, a path name, and a number of bytes.  This
.\"O should be followed by a newline, with white-space separating the
.\"O fields, and octal quoting of special characters.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: quoting の訳は「表記」で良いか？
.\"Osato: 
.B filehandle
に書き込まれるリクエストは、クライアント名・パス名・バイト数である。
その後には、改行・空白で区切ったフィールド・
特殊文字を 8 進数表記したものが続く。

.\"O On writing this, the program will be able to read back a filehandle
.\"O for that path as exported to the given client.  The filehandles length
.\"O will be at most the number of bytes given.
このファイルに書き込むことにより、プログラムは
指定されたクライアントにエクスポートされるパスに対する
ファイルハンドルを読み返すことができる。
ファイルハンドルの長さは、指定されたバイト数以下にされる。

.\"O The filehandle will be represented in hex with a leading '\ex'.
ファイルハンドルは先頭に '\ex' を付けた 16 進数で表現される。
.PP
.\"O The directory
.\"O .B /proc/net/rpc
.\"O in the
.\"O .B procfs
.\"O filesystem contains a number of files and directories.
.B procfs
ファイルシステム上のディレクトリ
.B /proc/net/rpc
には、いくつかのファイルとディレクトリが含まれる。
.\"O The files contain statistics that can be display using the
.\"O .I nfsstat
.\"O program.
ファイルには
.I nfsstat
プログラムを使って表示できる統計情報が含まれる。
.\"O The directories contain information about various caches that the NFS
.\"O server maintains to keep track of access permissions that different
.\"O clients have for different filesystems.
ディレクトリには NFS サーバが管理するいろいろなキャッシュが含まれる。
これらのキャッシュは、各クライアントがファイルシステム毎に持つ
アクセス許可を把握するためのものである。
.\"O The caches are:
キャッシュは以下の通り:

.TP
.B auth.domain
.\"O This cache maps the name of a client (or domain) to an internal data
.\"O structure.  The only access that is possible is to flush the cache.
このキャッシュはクライアント (またはドメイン) の名前を
内部データ構造にマップする。
利用可能なアクセスは、キャッシュの書き出し (flush) のみである。

.TP
.B auth.unix.ip
.\"O This cache contains a mapping from IP address to the name of the
.\"O authentication domain that the ipaddress should be treated as part of.
このキャッシュは IP アドレスから認証されたドメインへのマップを保持する。
認証されたドメインでは、この IP アドレスがドメインの一部として扱われる。

.TP
.B nfsd.export
.\"O This cache contains a mapping from directory and domain to export
.\"O options.
このキャッシュはディレクトリとドメインから
エクスポートオプションへのマッピングを保持する。

.TP
.B nfsd.fh
.\"O This cache contains a mapping from domain and a filesystem identifier
.\"O to a directory.   The filesystem identifier is stored in the
.\"O filehandles and consists of a number indicating the type of identifier
.\"O and a number of hex bytes indicating the content of the identifier.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: NFS 環境が手元にないため、最後の行の訳が正しいか不明である。
.\"Osato: 
このキャッシュはドメインとファイルシステム識別子から
ディレクトリへのマッピングを保持する。
ファイルシステム識別子はファイルハンドルに格納され、
識別子のタイプを表す数値と
識別子の内容を表す 16 進数のバイトの数値で構成される。

.PP
.\"O Each directory representing a cache can hold from 1 to 3 files.  They
.\"O are:
キャッシュを表す各ディレクトリは 1 〜 3 個のファイルを保持できる。
ファイルは以下の通り:
.TP
.B flush
.\"O When a number of seconds since epoch (1 Jan 1970) is written to this
.\"O file, all entries in the cache that were last updated before that file
.\"O become invalidated and will be flushed out.  Writing 1 will flush
.\"O everything.  This is the only file that will always be present.
紀元 (epoch, 1970 年 1 月 1 日) からの秒数がこのファイルに書き込まれると、
その時刻より前に更新されたキャッシュ内の全てのエントリが無効化され、
そのエントリはフラッシュされる (書き出される)。
1 を書き込むと全てのエントリが書き出される。
このファイルだけが常に存在するだろう。

.TP
.B content
.\"O This file, if present, contains a textual representation of ever entry
.\"O in the cache, one per line.  If an entry is still in the cache
.\"O (because it is actively being used) but has expired or is otherwise
.\"O invalid, it will be presented as a comment (with a leading hash
.\"O character).
このファイルが存在する場合、キャッシュ内の全てのエントリの文字列表現が
1 行に 1 個ずつ含まれる。
エントリがまだキャッシュ内にあり (アクティブで使用中であり)、
かつ期限切れの場合、またはそれ以外でエントリが無効である場合、
そのエントリは (先頭にハッシュ記号を付けた) コメントとして表される。

.TP
.B channel
.\"O This file, if present, acts a channel for request from the kernel-based
.\"O nfs server to be passed to a user-space program for handling.
このファイルが存在する場合、カーネルベースの NFS サーバーからのリクエストを、
ユーザー空間のプログラムが扱うための受け渡しをするチャンネルとして働く。

.\"O When the kernel needs some information which isn't in the cache, it
.\"O makes a line appear in the
.\"O .B channel
.\"O file giving the key for the information.  A user-space program should
.\"O read this, find the answer, and write a line containing the key, an
.\"O expiry time, and the content.
カーネルがキャッシュにない情報を必要とする場合、
情報のキーとなる 1 行を
.B channel
ファイルに書き込む。
ユーザー空間プログラムは、これを読み込み、答えを見つけ、
キー・満了時刻・内容を含む行を書き込まなければならない。

.\"O For example the kernel might make
たとえば、カーネルが
.ti +5
nfsd 127.0.0.1
.br
.\"O appear in the
.\"O .B auth.unix.ip/content
.\"O file.  The user-space program might then write
を
.B auth.unix.ip/content
ファイルに書き込んだ場合、ユーザー空間プログラムは
.ti +5
nfsd 127.0.0.1 1057206953 localhost
.br
.\"O to indicate that 127.0.0.1 should map to localhost, atleast for now.
を書き込んで、少なくとも今のところは
127.0.0.1 を localhost にマップすべきであることを示す。

.\"O If the program uses select(2) or poll(2) to discover if it can read
.\"O from the
.\"O .B channel
.\"O then it will never see and end-of-file but when all requests have been
.\"O answered, it will block until another request appears.
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: ここの訳は自信がない。
.\"Osato: it will never see and end-of-file の and の役割が分からない。
.\"Osato: 下記の訳では and がないものとして訳してみた。
.\"Osato: 
プログラムが select(2) または poll(2) を使って
.B channel
から読み込めるかを確かめたときに、
ファイルの終わり (end-of-file) は見つからないが、
全てのリクエストに答え終わっているという場合には、
プログラムは他のリクエストが現れるまでブロックする。

.PP
.\"O In the
.\"O .B /proc
.\"O filesystem there are 4 files that can be used to enabled extra tracing
.\"O of nfsd and related code.  They are:
.B /proc
ファイルシステムには、nfsd とそれに関連するコードの
より詳細なトレースを可能にするための、4 つのファイルがある:
.in +5
.B /proc/sys/sunrpc/nfs_debug
.br
.B /proc/sys/sunrpc/nfsd_debug
.br
.B /proc/sys/sunrpc/nlm_debug
.br
.B /proc/sys/sunrpc/rpc_debug
.br
.in -5
.\"O They control tracing for the NFS client, the NFS server, the Network
.\"O Lock Manager (lockd) and the underlying RPC layer respectively.
これらのファイルは、それぞれ、
NFS クライアント・NFS サーバー・ネットワークロックマネージャ (lockd)・
下層の RPC レイヤのトレースを制御する。
.\"O Decimal numbers can be read from or written to these files.  Each
.\"O number represents a bit-pattern where bits that are set cause certain
.\"O classes of tracing to be enabled.  Consult the kernel header files to
.\"O find out what number correspond to what tracing.
これらのファイルに対して 10 進数を読み書きできる。
各数値は特定の種類のトレースを有効にするためのビットのパターンを表す。
どの数値がどのトレースに対応するかを見つけるには、
カーネルのヘッダファイルを調べてほしい。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR rpc.nfsd (8),
.BR exports (5),
.BR nfsstat (8),
.BR mountd (8)
.BR exportfs (8).

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
NeilBrown
