.\"(c) Copyright 1992 by Panagiotis Tsirigotis
.\"(c) Sections Copyright 1998-2001 by Rob Braun
.\"All rights reserved.  The file named COPYRIGHT specifies the terms 
.\"and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\" $Id: xinetd.log.man,v 1.1.1.1 1999/10/12 17:28:59 bbraun Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (C) 2003 System Design and Research
.\" Institute Co.,Ltd. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Translated Feb 24, 2003 by
.\"   System Design and Research Institute Co.,Ltd. <info@sdri.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD remote end		相手側ホスト
.\"WORD bracket			角括弧
.\"WORD identification daemon	ident デーモン
.TH XINETD.LOG 5 "28 April 1993"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O xinetd.log \- xinetd service log format
xinetd.log \- xinetd サービスのログ形式
.\" *********************** DESCRIPTION ****************************
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH 説明
.\"O A service configuration may specify various degrees of logging when
.\"O attempts are made to access the service. When logging for a service
.\"O is enabled,
.\"O .B xinetd
.\"O will generate one-line log entries which have the following format
サービスへのアクセスが試みられたときに、サービスの設定によって
いろいろな程度でのログ出力を行える。
そのサービスに対するログ出力が有効になっていれば、
.B xinetd
は下記の形式で 1 行のログエントリを生成する
.\"O (all entries have a timestamp as a prefix):
(全てのエントリには、最初にタイムスタンプがつく)。
.sp 1
.RS
\fIentry\fP: \fIservice-id\fP \fIdata\fP
.RE
.LP
.\"O The \fIdata\fP depends on the \fIentry\fP.
.I data
は
.I entry
に依存する。
.\"O Possible \fIentry\fP types include:
.I entry
には以下のものがある。
.RS
.TP 12
.SB START
.\"O generated when a server is started
サーバが起動されたときに生成される
.TP
.SB EXIT
.\"O generated when a server exits
サーバが終了したときに生成される
.TP
.SB FAIL
.\"O generated when it is not possible to start a server
サーバを起動できなかったときに生成される
.TP
.SB DATA
.\"O generated when an attempt to start a server fails and the service supports
.\"O the \fIRECORD\fP log option.
サーバの起動に失敗し、サービスが
.I RECORD
ログオプションをサポートしているときに生成される
.TP
.SB USERID
.\"O generated if the \fIUSERID\fP log option is used.
.I USERID
ログオプションが指定されていれば生成される
.TP
.SB NOID
.\"O generated if the 
.\"O .I USERID
.\"O log option is used,
.\"O and the 
.\"O .I IDONLY
.\"O service flag is used,
.\"O and the remote end does not identify who is trying to access the service.
.I USERID
ログオプションと
.I IDONLY
サービスフラグが指定されていて、
かつ相手側ホストが誰がサービスにアクセスしようとしているかを
識別できなかった場合に生成される
.RE
.LP
.\"O In the following, the information enclosed in brackets appears 
.\"O if the appropriate log option is used.
適切なログオプションを使用している場合に、角括弧の内側に現れる
情報について以下に述べる。
.LP
.\"O A \fISTART\fP entry has the format:
.I START
エントリでは次の形式である。
.sp 1
.RS
START: \fIservice-id\fP [pid=%d] [from=%d.%d.%d.%d]
.RE
.LP
.\"O An \fIEXIT\fP entry has the format:
.I EXIT 
エントリでは次の形式である。
.sp 1
.RS
EXIT: \fIservice-id\fP [\fItype\fP=%d] [pid=%d] [duration=%d(sec)]
.RE
.sp 1
.\"O .I type
.\"O can be either
.\"O .SB status
.\"O or
.\"O .SB signal.
.I type
は
.SB status
と
.SB signal
のどちらかである。
.\"O The number is either the exit status or the signal that caused process
.\"O termination.
数値は、終了ステータスか、プロセスを終了させたシグナル番号のどちらかである。
.LP
.\"O A \fIFAIL\fP entry has the format:
.I FAIL
エントリは以下の形式である。
.sp 1
.RS
FAIL: \fIservice-id\fP \fIreason\fP [from=%d.%d.%d.%d]
.RE
.sp 1
.\"O Possible \fIreasons\fP are:
.I reasons
には以下のものがある。
.RS
.TP 15
.SB fork
.\"O a certain number of consecutive fork attempts failed (this number is
.\"O a configurable parameter)
ある連続した回数、フォークに失敗した(回数は設定可能なパラメータである)。
.TP
.SB time
.\"O the time check failed
時間チェックに失敗した
.TP
.SB address
.\"O the address check failed
アドレスチェックに失敗した
.TP
.SB service_limit
.\"O the allowed number of server instances for this service would be exceeded
そのサービスに対する同時サービス数(instances)の制限を越えた
.TP
.SB process_limit
.\"O a limit on the number of forked processes was specified and it would 
.\"O be exceeded
フォークしたプロセス数が制限を越えた
.RE
.LP
.\"O A \fIDATA\fP entry has the format:
.I DATA
エントリは以下の形式である。
.sp 1
.RS
DATA: \fIservice-id\fP \fIdata\fP
.RE
.sp 1
.\"O The \fIdata\fP logged depends on the service.
ログ出力される
.I data
はサービスに依存する。
.RS
.TP 12
.SB login
remote_user=%s local_user=%s tty=%s
.TP
.SB exec
remote_user=%s verify=\fIstatus\fP command=%s
.br
.\"O Possible
.\"O .I status
.\"O values:
.I status
には以下のものがある。
.RS
.TP 10
.I ok
.\"O the password was correct
パスワードは正しかった
.TP
.I failed
.\"O the password was incorrect
パスワードが正しくなかった
.TP
.I baduser
.\"O no such user
そのようなユーザは存在しない
.RE
.TP
.SB shell
remote_user=%s local_user=%s command=%s
.TP
.SB finger
.\"O \fIreceived string\fP or
.\"O .I EMPTY-LINE
.I 受け取った文字列
または
.I 空行
.RE
.LP
.\"O A \fIUSERID\fP entry has the format:
.I USERID
は以下の形式である。
.sp 1
.RS
USERID: \fIservice-id\fP \fItext\fP
.RE
.sp 1
.\"O The \fItext\fP is the response of the identification daemon at the remote end
.\"O excluding the port numbers (which are included in the response).
.I text
は相手側ホストの ident デーモンからの返事のうち、ポート番号を除いたもの
である(ポート番号は返事に含まれている)。
.LP
.\"O A \fINOID\fP entry has the format:
.I NOID
は以下の形式である。
.sp 1
.RS
NOID: \fIservice-id\fP \fIIP-address\fP \fIreason\fP 
.RE
.\" *********************** SEE ALSO ****************************
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .I "xinetd(1L),"
.\"O .LP
.\"O .I "xinetd.conf(5)"
.IR xinetd "(1),"
.IR xinetd.conf (5)
