.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de), Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 16:53:03 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 KUNIMOTO Yasuhiro, all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Jun 27, 1997 by KUNIMOTO Yasuhiro (hiro@kthree.co.jp)
.\"
.\" Modified  Jun 28, 1997 by Yoshiki Sugiura (yox@in.aix.or.jp)
.\" Modified  Jul  6, 1997 by Yoshiki Sugiura (yox@in.aix.or.jp)
.\" Modified  Dec 26, 1999 by Kentaro Shirakata (argrath@yo.rim.or.jp)
.\"
.\"WORD introduction 説明
.\"
.TH INTRO 1 "24 July 1993" "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
intro \- ユーザーコマンドの説明
.SH 説明
この章はユーザーコマンドを記述している。
.SH 著者
著者と著作権(copyright)に関しては各 man ページのヘッダーを見ること。
これらはページごとに異なっている。
