.\" This file Copyright 1992, 1997 Michael K. Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com>
.\" and 1996 Charles L. Blake <cblake@bbn.com>
.\" It may be distributed under the GNU Public License, version 2, or
.\" any higher version.  See section COPYING of the GNU Public license
.\" for conditions under which this file may be redistributed.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 SUZUKI Daisuke, Tanoshima Hidetoshi
.\"         and NAKANO Takeo, all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 1996
.\"         by SUZUKI Daisuke <dai@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp>
.\" Translation Updated Sun Dec 14 02:19:38 JST 1997
.\"         by Tanoshima Hidetoshi <tano@sainet.or.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Tue Nov 14 2000
.\"         by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seieki.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PS 1 "3 Sep 1997" "Cohesive Systems" "Linux User's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ps \- report process status
.SH 名前
ps \- プロセスの状態の報告
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
ps [\fBlujsvmaxScewhrnu\fR] [\fBt\fIxx\fR] \
[\fBO\fR[\fB+\fR|\fB-\fR]\fIk1\fR[[\fB+\fR|\fB-\fR]\fIk2\fR...]] \
[\fIpids\fR]

.\"O there are also three long options:
長いオプションも 3 つ:

.BR \-\-sort\fIX [ + | - ] \fIkey [,[ + | - ] \fIkey [, ... ]]

.B "\-\-help"

.B "\-\-version"

.\"O More long options are on the way...
その他の長いオプションは作成中…
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B "ps "
.\"O gives a snapshot of the current processes.  If you want a repetitive
.\"O update of this status, use
.\"O .BR top .
.\"O This man page documents the
.\"O .IR /proc -based
.\"O version of
.\"O .BR ps ,
.\"O or tries to.
.B ps
は現在のプロセスのスナップショットを与える。
この状態を繰り返し更新して見たい場合は
.BR top (1)
を用いること。
この man ページは、
.I /proc
ベースの
.B ps
を解説するものである (少なくともそのつもり)。
.PP
.\"O .SH "COMMAND-LINE OPTIONS"
.SH コマンドラインオプション
.\"O The command-line options for this version of
.\"O .B ps
.\"O are derived from the BSD version of
.\"O .BR ps ,
.\"O not the System V version..
この
.B ps
のコマンドラインオプションは BSD バージョンの
.B ps 
由来であり、System V バージョンのものとは異なる。
 
.\"O The command-line arguments should \fBnot\fP be preceeded by a `\-' character,
.\"O because in the future, a `\-' will be used to indicate Unix98-standard
.\"O command-line arguments, while no `\-' will indicate the current
.\"O ``extended BSD'' style of command line arguments.
コマンドラインの引数は`\-' で始める\fBべきではない\fP。
将来の予定では、 `\-' のあるコマンドライン引数を Unix98 標準の
ものとみなし、 `\-' のないコマンドライン引数を
現在の「拡張BSD」スタイルとみなすからである。

.\"O For now, ps will give you a warning if you use a `\-' for a short option,
.\"O but it will still work.  If you have shell scripts which use BSD-style
.\"O arguments to ps, take heed of the warning and fix them, or else your
.\"O scripts will fail to function correctly at some point in the future.
.\"O If you want to turn off the warnings, set the
.\"O .B I_WANT_A_BROKEN_PS
.\"O environment variable. 
いまのところ、 ps コマンドは `\-' を短いオプションに使うと警告を出すが、
まだ有効である。
BSD スタイルの引数を使ったシェルスクリプトを使っているなら、
警告に注意して直すべきである、さもないと、
そのスクリプトは将来うまく動かなくなるかもしれない。
警告を出したくない場合は、環境変数
.B I_WANT_A_BROKEN_PS
を設定すればよい。

.\"O There are also some ``long options'' in GNU style; see below for those.
他にもGNU形式の「長いオプション名」で指定するオプションもある。
詳細については後述。
.PP
.PD 0
.TP 0.5i
.B "l "
.\"O long format
長い出力形式
.TP 0.5i
.B "u "
.\"O user format: gives user name and start time
ユーザ形式: ユーザ名と開始時刻を表示
.TP 0.5i
.B "j "
.\"O jobs format: pgid sid
ジョブ形式: pgid と sid
.TP 0.5i
.B "s"
.\"O signal format
シグナル形式
.TP 0.5i
.B "v "
.\"O vm format
vm 形式
.TP 0.5i
.B "m "
.\"O displays memory info (combine with
.\"O .B p
.\"O flag to get number of pages).
メモリ状態の表示 (フラグ
.B p
を一緒に使うと、ページ数で表示される)。
.TP 0.5i
.B "f "
.\"O "forest" family tree format for command line
コマンドラインをツリー状に表示して、親子関係がわかるようにする。
.TP 0.5i
.B "a "
.\"O show processes of other users too
自分以外のユーザのプロセスについても表示する。
.TP 0.5i
.B "x "
.\"O show processes without controlling terminal
制御端末のないプロセスの情報も表示する。
.TP 0.5i
.B "S "
.\"O add child cpu time and page faults
子プロセスの cpu 時間とページフォールトを合計して表示する。
.TP 0.5i
.B "c "
.\"O command name from task_struct
task_struct のコマンド名を表示する。
.TP 0.5i
.B "e "
.\"O show environment after command line and ` + '
コマンドラインの後に、 + に続けて環境を表示する。
.TP 0.5i
.B "w "
.\"O wide output: don't truncate command lines to fit on one line.
.\"O To be exact, every w that is specified will add another possible
.\"O line to the output. If the space isn't needed it isn't used. You
.\"O may up to 100
.\"O .BR w 's.
出力の一行あたりの幅を広げる:
実行命令の端を切って一行に収める作業を行わない。
正確には、w が一つ加わると出力に一行余計に使うことが出来るようになる。
必要なければ余計な行は使わない。
.BR w
は、最大100個まで使用可能。
.TP 0.5i
.B "h "
.\"O no header
ヘッダをつけない。
.TP 0.5i
.B "r "
.\"O running procs only
実行中のプロセスだけ表示する。
.TP 0.5i
.B "n "
.\"O numeric output for
.\"O .BR USER " and " WCHAN .
.BR USER " と " WCHAN
を数値で表示する。
.PD 1
.TP 0.5i
.BI t xx
.\"O only procs with controlling tty \fIxx\fR; for \fIxx\fR you may use either the
.\"O name of a device file under "/dev" or that name with either
.\"O .IR tty " or " cu
.\"O sliced off.  This is the reverse heuristic that ps uses to print out the
.\"O abbreviated tty name in the \fBTT\fR field, e.g.
.\"O .BR "ps t1" .
制御端末が tty \fIxx\fR であるプロセスのみ表示する。
\fIxx\fR には、"/dev" の下にあるデバイスファイル名、あるいは
.IR tty " または " cu
を省略したものが使用できる。
これは ps が \fBTTY\fR フィールドでの
tty 名表示に用いる際のヒューリスティックな短縮名の選び方の逆である。
例えば
.BR "ps t1" .

.TP 0.5i
.BR O [ + | - ] \fIk1 [,[ + | - ] \fIk2 [, ... ]]
.\"O Order the process listing according to the multi-level sort specified by
.\"O the sequence of \fIshort\fR keys from \fBSORT KEYS\fR, \fIk1\fR, \fIk2\fR, ...
.\"O Default order specifications exist for each of the various formats of \fBps\fR.
.\"O These are over-ridden by a user specified ordering.  The `+' is quite optional,
.\"O merely re-iterating the default direction on a key.  `-' reverses direction only
.\"O on the key it precedes.  As with \fBt\fR and \fIpids\fR, the O option must be
.\"O the last option in a single command argument, but specifications in successive
.\"O arguments are catenated.
\fBSORT KEYS\fR, \fIk1\fR, \fIk2\fR, ... に含まれる
\fIshort\fR 形式のキーワードによって、
キーワードの指定順にマルチレベルのソートを行ってプロセス状態を表示する。
何も指定のない場合でも、 \fBps\fR のオプションに応じてソートは行われる。
ただしユーザーが指定したソートのキーワードが優先される。 `+'
はキーワードの降順にソートする指定なので、付けなくてもよい。
`-' を指定すると、その直後のキーワードの逆順でソートする。
\fBt\fR や \fIpids\fR と同様に、オプション O はコマンドライン中の
最後のオプションでなければならないが、
そのあとに引数をとることはできる。
.TP 0.5i
.I pids
.\"O List only the specified processes; they are comma-delimited.  The 
.\"O list must be given immediately after the last option in a single command-line
.\"O argument, with no intervening space, e.g.
.\"O .BR "ps j1,4,5" .
.\"O Lists specified in subsequent arguments are catenated, e.g.
.\"O .B ps l 1,2 3,4 5 6
.\"O will list all of the processes 1-6 in long format.  If pids are given, they
.\"O are listed no matter what.  If a tty is given matching processes are listed
.\"O no matter what.  These two features override the 'a' and 'x' flags.
指定されたプロセスのみ表示する。複数指定する場合はコンマで区切る。
プロセスのリストは、コマンド引数の最後のオプションの直後に置かなければならない。
間にスペースを入れてはいけない。例えば
.B "ps j1,4,5"
というように記述する。
連続して指定された引数は結合される。例えば
.B ps l 1,2 3,4 5 6
は 1 から 6 までのプロセスすべての内容を長い形式で表示する。
pid が指定されていると、その pid のプロセスが必ず表示される。
tty が指定されていると、それを制御端末とするプロセスを必ず表示する。
これらの二つのルールは、'a' オプション・'x' オプションより優先される。
.\"O .SH "LONG COMMAND\-LINE OPTIONS"
.SH "長いオプション"
.\"O These options are preceeded by a double\-hyphen.
以下のオプションは、ハイフン(\-)を二個続けたあとに記述する。
.TP 0.5i
.BR \-\-sort\fIX [ + | - ] \fIkey [,[ + | - ] \fIkey [, ... ]]
.\"O Choose a \fImulti-letter key\fR from the \fBSORT KEYS\fR section. \fIX\fR may be
.\"O any convenient separator character.  To be GNU-ish use `='.  The `+' is really
.\"O optional since default direction is increasing numerical or lexicographic order.
.\"O E.g.:
.\"O .B ps jax --sort=uid,-ppid,+pid
表示するプロセスをソートするために、
\fBSORT KEYS\fR から、\fI複数文字のキーワード\fR を選択する。
\fIX\fR には区切りに使う文字を入れる (なんでもよい)。
GNU らしくしたければ `=' を使うとよい。
デフォルトのソートの方向は数値順・辞書順ともに昇順なので、`+' は
実際には省略してよい。例えば:
.B ps jax --sort=uid,-ppid,+pid
.TP 0.5i
.B "\-\-help"
.\"O Get a help message that summarizes the usage and gives a list of
.\"O supported sort keys.  This list may be more up to date than this man
.\"O page.
使用法と順序付けのキーワードリストをまとめた
ヘルプメッセージを表示する。
このリストは、このマニュアルよりも新しいかもしれない。
.TP 0.5i
.B "\-\-version"
.\"O Display version and source of this program.
このプログラムのバージョンと取得元を表示する。
.\"O .SH "SORT KEYS"
.SH ソートキー
.\"O Note that the values used in sorting are the internal values \fBps\fR uses and
.\"O \fInot\fR the `cooked' values used in some of the output format fields.  If
.\"O someone wants to volunteer to write special comparison functions for the cooked
.\"O values, ... ;-)
ソートに使われる変数は、\fBps\fR の用いる内部変数であり、
出力形式のフィールドに用いられる「加工された」値ではない。
「加工された」値用の特別な比較関数を書いてくれる
ボランティアがいるといいのですが… ;-)

.\"O SHORT   LONG            DESCRIPTION
SHORT   LONG            説明
.PD 0
.TP 0.5i
.\"O c       cmd             simple name of executable
c       cmd             実行可能ファイル名の単純形
.TP 0.5i
.\"O C       cmdline         full command line
C       cmdline         コマンドライン全体
.TP 0.5i
.\"O f       flags           flags as in long format F field
f       flags           長い表示の F フィールドのフラグ
.TP 0.5i
.\"O g       pgrp            process group ID
g       pgrp            プロセスグループID
.TP 0.5i
.\"O G       tpgid           controlling tty process group ID
G       tpgid           制御端末のプロセスグループ ID
.TP 0.5i
.\"O j       cutime          cumulative user time
j       cutime          累積ユーザ時間
.TP 0.5i
.\"O J       cstime          cumulative system time
J       cstime          累積システム時間
.TP 0.5i
.\"O k       utime           user time
k       utime           ユーザ時間
.TP 0.5i
.\"O K       stime           system time
K       stime           システム時間
.TP 0.5i
.\"O m       min_flt         number of minor page faults
m       min_flt         マイナーページフォールトの回数
.TP 0.5i
.\"O M       maj_flt         number of major page faults
M       maj_flt         メジャーページフォールトの回数
.TP 0.5i
.\"O n       cmin_flt        cumulative minor page faults
n       cmin_flt        累積マイナーページフォールトの回数
.TP 0.5i
N       cmaj_flt        累積メジャーページフォールトの回数
.\"O N       cmaj_flt        cumulative major page faults
.TP 0.5i
o       session         セッション ID
.\"O o       session         session ID
.TP 0.5i
p       pid             プロセス ID
.\"O p       pid             process ID
.TP 0.5i
.\"O P       ppid            parent process ID
P       ppid            親プロセス ID
.TP 0.5i
.\"O r       rss             resident set size
r       rss             常駐セットサイズ
.TP 0.5i
.\"O R       resident        resident pages
R       resident        常駐ページ数
.TP 0.5i
.\"O s       size            memory size in kilobytes
s       size            メモリサイズ(kByte 単位)
.TP 0.5i
.\"O S       share           amount of shared pages
S       share           共有ベージの総量
.TP 0.5i
.\"O t       tty             the minor device number of tty
t       tty             tty のマイナーデバイス番号
.TP 0.5i
.\"O T       start_time      time process was started
T       start_time      プロセス開始時刻
.TP 0.5i
.\"O U       uid             user ID number
U       uid             ユーザ ID ナンバー
.TP 0.5i
.\"O u       user            user name
u       user            ユーザ名
.TP 0.5i
.\"O v       vsize           total VM size in bytes
v       vsize           仮想記憶サイズ(Byte 単位)
.TP 0.5i
.\"O y       priority        kernel scheduling priority
y       priority        カーネルスケジューリングの優先順位
.PD 1
.\"O .SH "FIELD DESCRIPTIONS"
.SH フィールドの説明
.TP 0.5i
.B "PRI "
.\"O This is the counter field in the task struct.  It is the time in
.\"O .B HZ
.\"O of the process's possible timeslice.
task 構造体のカウンターフィールド。
プロセスの可能なタイムスライスの時間
.RB ( HZ
単位)。
.TP 0.5i
.B "NI "
.\"O Standard unix nice value; a positive value means less cpu time.
標準 unix の nice 値; 正の値だと cpu 時間の割り当てが少なくなる。
.TP 0.5i
.B "SIZE "
.\"O Virtual image size; size of text+data+stack.
仮想イメージの大きさ; text+data+stack の大きさ。
.TP 0.5i
.B "RSS "
.\"O Resident set size; kilobytes of program in memory.
常駐セットの大きさ; メモリ中のプログラムの大きさ (kByte 単位)。
.TP 0.5i
.B "WCHAN "
.\"O Name of the kernel function where the process is sleeping, with the
.\"O .RB ` sys_ '
.\"O stripped from the function name.  If
.\"O .I /etc/psdatabase
.\"O does not exist, it is just a hex number instead.
プロセスが休眠状態の時のカーネル関数名
.RB (` sys_ '
は省略)。
.I /etc/psdatabase
が無い場合には、代わりに 16 進数を表示する。
.TP 0.5i
.B "STAT "
.\"O Information about the status of the process.  The first field is
.\"O .B R
.\"O for runnable,
.\"O .B S
.\"O for sleeping,
.\"O .B D
.\"O for uninterruptible sleep,
.\"O .B T
.\"O for stopped or traced, or
.\"O .B Z
.\"O for a zombie process.  The second field contains
.\"O .B W
.\"O if the process has no resident pages.  The third field is
.\"O .B N
.\"O if the process has a positive nice value
.\"O .RB ( NI
.\"O field).
プロセス状態に関する情報。最初のフィールドは、
.B R
(実行中: running)・
.B S
(休眠中: sleeping)・
.B D
(割り込み不可能な休眠中)・
.B T
(停止中かトレース中)・
.B Z
(ゾンビプロセス) である。
第二フィールドには、プロセスが常駐ページを持たなければ
.B W
が入る。第三フィールドには、
プロセスが正のナイス値
.RB ( NI
field) を持てば
.B N
が入る。
.TP 0.5i
.B "TT "
.\"O Controlling tty.
制御端末。
.TP 0.5i
.B "PAGEIN "
.\"O Number of major page faults (page faults that cause pages to be read
.\"O from disk, including pages read from the buffer cache).
メジャーページフォールトの数 (ページ内容がディスク/バッファー
キャッシュから読まれるページフォルトのこと)。
.TP 0.5i
.B "TRS "
.\"O Text resident size.
text 常駐領域の大きさ。
.TP 0.5i
.B "SWAP "
.\"O Kilobytes (or pages if
.\"O .B p
.\"O is used) on swap device.
スワップデバイス上での大きさ (kByte 単位。
.B \-p
が指定された場合はページ単位)。
.TP 0.5i
.B "SHARE "
.\"O Shared memory.
共有メモリ。
.\"O .SH UPDATING
.SH 更新
.\"O This
.\"O .BR proc -based
.\"O .B ps
.\"O works by reading the files in the
.\"O .B proc
.\"O filesystem, mounted on
.\"O .BR /proc .
.\"O This
.\"O .B ps
.\"O does not need to be suid
.\"O .B kmem
.\"O or have any privileges to run.
.\"O .I "Do not give this ps any special permissions."
この
.B proc
ベースの
.B ps
は、
.B /proc
にマウントされた
.B proc
ファイルシステム中のファイル内容を読んで動作する。
この
.B ps
は、
.B kmem
に suid する必要もなく、実行の際に特別な権限も必要ない。
.I "この ps には、いかなる特別な許可も与えてはいけない。"
.PP
.\"O You will need to put in place the appropriate System.map file
.\"O when you install a new kernel in order
.\"O to get meaningful information from the
.\"O .B WCHAN
.\"O field.  This should be done every time you compile a new kernel.  You should
.\"O also run 'ps' as root once and then any time the tty devices in the "/dev"
.\"O directory change.
.B WCHAN
フィールドから意味のある情報を得るためには、
.I /sbin/psupdate
を走らせて
.I /etc/psupdate
ファイルを更新する必要がある。
これは新しいカーネルをコンパイルする度に行なう必要がある。
"/dev" ディレクトリの tty デバイスを変更した場合にも
少なくとも一回は root で ps を実行する必要がある。

.\"O As of procps-1.00, ps/top read System.map directly if it is available.  The
.\"O search path for kernel address-to-symbol resolution is:
procps-1.00 までの ps/top は、
System.map が存在すればそこから直接読み込む。
カーネルのアドレスとシンボルの対応表のパスの検索の順序は以下の通り。
.nf
            $PS_SYSTEM_MAP
            /boot/System.map-`uname -r`
            /boot/System.map
            /lib/modules/`uname -r`/System.map
            /etc/psdatabase
            /boot/psdatabase-`uname -r`
            /boot/psdatabase,
            /lib/modules/`uname -r`/psdatabase
.fi 
.PP
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O The member
.\"O .B used_math
.\"O of
.\"O .B task_struct
.\"O is not shown, since
.\"O .B crt0.s
.\"O checks to see if math is present.  This causes the math flag to be set
.\"O for all processes, and so it is worthless.
.B task_struct
のメンバー
.B used_math
は表示されない。なぜなら、
.B crt0.s
が math が存在するかどうかをチェックするからである。
これによってフラグ math はすべてのプロセスに設定されるので、
used_math を表示する意味はない。
.PP
.\"O Programs swapped out to disk will be shown without command line
.\"O arguments, and unless the
.\"O .B c
.\"O option is given, in parentheses.
ディスクにスワップアウトされたプログラムはコマンドライン引数なしで表示され、
.B c
オプションが指定されてなければ、括弧でくくられた形で表示される。
.PP
.\"O .B %CPU
.\"O shows the cputime/realtime percentage.  It will not add up to 100%
.\"O unless you are lucky.  It is time used divided by the time the process
.\"O has been running.
.B %CPU
は cputime/realtime のパーセンテージである。
これを全部足しても 100% になることは (よほど幸運でなければ) ない。
これはプロセスが起動されてからの時間で、利用した時間を割ったものである。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B SIZE
.\"O and
.\"O .B RSS
.\"O fields don't count the page tables and the
.\"O .B task_struct
.\"O of a proc; this is at least 12k of memory that is always resident.
.\"O .B SIZE
.\"O is the virtual size of the proc (code+data+stack).
.B SIZE
と
.B RSS
という二つのフィールドは、プロセスのページテーブルと
.B task_struct
をカウントしない。これらは 12k のメモリに常駐している。
.B SIZE
はプロセスの仮想サイズ (code+data+stack) である。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B ps
.\"O was originally written by Branko Lankester <lankeste@fwi.uva.nl>. Michael K.
.\"O Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com> re-wrote it significantly to use the proc
.\"O filesystem, changing a few things in the process.  Michael Shields
.\"O <mjshield@nyx.cs.du.edu> added the pid-list feature.  Charles
.\"O Blake <cblake@bbn.com> added multi-level sorting, the dirent-style library, the
.\"O device name-to-number mmaped database, the approximate binary search directly
.\"O on System.map, and many code and documentation cleanups.  David Mossberger-Tang
.\"O wrote the generic BFD support for psupdate.  Michael K. Johnson
.\"O <johnsonm@redhat.com> is the current maintainer.
Branko Lankester <lankeste@fwi.uva.nl> が最初に
.B ps
を書いた。
Michael K. Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com> は
proc ファイルシステムに対応させるための大幅な書き換えを行った。
プロセス内のいくつかの項目を変更した。
Charles Blake <cblake@bbn.com> は、複数レベルのソート・
dirent 形式のライブラリ・デバイス名−番号間の mmap データベース・
直接 System.map を二分木的に探索する手法、を追加し、
コードとドキュメントの大幅な整理を行った。
David Mosberger-Tang は psupdate のジェネリックな BFD サポートを書いた。
Michael K. Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com> が現在のメンテナである。

.\"O Please send bug reports to <procps-bugs@redhat.com>
バグレポートは <procps-bugs@redhat.com> まで送って欲しい。

