.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 keisuke ishikawa
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 25 23:33:13 JST 1998
.\"         by ishikawa,keisuke <kn954168@ppp.copernicus.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jan  8 01:48:20 JST 2000
.\"         by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jan 14 21:16:31 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ARP 8 "5 Jan 1999" "net-tools" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O arp \- manipulate the system ARP cache
.SH 名前
arp \- システムの ARP キャッシュを操作する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B arp 
.RB [ \-vn ] 
.RB [ "\-H type" ] 
.RB [ "-i if" ] 
.B -a 
.RB [ hostname ]
.PP
.B arp 
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ "\-i if" ] 
.B "\-d hostname"
.RB [ pub ]
.PP
.B arp 
.RB [ \-v ] 
.RB [ "\-H type" ] 
.RB [ "\-i if" ] 
.B -s hostname hw_addr
.RB [ temp ] 
.PP
.B arp 
.RB [ \-v ] 
.RB [ "\-H type" ] 
.RB [ "\-i if" ] 
.B -s hostname hw_addr
.RB [ "netmask nm" ] 
.B pub
.PP
.B arp 
.RB [ \-v ] 
.RB [ "\-H type" ] 
.RB [ "\-i if" ] 
.B -Ds hostname ifa
.RB [ "netmask nm" ] 
.B pub
.PP
.B arp 
.RB [ \-vnD ]
.RB [ "\-H type" ] 
.RB [ "-i if" ]
.B -f [filename]

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O .B Arp
.\"O manipulates the kernel's ARP cache in various ways.  The primary options
.\"O are clearing an address mapping entry and manually setting up one.  For
.\"O debugging purposes, the
.\"O .B arp
.\"O program also allows a complete dump of the ARP cache.
.SH 説明
.B arp
は、カーネルの ARP キャッシュをさまざまな方法で操作する。
アドレス・マッピングのエントリーをクリアしたり、
手作業でエントリーを設定したりするのが、主要なオプションである。
デバッグに
.B arp
を利用して、ARP キャッシュを完全にダンプすることも可能である。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-verbose"
.\"O Tell the user what is going on by being verbose.
何が起こっているかを詳しくユーザーに知らせる。
.TP
.\"O .B "\-n, \-\-numeric"
.B "\-n, \-\-numeric"
.\"O shows numerical addresses instead of trying to determine symbolic host, port
.\"O or user names.
このオプションを指定すると、ホスト名、ポート名、ユーザー名を解決せずに
番号のまま表示する。
.TP
.B "\-H type, \-\-hw-type type"
.\"O When setting or reading the ARP cache, this optional parameter tells
.\"O .B arp
.\"O which class of entries it should check for.  The default value of
.\"O this parameter is
.\"O .B ether
.\"O (i.e. hardware code 0x01 for IEEE 802.3 10Mbps Ethernet).
.\"O Other values might include network technologies such as
.\"O .RB "ARCnet (" arcnet ")"
.\"O ,
.\"O .RB "PROnet (" pronet ")"
.\"O ,
.\"O .RB "AX.25 (" ax25 ")"
.\"O and
.\"O .RB "NET/ROM (" netrom ")."
ARP キャッシュを設定したり読み出したりするとき、
エントリーのどのクラスを対象にして欲しいかを
.B arp
に指定する。
このパラメータは、デフォルトでは
.B ether
(つまり、IEEE 802.3 10Mbps Ethernet に対応するハードウェア・コード 
0x01) に設定されている。
ほかに、たとえば
.RB "ARCnet (" arcnet "),"
.RB "PROnet (" pronet "),"
.RB "AX.25 (" ax25 "),"
.RB "NET/ROM (" netrom ")"
などのネットワーク技術が指定できる。
.TP
.B "\-a [hostname], \-\-display [hostname]"
.\"O Shows the entries of the specified hosts.  If the
.\"O .B hostname
.\"O parameter is not used,
.\"O .B all
.\"O entries will be displayed.
指定したホストのエントリーを表示する。
もし
.B hostname
が指定されていない場合は
.B すべての
エントリーが表示される。
.TP
.B "\-d hostname, \-\-delete hostname"
.\"O Remove any entry for the specified host.  This can be used if the
.\"O indicated host is brought down, for example.
指定されたホストのエントリーすべてを削除する。
例えば、これは指定されたホストがダウンしたときなどに使うことができる。
.TP
.B "\-D, \-\-use-device"
.\"O Use the interface
.\"O .BR ifa "'s"
.\"O hardware address.
インターフェース
.BR ifa
のハードウェアアドレスを使う。
.TP
.B "\-i If, \-\-device If"
.\"O Select an interface. When dumping the ARP cache only entries matching
.\"O the specified interface will be printed. When setting a permanent or
.\"O .B temp
.\"O ARP entry this interface will be associated with the entry; if this
.\"O option is not used, the kernel will guess based on the routing
.\"O table. For
.\"O .B pub
.\"O entries the specified interface is the interface on which ARP requests will
.\"O be answered. 
インターフェースを選択する。
ARP キャッシュをダンプする際、
指定されたインターフェースに合致するエントリーのみが出力される。
permanent ARP エントリー、または
.B temp
ARP エントリーを設定する場合には、このインターフェースは
そのエントリーと関連付けられる。
このオプションを使わないと、
カーネルは経路テーブルからデバイスを推量する。
.B pub
エントリーの場合は、ここに指定するインターフェースは
ARP 要求に答えてくれるインターフェースである。
.br
.\"O .B NOTE:
.\"O This has to be different from the interface to which the IP
.\"O datagrams will be routed.
.B 注:
これは IP データグラムの経路制御を行なうインターフェースとは、
異なっていなければならない。
.TP
.\"O .B "\-s hostname hw_addr, \-\-set hostname"
.B "\-s hostname hw_addr, \-\-set hostname hw_addr"
.\"O Manually create an ARP address mapping entry for host
.\"O .B hostname
.\"O with hardware address set to
.\"O .B hw_addr
.\"O .  The format of the hardware address is dependent on the hardware
.\"O class, but for most classes one can assume that the usual presentation
.\"O can be used.  For the Ethernet class, this is 6 bytes in hexadecimal,
.\"O separated by colons. When adding proxy arp entries (that is those with
.\"O the 
.\"O .BR pub lish 
.\"O flag set a 
.\"O .B netmask 
.\"O may be specified to proxy arp for entire subnets. This is not good
.\"O practice, but is supported by older kernels because it can be
.\"O useful. If the
.\"O .B temp
.\"O flag is not supplied entries will be permanent stored into the ARP
.\"O cache.
ARP アドレスのマッピング・エントリーを手作業で設定する。
ホスト
.B hostname
に対するハードウェア・アドレスは
.B hw_addr
に設定される。ハードウェア・アドレスの書式は、
ハードウェア・クラスによって異なるが、
ほとんどのクラスでは普通の書き方が使える。
例えば、ethernet のクラスでは 16 進数 6 バイトであり、
コロンで分割されている。
代理 ARP のエントリーを追加するとき (つまり、
.BR pub
フラグを指定したとき) は、
.BR netmask
を指定すると、サブネット全体の代理 ARP が設定される。
これはよい風習ではないが、
有効な時もあったので古いカーネルではサポートしていた。
.B temp
フラグを指定しなければ、設定したエントリーは永続的となり、
ARP キャッシュにそのまま残される。
.br
.\"O .B NOTE:
.\"O As of kernel 2.2.0 it is no longer possible to set an ARP entry for an 
.\"O entire subnet. Linux instead does automagic proxy arp when a route
.\"O exists and it is forwarding. See 
.\"O .BR arp (7)
.\"O for details.
.B 注:
カーネル 2.2.0 から、サブネット全体に ARP エントリーをセットすることは
出来なくなっている。
その代わり、Linux では、経路が存在しフォワードされていれば、
自動的に代理 arp される。
詳細は
.BR arp (7)
を参照すること。
.TP
.B "\-f filename, \-\-file filename"
.\"O Similar to the
.\"O .B \-s
.\"O option, only this time the address info is taken from file
.\"O .B filename
.\"O .  This can be used if ARP entries for a lot of hosts have to be
.\"O set up.  The name of the data file is very often
.\"O .IR /etc/ethers , 
.\"O but this is not official. If no filename is specified /etc/ethers
.\"O is used as default.
.B \-s
オプションと似ているが、このオプションの場合、アドレスの情報がファイル
.B filename
から与えられる。
これは、多数のホストに対して
ARP エントリーを設定しなければならない場合に使われる。
データファイルの名前には
.I /etc/ethers
がよく使われるが、これは公式のものではない。
filename が指定されない場合、
.I /etc/ethers
がデフォルトとして使われる。
.sp 1
.\"O The format of the file is simple; it
.\"O only contains ASCII text lines with a hostname, and a hardware
.\"O address separated by whitespace. Additionally the 
.\"O .BR "pub" , " temp" " and" " netmask"
.\"O flags can be used.
ファイルの書式は簡単である。
ホスト名とハードウェア・アドレスはASCII テキストのみであり、
ホスト名とハードウェア・アドレスの間は空白で区切られる。
加えて、
.BR "pub" , " temp" , " netmask"
フラグを使うことができる。
.LP
.\"O In all places where a
.\"O .B hostname
.\"O is expected, one can also enter an
.\"O .B "IP address"
.\"O in dotted-decimal notation.
.B hostname
はいずれも、ピリオドで区切られた 10 進表記の
.B "IP address"
でもよい。
.P
.\"O As a special case for compatibility the order of the hostname and 
.\"O the hardware address can be exchanged.
互換性のための特別なケースとして、
ホスト名とハードウェア・アドレスの順番を入れ換えることができる。
.LP 
.\"O Each complete entry in the ARP cache will be marked with the
.\"O .B C
.\"O flag. Permanent entries are marked with
.\"O .B M
.\"O and published entries have the
.\"O .B P
.\"O flag.
ARP キャッシュの完全なエントリーには、
.B C
フラグがつけられる。また、永続的 (permanent) なエントリーには
.B M
フラグが、公開 (pub) エントリーには
.B P
フラグがつけられる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /proc/net/arp
.br
.I /etc/networks
.br
.I /etc/hosts
.br
.I /etc/ethers
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
rarp(8), route(8), ifconfig(8), netstat(8)
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O Fred N. van Kempen, <waltje@uwalt.nl.mugnet.org> with a lot of improvements
.\"O from net-tools Maintainer Bernd Eckenfels <net-tools@lina.inka.de>.
Fred N. van Kempen, <waltje@uwalt.nl.mugnet.org>
また、net-tools の管理者である
Bernd Eckenfels <net-tools@lina.inka.de> が多数の改良を行なった。
