.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 Yoshiki Sugiura
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated  at Sat Jan 31 12:36:58 JST 1998
.\"         by Yoshiki Sugiura <yoy@mb.kcome.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Dec 25 23:56:10 JST 1999
.\"         by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Jan 29 19:24:09 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" 
.\"WORD:	Maximum Transfer Unit	最大転送単位
.\"WORD:	Point-To-Point link	ポイント間接続
.TH IFCONFIG 8 "14 August 2000" "net-tools" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O ifconfig \- configure a network interface
ifconfig \- ネットワーク・インタフェースの設定
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "ifconfig [interface]"
.br
.B "ifconfig interface [aftype] options | address ..."
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Ifconfig
.\"O is used to configure the kernel-resident network interfaces.  It is
.\"O used at boot time to set up interfaces as necessary.  After that, it
.\"O is usually only needed when debugging or when system tuning is needed.
.B ifconfig
はカーネルによって認識されているネットワーク・インタフェースの設定に使用する。
特にブート時に、必要に応じてインタフェースを設定するために使用される。
ブート後には、デバッグやシステムチューニングなどの特殊な目的がなければ、
通常使うことはない。
.LP
.\"O If no arguments are given,
.\"O .B ifconfig
.\"O displays the status of the currently active interfaces.  If
.\"O a single
.\"O .B interface
.\"O argument is given, it displays the status of the given interface
.\"O only; if a single
.\"O .B -a
.\"O argument is given, it displays the status of all interfaces, even
.\"O those that are down.  Otherwise, it configures an interface.
引数が与えられないと、
.B ifconfig
は現在動作しているインタフェースの状態を表示する。
もし一つの\fBインタフェース\fRが引数として与えられると、
そのインタフェースの状態だけを表示する。
また
.B -a
が引数として与えられると、停止しているものも含めて、
すべてのインタフェースの状態を表示する。
以上のいずれでもない場合、ifconfig はインタフェースを設定する。

.\"O .SH Address Families
.SH アドレス・ファミリー
.\"O If the first argument after the interface name is recognized as
.\"O the name of a supported address family, that address family is
.\"O used for decoding and displaying all protocol addresses.  Currently
.\"O supported address families include
.\"O .B inet
.\"O (TCP/IP, default), 
.\"O .B inet6
.\"O (IPv6),
.\"O .B ax25
.\"O (AMPR Packet Radio),
.\"O .B ddp
.\"O (Appletalk Phase 2),
.\"O .B ipx
.\"O (Novell IPX) and
.\"O .B netrom
.\"O (AMPR Packet radio).
インタフェース名の直後に置かれた引数が、
サポートされているアドレス・ファミリーの名前として認識されると、
すべてのプロトコル・アドレスの解釈と表示は、
そのアドレス・ファミリーに従う。
現在サポートされているアドレス・ファミリーは次の通り:
.B inet
(TCP/IP, デフォルト),
.B inet6
(IPv6),
.B ax25
(AMPR Pakcet Radio),
.B ddp
(Appletalk フェーズ 2),
.B ipx
(Novell IPX),
.B netrom
(AMPR Packet radio).
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B interface
.\"O The name of the interface.  This is usually a driver name followed by
.\"O a unit number, for example
.\"O .B eth0
.\"O for the first Ethernet interface.
インタフェースの名前である。
これは通常、ドライバーの名前に装置の番号を付けたものである。
例えば、
.B eth0
は最初のイーサネット・インタフェースである。
.TP
.B up
.\"O This flag causes the interface to be activated.  It is implicitly
.\"O specified if an address is assigned to the interface.
このフラグは、インタフェースを活動状態にする。
インタフェースに新しいアドレスを割り当てた場合は、
暗黙のうちにこの up が指定される。
.TP
.B down
.\"O This flag causes the driver for this interface to be shut down.
このフラグは、このインタフェースのドライバを停止する。
.TP
.B "[\-]arp"
.\"O Enable or disable the use of the ARP protocol on this interface.
ARP プロトコルの使用を有効/無効にする。
.TP
.B "[\-]promisc"
.\"O Enable or disable the
.\"O .B promiscuous
.\"O mode of the interface.  If selected, all packets on the network will
.\"O be received by the interface.
.B 無差別 (promiscuous)
モードを有効/無効にする。
もし有効にすると、ネットワーク上のすべてのパケットは
このインタフェースにより受信される。
.TP
.B "[\-]allmulti"
.\"O Enable or disable 
.\"O .B all-multicast
.\"O mode.  If selected, all multicast packets on the network will be
.\"O received by the interface.
.B 全マルチキャスト (all-multicast)
モードを有効/無効にする。
もし有効にすると、ネットワーク上のすべてのマルチキャスト・パケットは
このインタフェースにより受信される。
.TP
.B "metric N"
.\"O This parameter sets the interface metric.
この引数はインタフェースメトリックを設定する。
.TP
.B "mtu N"
.\"O This parameter sets the Maximum Transfer Unit (MTU) of an interface.
この引数はインタフェースの最大転送単位 (MTU) を設定する。
.TP
.B "dstaddr addr"
.\"O Set the remote IP address for a point-to-point link (such as
.\"O PPP).  This keyword is now obsolete; use the
.\"O .B pointopoint
.\"O keyword instead.
(PPPのような) ポイント間接続においてリモートの IP アドレスを設定する。
この引数はすでに古い仕様となったので、代りに
.B pointopoint
キーワードを使用すること。
.TP
.B "netmask addr"
.\"O Set the IP network mask for this interface.  This value defaults to the
.\"O usual class A, B or C network mask (as derived from the interface IP
.\"O address), but it can be set to any value.
このインタフェースの IP ネットワークマスクを設定する。この値は通常、
(IP アドレスに対応する) クラス A,B,C の ネットマスクがデフォルトで設定
されるが、値を指定することも可能である。
.TP
.B "add addr/prefixlen"
.\"O Add an IPv6 address to an interface. 
IPv6 アドレスをインタフェースに追加する。
.TP
.B "del addr/prefixlen"
.\"O Remove an IPv6 address from an interface.
IPv6 アドレスをインタフェースから削除する。
.TP
.B "tunnel aa.bb.cc.dd"
.\"O Create a new SIT (IPv6-in-IPv4) device, tunnelling to the given destination.
新規の SIT (IPv6-in-IPv4) デバイスを作成し、
与えられた対象アドレスにトンネルする。
.TP
.B "irq addr"
.\"O Set the interrupt line used by this device.  Not all devices can
.\"O dynamically change their IRQ setting.
このデバイスにより使用される割り込みを設定する。
ただし、すべてのデバイスで動的な IRQ 設定の変更が可能なわけではない。
.TP
.B "io_addr addr"
.\"O Set the start address in I/O space for this device. 
このデバイスの I/O 開始アドレスを設定する。
.TP
.B "mem_start addr"
.\"O Set the start address for shared memory used by this device.  Only a
.\"O few devices need this.
このデバイスにより使用される共有メモリーの開始アドレスを設定する。
これは、いくつかのデバイスでのみ必要とされる。
.TP
.B "media type"
.\"O Set the physical port or medium type to be used by the device.  Not
.\"O all devices can change this setting, and those that can vary in what
.\"O values they support.  Typical values for
.\"O .B type
.\"O are 
.\"O .B 10base2
.\"O (thin Ethernet),
.\"O .B 10baseT
.\"O (twisted-pair 10Mbps Ethernet),
.\"O .B AUI 
.\"O (external transceiver) and so on.  The special medium type of
.\"O .B auto
.\"O can be used to tell the driver to auto-sense the media.  Again, not
.\"O all drivers can do this.
このデバイスで使用される、物理ポートもしくは媒体タイプを設定する。
すべてのデバイスで、この設定の変更が可能なわけではない。
また可能なものでも、どの値をサポートしているかはデバイスによって異なる。
.B type
の値は、
.B 10base2
(thin イーサネット),
.B 10baseT
(twisted-pair 10Mbps イーサネット),
.B AUI 
(外部トランシーバー) などである。
.B auto
は特殊な媒体指定で、
ドライバーに媒体を自動検出するよう伝える。
同じく、すべてのドライバでこれが可能であるわけではない。
.TP
.B "[-]broadcast [addr]"
.\"O If the address argument is given, set the protocol broadcast
.\"O address for this interface.  Otherwise, set (or clear) the
.\"O .B IFF_BROADCAST
.\"O flag for the interface.
アドレスを指定すると、このインタフェースに
プロトコルブロードキャストアドレスを設定する。
指定されないと、このインタフェースに
.B IFF_BROADCAST
フラグを設定 (もしくは解除) する。
.TP
.B "[-]pointopoint [addr]"
.\"O This keyword enables the
.\"O .B point-to-point
.\"O mode of an interface, meaning that it is a direct link between two
.\"O machines with nobody else listening on it.
.\"O .br
.\"O If the address argument is also given, set the protocol address of
.\"O the other side of the link, just like the obsolete
.\"O .B dstaddr
.\"O keyword does.  Otherwise, set or clear the
.\"O .B IFF_POINTOPOINT
.\"O flag for the interface. 
.B ポイント間接続 (point-to-point)
モードを有効にする。
これは二つのマシン間だけで直接接続し、
他が干渉できないことを意味する。
.br
アドレスも指定された場合は、リンクの相手側のプロトコルアドレスを設定する。
これにより、
.B dstaddr
は古い仕様となった。指定されない場合
.B IFF_POINTOPOINT
フラグを設定もしくは解除するだけである。
.TP
.B hw class address
.\"O Set the hardware address of this interface, if the device driver
.\"O supports this operation.  The keyword must be followed by the
.\"O name of the hardware class and the printable ASCII equivalent of
.\"O the hardware address.  Hardware classes currently supported include
.\"O .B ether
.\"O (Ethernet),
.\"O .B ax25
.\"O (AMPR AX.25),
.\"O .B ARCnet
.\"O and
.\"O .B netrom
.\"O (AMPR NET/ROM).
デバイスドライバーがこの操作をサポートしていれば、
インタフェースのハードウェアアドレスを設定する。
このキーワードの後には、ハードウェアのクラスの名前と
ハードウェアアドレスにあたる ASCII 文字列が続かなくてはならない。
現在サポートされるハードウェアクラスは
.B ether
(イーサネット),
.B ax25
(AMPR AX.25),
.BR ARCnet ,
.B netrom
(AMPR NET/ROM) である。
.TP
.B multicast
.\"O Set the multicast flag on the interface. This should not normally be needed
.\"O as the drivers set the flag correctly themselves.
インタフェースのマルチキャストフラグを設定する。
通常はドライバーが自動で設定するので、
.TP
.B address
.\"O The IP address to be assigned to this interface.
このインタフェースに割り当てる IP アドレス。
.TP
.B txqueuelen length
.\"O Set the length of the transmit queue of the device. It is useful to set this
.\"O to small values for slower devices with a high latency (modem links, ISDN)
.\"O to prevent fast bulk transfers from disturbing interactive traffic like
.\"O telnet too much. 
デバイスの送信キューの長さをセットする。
遅延が大きく、遅いデバイス (モデム、ISDN) に対して
小さい値をセットすると、
大量転送中に telnet のようなインタラクティブなトラフィックが
あまり邪魔されないようにできる。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Since kernel release 2.2 there are no explicit interface statistics for
.\"O alias interfaces anymore. The statistics printed for the original address
.\"O are shared with all alias addresses on the same device. If you want per-address
.\"O statistics you should add explicit accounting
.\"O rules for the address using the 
.\"O .BR ipchains(8)
.\"O command.
カーネルリリース 2.2 からは、
エイリアスされたインタフェースに対する
明示的なインタフェース統計がなくなった。
元のアドレスに対して表示される統計は、
同じデバイスの全ての別名アドレスで共通のものとなる。
アドレス毎の統計が欲しい場合は、
.BR ipchains (8)
コマンドを使って、そのアドレスの明示的な集計ルールを追加すること。
.LP
.\"O Interrupt problems with Ethernet device drivers fail with EAGAIN. See
.\"O .I http://cesdis.gsfc.nasa.gov/linux/misc/irq-conflict.html
.\"O for more information.
イーサネットデバイスドライバの割り込み問題により、
EAGAIN で失敗する。
より詳細な情報は
.I http://cesdis.gsfc.nasa.gov/linux/misc/irq-conflict.html
を参照すること。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /proc/net/socket 
.br
.I /proc/net/dev
.br
.I /proc/net/if_inet6
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O While appletalk DDP and IPX addresses will be displayed they cannot be
.\"O altered by this command.
Appletalk DDP と IPX はアドレスの表示はするが、
このコマンドにより変更することはできない。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
route(8), netstat(8), arp(8), rarp(8), ipchains(8)
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Fred N. van Kempen, <waltje@uwalt.nl.mugnet.org>
.br
Alan Cox, <Alan.Cox@linux.org>
.br
Phil Blundell, <Philip.Blundell@pobox.com>
.br
Andi Kleen
