.\" Copyright (C) 2000 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" mii-tool.8 1.5 2000/04/25 22:58:19
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 14 21:52:22 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH MII-TOOL 8 "2000/04/25 22:58:19" "net-tools"

.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mii-tool \- view, manipulate media-independent interface status
mii-tool \- メディアに依存しないインターフェースの状態を閲覧・操作する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mii-tool
[\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR]
[\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR]
[\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-reset\fR]
[\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-restart\fR]
[\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-watch\fR]
[\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-log\fR]
[\fB\-A\fR, \fB\-\-advertise=\fImedia,...\fR]
[\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-force=\fImedia\fR]
.RI [ "interface\ ..." ]

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This utility checks or sets the status of a network interface's Media
.\"O Independent Interface (MII) unit.  Most fast ethernet adapters use an
.\"O MII to autonegotiate link speed and duplex setting.
このユーティリティは、ネットワークインターフェースの
Media Independent Interface 
(MII, メディアに依存しないインターフェース) ユニットの
状態を調査・設定する。
ファストイーサーネット (fast ethernet) アダプタの多くは、
リンク速度とデュプレクス (duplex) 設定を
自動ネゴシエーションするために MII を使う。
.PP
.\"O Most intelligent network devices use an autonegotiation protocol to
.\"O communicate what media technologies they support, and then select the
.\"O fastest mutually supported media technology.  
インテリジェントネットワークデバイスの多くは、
どのようなメディア技術がサポートされているかを通信し、
共通にサポートされている最速のメディア技術を選択するために、
自動ネゴシエーションプロトコルを使う。
.\"O The \fB\-A\fR or
.\"O \fB\-\-advertise\fR options can be used to tell the MII to only
.\"O advertise a subset of its capabilities.  
\fB\-A\fR と \fB\-\-advertise\fR オプションは、
MII に対して機能の一部のみを告知させるようにするために使われる。
.\"O Some passive devices, such as
.\"O single-speed hubs, are unable to autonegotiate.  
単一スピードのハブのようなパッシブなデバイスのなかには、
自動ネゴシエーションができないものがある。
.\"O To handle such
.\"O devices, the MII protocol also allows for establishing a link by
.\"O simply detecting either a 10baseT or 100baseT link beat.  
このようなデバイスに対処するため、
MII プロトコルでは、
10baseT と 100baseT のリンク速度のどちらであるかを単純に検知して、
リンクを確立することができる。
.\"O The \fB\-F\fR
.\"O or \fB\-\-force\fR options can be used to force the MII to operate in
.\"O one mode, instead of autonegotiating.  
\fB\-F\fR と \fB\-\-force\fR オプションは、
MII に対して、自動ネゴシエーションをさせるのではなく、
強制的に 1 つのモードで動作させるようにする。
.\"O The \fB\-A\fR and \fB-F\fR
.\"O options are mutually exclusive.
\fB\-A\fR と \fB-F\fR オプションは互いに排他的である
(同時に指定することはできない)。
.PP
.\"O The default short output reports the negotiated link speed and link
.\"O status for each interface.  If an interface or interfaces are not
.\"O specified on the command line, then \fBmii-tool\fR will check any
.\"O available interfaces from \fBeth0\fR through \fBeth7\fR.
デフォルトの簡単な出力では、
各インターフェースについて、
ネゴシエーションされたリンク速度とリンク状態が表示される。
インターフェースがコマンドラインで指定されていない場合、
\fBmii-tool\fR は \fBeth0\fR 〜 \fBeth7\fR のうち
使用可能な全てのインターフェースを調べる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
.\"O Display more detailed MII status information.  If used twice, also
.\"O display raw MII register contents.
より詳細な MII 状態の情報を表示する。
このオプションを 2 個指定した場合、
MII レジスタのそのままの内容も表示する。
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
.\"O Display program version information.
プログラムのバージョン情報を表示する。
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-reset\fR
.\"O Reset the MII to its default configuration.
MII をデフォルトの設定にリセットする。
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-restart\fR
.\"O Restart autonegotiation.
自動ネゴシエーションを再スタートさせる。
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-watch\fR
.\"O Watch interface(s) and report changes in link status.  The MII
.\"O interfaces are polled at one second intervals.
インターフェースを監視し、リンク状態を報告させる。
MII インターフェースは 1 秒ごとに poll される。
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-log\fR
.\"O Used with \fB-w\fR, records link status changes in the system log
.\"O instead of printing on standard output.
\fB-w\fR とともに使用すると、
リンク状態の変更を標準出力でなくシステムログに記録する。
.TP
\fB\-F\fI media\fR, \fB\-\-force=\fImedia\fR
.\"O Disable autonegotiation, and force the MII to either \fB100baseTx-FD\fR,
.\"O \fB100baseTx-HD\fR, \fB10baseT-FD\fR, or \fB10baseT-HD\fR operation.
自動ネゴシエーションを無効にして、
MII を強制的に
\fB100baseTx-FD\fR, \fB100baseTx-HD\fR,
\fB10baseT-FD\fR, \fB10baseT-HD\fR
のいずれかで動作させる。
.TP
\fB\-A\fI media,...\fR, \fB\-\-advertise=\fImedia,...\fR
.\"O Enable and restart autonegotiation, and advertise only the specified
.\"O media technologies.  Multiple technologies should be separated by
.\"O commas.  Valid media are \fB100baseT4\fR, \fB100baseTx-FD\fR,
.\"O \fB100baseTx-HD\fR, \fB10baseT-FD\fR, and \fB10baseT-HD\fR.
自動ネゴシエーションを有効にして、再スタートさせる。
さらに、指定したメディア技術のみが使用可能なことを告知する。
複数のメディア技術を指定する場合は、コンマで区切らなけらばならない。
指定可能なメディア技術は、
\fB100baseT4\fR, \fB100baseTx-FD\fR, 
\fB100baseTx-HD\fR, \fB10baseT-FD\fR, \fB10baseT-HD\fR
である。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.br
Donald Becker \- becker@scyld.com
