.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jan 29 19:24:09 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH NAMEIF 8 "18 Oct 2000" "net-tools" "Linux's Administrator's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O nameif \- name network interfaces based on MAC addresses
nameif \- MAC アドレスに基づいてネットワークインタフェースに名前を付ける
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "nameif [-c configfile] [-s]"
.br
.B "nameif [-c configfile] [-s] {interface macaddress}"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B nameif 
.\"O renames network interfaces based on mac addresses. When no arguments are
.\"O given 
.\"O .I /etc/mactab
.\"O is read. Each line  of it contains an interface name and a Ethernet MAC 
.\"O address. Comments are allowed starting with #. 
.B nameif 
は MAC アドレスに基づいてネットワークインタフェースに名前を付け直す。
引き数がない場合、
.I /etc/mactab
が読まれる。
このファイルには各行にインタフェース名と
イーサネット MAC アドレスが書かれる。
# で始めた行はコメントにできる。
.\"O Otherwise the interfaces specified on the command line are processed.
.\"O .I nameif
.\"O looks for the interface with the given MAC address and renames it to the
.\"O name given.
それ以外の場合は、
コマンドラインで指定されたインタフェースが操作される。
.I nameif
は指定された MAC アドレスのインタフェースを探し、
指定された名前に変更する。

.\"O When the 
.\"O .I -s
.\"O argument is given all error messages go to the syslog.
引き数
.I -s
が指定された場合、全てのエラーメッセージは syslog に送られる。

.\"O When the 
.\"O .I -c 
.\"O argument is given with a file name that file is read instead of /etc/mactab.
引き数
.I -c 
とともにファイル名が指定された場合、
/etc/mactab ではなくそのファイルが読み込まれる。

.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O .I nameif
.\"O should be run before the interface is up, otherwise it'll fail.
.I nameif
はインタフェースがアップする前に実行すべきである。
さもないと失敗する。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/etc/mactab
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Only works for Ethernet currently.
現在のところイーサネットについてしか動作しない。
