.\"
.\" netstat.8 
.\"
.\" Original: (mdw@tc.cornell.edu & dc6iq@insu1.etec.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Modified: Bernd.Eckenfels@inka.de
.\" Modified: Andi Kleen ak@muc.de 
.\" Modified: Tuan Hoang tqhoang@bigfoot.com 
.\"
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Jan 22 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Dec 25 1999 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jan 14 20:46:00 JST 2001
.\"	by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Dec 25 17:18:23 JST 2001
.\"     by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH NETSTAT 8 "19 December 2000" "net-tools" "Linux Programmer's Manual"

.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O netstat \- Print network connections, routing tables, interface statistics, masquerade connections, and multicast memberships
netstat \- ネットワーク接続、経路テーブル、インターフェースの状態、マスカレード接続、 netlink メッセージ、マルチキャストのメンバーシップを表示する

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式

.B netstat 
.RI [ address_family_options ]
.RB [ \-\-tcp | \-t ]
.RB [ \-\-udp | \-u ]
.RB [ \-\-raw | \-w ]
.RB [ \-\-listening | \-l ]
.RB [ \-\-all | \-a ]
.RB [ \-\-numeric | \-n ]
.RB [ \-\-numeric-hosts ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ]
.RB [ \-\-symbolic | \-N ]
.RB [ \-\-extend | \-e  [ \-\-extend | \-e] ]
.RB [ \-\-timers | \-o ]
.RB [ \-\-program | \-p ]
.RB [ \-\-verbose | \-v ]
.RB [ \-\-continuous | \-c]
.P
.B netstat 
.RB { \-\-route | \-r }
.RI [ address_family_options ]
.RB [ \-\-extend | \-e  [ \-\-extend | \-e] ]
.RB [ \-\-verbose | \-v ]
.RB [ \-\-numeric | \-n ]
.RB [ \-\-numeric-hosts ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ]
.RB [ \-\-continuous | \-c]
.P
.B netstat
.RB { \-\-interfaces | \-i }
.RI [ iface ]
.RB [ \-\-all | \-a ]
.RB [ \-\-extend | \-e  [ \-\-extend | \-e] ]
.RB [ \-\-verbose | \-v ]
.RB [ \-\-program | \-p ]
.RB [ \-\-numeric | \-n ]
.RB [ \-\-numeric-hosts ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ]
.RB [ \-\-continuous | \-c]
.P
.B netstat
.RB { \-\-groups | \-g }
.RB [ \-\-numeric | \-n ]
.RB [ \-\-numeric-hosts ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ]
.RB [ \-\-continuous | \-c]
.P
.B netstat
.RB { \-\-masquerade | \-M }
.RB [ \-\-extend | \-e ]
.RB [ \-\-numeric | \-n ]
.RB [ \-\-numeric-hosts ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ] [ \-\-numeric-ports ]
.RB [ \-\-continuous | \-c]
.P
.B netstat
.RB { \-\-statistics | -s }
.RB [ \-\-tcp | \-t ]
.RB [ \-\-udp | \-u ]
.RB [ \-\-raw | \-w ]
.P
.B netstat 
.RB { \-\-version | \-V }
.P
.B netstat 
.RB { \-\-help | \-h }
.P
.IR address_family_options :
.PP
.RB [ \-\-protocol= { inet , unix , ipx , ax25 , netrom , ddp }[, ...] ]
.RB [ \-\-unix | \-x ] 
.RB [ \-\-inet | \-\-ip ]
.RB [ \-\-ax25 ]
.RB [ \-\-ipx ] 
.RB [ \-\-netrom ]
.RB [ \-\-ddp ]

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Netstat
.\"O prints information about the Linux networking subsystem.  The type of
.\"O information printed is controlled by the first argument, as follows:
.B netstat
は Linux のネットワークシステムに関する情報を表示する。
表示される情報のタイプは、最初の引き数で以下のように制御される。
.\"O .SS (none)
.\"O By default,
.\"O .B
.\"O netstat 
.\"O displays a list of open sockets.  If you don't specify any
.\"O address families, then the active sockets of all configured address
.\"O families will be printed.
.SS (引き数なし)
デフォルトでは、
.B netstat
はオープンされているソケットの一覧を表示する。
アドレスファミリーが指定されていなければ、
設定されている全てのアドレスファミリーに関して、
アクティブなソケットが表示される。
.SS "\-\-route , \-r"
.\"O Display the kernel routing tables.
カーネルの経路テーブルを表示する。
.SS "\-\-groups , \-g"
.\"O Display multicast group membership information for IPv4 and IPv6.
IPv4 と IPv6 のマルチキャストグループメンバーシップ情報を表示する。
.SS "\-\-interface=\fIiface \fR, \fB\-i"
.\"O Display a table of all network interfaces, or the specified
.\"O .IR iface ) .
全ての (あるいは
.I iface
で指定した) ネットワークインターフェースの状態テーブルを表示する。
.SS "\-\-masquerade , \-M"
.\"O Display a list of masqueraded connections.
マスカレードされた接続を表示する。
.SS "\-\-statistics , \-s"
.\"O Display summary statistics for each protocol.
各プロトコルの統計情報の一覧を表示する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.SS "\-\-verbose , \-v"
.\"O Tell the user what is going on by being verbose. Especially print some
.\"O useful information about unconfigured address families.
詳細表示モードになり、起こっていることをユーザーに知らせる。
特に、設定されていないアドレスファミリー関する有用な情報をいくつか表示する。
.SS "\-\-numeric , \-n"
.\"O Show numerical addresses instead of trying to determine symbolic host, port
.\"O or user names.
ホスト・ポート・ユーザーなどの名前を解決せずに、数字のアドレスで表示する。
.SS "\-\-numeric-hosts"
.\"O shows numerical host addresses but does not affect the resolution of
.\"O port or user names.
ホストアドレスを数値で表示する。
ただし、ポート名とユーザー名の解決は行う。
.SS "\-\-numeric-ports"
.\"O shows numerical port numbers but does not affect the resolution of
.\"O host or user names.
ポート番号を数値で表示する。
ただし、ホスト名とユーザー名の解決は行う。
.SS "\-\-numeric-users"
.\"O shows numerical user IDs but does not affect the resolution of host or
.\"O port names.
ユーザー ID を数値で表示する。
ただし、ホスト名とポート名の解決は行う。

.SS "\-\-protocol=\fIfamily \fR, \fB\-A"
.\"O Specifies the address families (perhaps better described as low level
.\"O protocols) for which connections are to be shown.
.\"O .I family 
.\"O is a comma (',') separated list of address family keywords like
.\"O .BR inet , 
.\"O .BR unix , 
.\"O .BR ipx , 
.\"O .BR ax25 , 
.\"O .BR netrom ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR ddp .
接続状態を表示するアドレスファミリーを指定する
(低レベルのプロトコルを指定すれば、
アドレスファミリーをうまく記述できるだろう)。
.I family
はコンマ (',') で区切られたリストで、
アドレスファミリーのキーワードを指定する。
キーワードとして
.BR inet , 
.BR unix , 
.BR ipx , 
.BR ax25 , 
.BR netrom ,
.BR ddp
が指定できる。
.\"O This has the same effect as using the 
.\"O .BR \-\-inet ,
.\"O .BR \-\-unix " (" \-x ),
.\"O .BR \-\-ipx ,
.\"O .BR \-\-ax25 ,
.\"O .BR \-\-netrom ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-\-ddp 
.\"O options.
これは、
.BR \-\-inet ,
.BR \-\-unix " (" \-x ),
.BR \-\-ipx ,
.BR \-\-ax25 ,
.BR \-\-netrom ,
.B \-\-ddp
オプションを使った場合と同じ効果がある。
.P
.\"O The address family
.\"O .B inet
.\"O includes raw, udp and tcp protocol sockets.
アドレスファミリー
.B inet
には
raw, udp, tcp プロトコルソケットが含まれる。
.SS "\-c, \-\-continuous"
.\"O This will cause
.\"O .B netstat
.\"O to print the selected information every second continuously.
指定された情報を 1 秒ごとに表示し続ける。
.SS "\-e, \-\-extend"
.\"O Display additional information.  Use this option twice for maximum detail.
さらに詳しい情報を表示する。
このオプションを 2 個指定すれば最も詳しい表示が得られる。
.SS "\-o, \-\-timers"
.\"O Include information related to networking timers.
ネットワーキングタイマーに関する情報が追加される。
.SS "\-p, \-\-program"
.\"O Show the PID and name of the program to which each socket belongs.
各ソケットが属しているプログラムの PID と名前が表示される。
.SS "\-l, \-\-listening"
.\"O Show only listening sockets.  (These are omitted by default.)
接続待ち (listen) 状態にあるソケットのみを表示する
(このオプションはデフォルトでは省略される)。
.SS "\-a, \-\-all"
.\"O Show both listening and non-listening sockets.  With the
.\"O .B --interfaces
.\"O option, show interfaces that are not marked 
接続待ち状態にあるソケットも、接続待ち状態にないソケットも表示する。
.B --interfaces
オプションが指定された場合、
マークされていないインターフェースを表示する。
.SS "\-F"
.\"O Print routing information from the FIB.  (This is the default.)
FIB からの経路情報を表示する (これはデフォルトである)。
.SS "\-C"
.\"O Print routing information from the route cache.
.\"O .IR UP .
経路キャッシュからの経路情報を表示する。
.P
.\"O .SH OUTPUT
.SH 出力
.P
.\"O .SS Active Internet connections \fR(TCP, UDP, raw)\fR
.SS アクティブなインターネット接続 \fR(TCP, UDP, raw)\fR
.SS "Proto" 
.\"O The protocol (tcp, udp, raw) used by the socket. 
ソケットで用いられているプロトコル (tcp, udp, raw のいずれか)。
.SS "Recv-Q"
.\"O The count of bytes not copied by the user program connected to this socket.
このソケットに接続されたユーザープログラムに渡されなかったデータのバイト数。
.SS "Send-Q"
.\"O The count of bytes not acknowledged by the remote host.
リモートホストに受け入れられなかったデータのバイト数。
.SS "Local Address" 
.\"O Address and port number of the local end of the socket.  Unless the
.\"O .BR \-\-numeric " (" \-n )
.\"O option is specified, the socket address is resolved to its canonical
.\"O host name (FQDN), and the port number is translated into the
.\"O corresponding service name.
ローカル側ソケットのアドレスとポート番号。
.BR \-\-numeric " (" \-n )
オプションが指定されない限り、
ソケットアドレスは正式なホスト名 (FQDN) になり、
ポート番号は対応するサービス名に変換される。
.SS "Foreign Address"
.\"O Address and port number of the remote end of the socket.
.\"O Analogous to "Local Address."
リモート側ソケットのアドレスとポート番号。
その他は "Local Address" と同様である。 
.SS "State"
.\"O The state of the socket. Since there are no states in raw mode and usually no
.\"O states used in UDP, this column may be left blank. Normally this can be one
.\"O of several values:
ソケットの状態 (state)。 
raw モードには状態がなく、また UDP も通常状態を使用しないため、
この項目は空白になっている。
普通は以下の値のどれか:
.TP
.I
ESTABLISHED
.\"O The socket has an established connection.
ソケットは確立した接続状態にある。
.TP
.I
SYN_SENT
.\"O The socket is actively attempting to establish a connection.
ソケットは接続を確立しようと試みている。
.TP
.I
SYN_RECV
.\"O A connection request has been received from the network.
接続要求をネットワークから受信している。
.TP
.I
FIN_WAIT1
.\"O The socket is closed, and the connection is shutting down.
ソケットはクローズされており、接続は切断中である。
.TP
.I
FIN_WAIT2
.\"O Connection is closed, and the socket is waiting for a shutdown from the
.\"O remote end.
接続はクローズされ、ソケットはリモート側からの切断を待っている。
.TP
.I
TIME_WAIT
.\"O The socket is waiting after close to handle packets still in the network.
ソケットは、クローズ後にリモートからの切断が再送されるのを待っている。
.TP
.I
CLOSED
.\"O The socket is not being used.
ソケットは使用されていない。
.TP
.I
CLOSE_WAIT
.\"O The remote end has shut down, waiting for the socket to close.
リモート側は既に切断され、ソケットがクローズされるのを待っている。
.TP
.I
LAST_ACK
.\"O The remote end has shut down, and the socket is closed. Waiting for
.\"O acknowledgement.
リモート側は既に切断され、ソケットもクローズされている。
確認 (acknowledgement) を待っている。
.TP
.I
LISTEN
.\"O The socket is listening for incoming connections.  Such sockets are 
.\"O not included in the output unless you specify the 
.\"O .BR \-\-listening " (" \-l )
.\"O or 
.\"O .BR \-\-all " (" \-a )
.\"O option.
ソケットは接続待ち (listen) である。
このようなソケットは、
.BR \-\-listening " (" \-l )
または
.BR \-\-all " (" \-a )
オプションを指定しない限り、出力には含まれない。
.TP
.I
CLOSING
.\"O Both sockets are shut down but we still don't have all our data
.\"O sent.
両方のソケットが切断されているが、まだ全てのデータが送られていない。
.TP
.I
UNKNOWN
.\"O The state of the socket is unknown.
ソケットの状態は不明である。
.SS "User"
.\"O The username or the user id (UID) of the owner of the socket.
ソケットのオーナーの、名前またはユーザー ID (UID)。
.SS "PID/Program name"
.\"O Slash-separated pair of the process id (PID) and process name of the 
.\"O process that owns the socket.
.\"O .B --program
.\"O causes this column to be included.  You will also need
.\"O .I superuser
.\"O privileges to see this information on sockets you don't own.  This
.\"O identification information is not yet available for IPX sockets.
このソケットを所有しているプログラムの
プロセス ID (PID) とプログラム名の対 (スラッシュで区切られる)。
.B --program
オプションによってこの項目が現れる。
自分が所有していないソケットの情報を見るためには、
.I スーパーユーザー
特権が必要である。
この識別情報は IPX ソケットに対してはまだ利用できない。
.SS "Timer"
.\"O (this needs to be written)
(まだ書いていない)
.P
.\"O .SS Active UNIX domain Sockets
.SS アクティブな UNIX ドメインソケット
.SS "Proto" 
.\"O The protocol (usually unix) used by the socket.
ソケットで用いられているプロトコル (通常は unix)。
.SS "RefCnt"
.\"O The reference count (i.e. attached processes via this socket).
参照カウント (このソケットに接続されているプロセス数)。
.SS "Flags"
.\"O The flags displayed is SO_ACCEPTON (displayed as 
.\"O .BR ACC ),
.\"O SO_WAITDATA 
.\"O .RB ( W )
.\"O or SO_NOSPACE 
.\"O .RB ( N ). 
.\"O SO_ACCECPTON 
.\"O is used on unconnected sockets if their corresponding
.\"O processes are waiting for a connect request. The other flags are not
.\"O of normal interest.
表示されるフラグは SO_ACCEPTON (\fBACC\fP と表示される)、
SO_WAITDATA (\fBW\fP)、 SO_NOSPACE (\fBN\fP) である。
SO_ACCEPTON は、ソケットが接続されておらず、
かつそれを用いているプログラムが接続要求を待っている場合に用いられる。
他のフラグは通常は重要ではない。
.SS "Type"
.\"O There are several types of socket access:
ソケットアクセスのタイプ。何種類かある:
.TP
.I
SOCK_DGRAM
.\"O The socket is used in Datagram (connectionless) mode.
データグラム (connectionless) モードのソケットである。
.TP
.I
SOCK_STREAM
.\"O This is a stream (connection) socket.
ストリーム (connection) ソケットである。
.TP
.I
SOCK_RAW
.\"O The socket is used as a raw socket.
raw ソケットである。
.TP
.I
SOCK_RDM
.\"O This one serves reliably-delivered messages.
信頼性の高いメッセージを届けるソケットである。
.TP
.I
SOCK_SEQPACKET
.\"O This is a sequential packet socket.
シーケンシャルパケットのソケットである。
.TP
.I
SOCK_PACKET
.\"O Raw interface access socket.
raw インターフェースアクセスのソケットである。
.TP
.I
UNKNOWN
.\"O Who ever knows what the future will bring us - just fill in here :-)
将来なにが起こるか誰が知ろうか - ここに書いて下さい :-)
.PP
.SS "State"
.\"O This field will contain one of the following Keywords:
このフィールドには、以下のキーワードのいずれかが入る:
.TP
.I FREE
.\"O The socket is not allocated
ソケットは割り当てられていない。
.TP
.I LISTENING 
.\"O The socket is listening for a connection request.  Such
.\"O sockets are only included in the output if you specify the
.\"O .BR \-\-listening " (" \-l )
.\"O or
.\"O .BR \-\-all " (" \-a )
.\"O option.
ソケットは接続要求の待ち状態である。
これらのソケットは、
.BR \-\-listening " (" \-l )
または
.BR \-\-all " (" \-a )
オプションが指定されない限り、出力されない。
.TP
.I CONNECTING
.\"O The socket is about to establish a connection.
ソケットは接続中である。
.TP
.I CONNECTED
.\"O The socket is connected.
ソケットは接続されている。
.TP
.I DISCONNECTING
.\"O The socket is disconnecting.
ソケットは切断中である。
.TP
.\"O .I (empty)
.\"O The socket is not connected to another one.
.I (空白)
ソケットは他のソケットに接続されていない。
.TP
.I UNKNOWN
.\"O This state should never happen.
このステートは現われないはずである。
.SS "PID/Program name"
.\"O Process ID (PID) and process name of the process that has the socket open. 
.\"O More info available in
.\"O .B "Active Internet connections"
.\"O section written above.
このソケットをオープンしているプログラムのプロセス ID (PID) とプロセス名。
より詳しい情報は上記の
.B アクティブなインターネット接続
の項を参照のこと。
.SS "Path"
.\"O This is the path name as which the corresponding processes attached
.\"O to the socket.
ソケットに結び付けられているプロセスのパス名。
.P
.\"O .SS Active IPX sockets
.\"O (this needs to be done by somebody who knows it)
.SS アクティブな IPX ソケット
(知識を持っている人が記述してほしい)
.P
.\"O .SS Active NET/ROM sockets
.\"O (this needs to be done by somebody who knows it)
.SS アクティブな NET/ROM ソケット
(知識を持っている人が記述してほしい)
.P
.\"O .SS Active AX.25 sockets
.\"O (this needs to be done by somebody who knows it)
.SS アクティブな AX.25 ソケット
(知識を持っている人が記述してほしい)
.PP
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.\"O Starting with Linux release 2.2 
.\"O .B netstat -i 
.\"O does not show interface statistics for alias interfaces. To get per
.\"O alias interface counters you need to setup explicit rules using the
.\"O .BR ipchains(8) 
.\"O command.  
カーネルリリース 2.2 から、
.B netstat -i
では別名インターフェースの
インターフェース統計を表示しなくなった。
別名インターフェース毎の統計を得るためには、
.BR ipchains(8)
コマンドを用いて明示的にルールを設定する必要がある。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.ta
.I /etc/services
.\"O -- The services translation file
-- サービス名と番号の変換表が入ったファイル

.I /proc
.\"O -- Mount point for the proc filesystem, which gives access to kernel 
.\"O status information via the following files.
-- proc ファイルシステムのマウントポイント。
このファイルシステムにより、
以下のファイルを使ってカーネルの統計情報にアクセスできる。

.I /proc/net/dev
.\"O -- device information
-- デバイスの情報

.I /proc/net/raw
.\"O -- raw socket information
raw ソケットの情報

.I /proc/net/tcp
.\"O -- TCP socket information
-- TCP ソケットの情報

.I /proc/net/udp
.\"O -- UDP socket information
-- UDP ソケットの情報

.I /proc/net/igmp
.\"O -- IGMP multicast information
-- IGMP マルチキャストの情報

.I /proc/net/unix
.\"O -- Unix domain socket information
-- Unix ドメインソケットの情報

.I /proc/net/ipx
.\"O -- IPX socket information
-- IPX ソケットの情報

.I /proc/net/ax25
.\"O -- AX25 socket information
-- AX25 ソケットの情報

.I /proc/net/appletalk
.\"O -- DDP (appletalk) socket information
-- DDP (appletalk) ソケットの情報

.I /proc/net/nr
.\"O -- NET/ROM socket information
-- NET/ROM ソケットの情報

.I /proc/net/route
.\"O -- IP routing information
-- IP 経路情報

.I /proc/net/ax25_route
.\"O -- AX25 routing information
-- AX25 経路情報

.I /proc/net/ipx_route
.\"O -- IPX routing information
-- IPX 経路情報

.I /proc/net/nr_nodes
.\"O -- NET/ROM nodelist
-- NET/ROM ノードリスト

.I /proc/net/nr_neigh
.\"O -- NET/ROM neighbours
-- NET/ROM ネイバー (neighbour)

.I /proc/net/ip_masquerade
.\"O -- masqueraded connections
-- マスカレード接続

.I /proc/net/snmp
.\"O -- statistics
-- 統計情報
.fi
.P
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR route (8), 
.BR ifconfig (8), 
.BR ipchains (8),
.BR iptables (8),
.BR proc (5)
.P
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Occasionally strange information may appear if a socket changes
.\"O as it is viewed. This is unlikely to occur.
ソケットが表示中に変更されると、たまに妙な情報が表示されることがある。
あまり起こらないとは思うが。
.P
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.\"O The netstat user interface was written by Fred Baumgarten
.\"O <dc6iq@insu1.etec.uni-karlsruhe.de> the man page basically
.\"O by Matt Welsh <mdw@tc.cornell.edu>. It was updated by
.\"O Alan Cox <Alan.Cox@linux.org> but could do with a bit more
.\"O work.  It was updated again by Tuan Hoang
.\"O <tqhoang@bigfoot.com>.
netstat のユーザーインターフェースは
Fred Baumgarten <dc6iq@insu1.etec.uni-karlsruhe.de> が書いた。
マニュアルページは主に Matt Welsh <mdw@tc.cornell.edu> が書き
Alan Cox <Alan.Cox@linux.org> が更新した。
しかし、作業はあまり多くなかった。
そしてさらに Tuan Hoang <tqhoang@bigfoot.com> が更新した。
.br
.\"O The man page and the command included in the net-tools
.\"O package is totally rewritten by Bernd Eckenfels 
.\"O <ecki@linux.de>.
net-tools パッケージに入っているマニュアルページとコマンドは、
Bernd Eckenfels <ecki@linux.de> が全体的に書き直した。
