.\" This page is originally in the net-tools package.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu 13 Ap 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PLIPCONFIG 8 "17 February 1995" "" ""
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O plipconfig \- fine tune PLIP device parameters 
.SH 名前
plipconfig \- PLIP デバイスのパラメータを微調整する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "plipconfig interface"
.br
.B "plipconfig interface [nibble NN] [trigger NN] [unit NN]"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Plipconfig
.\"O is used to (hopefully) improve PLIP performance by changing the default
.\"O timing parameters used by the PLIP protocol. Results are dependent on
.\"O the parallel port hardware, cable, and the CPU speed of each machine
.\"O on each end of the PLIP link.
.B plipconfig
は、
PLIP 制御のタイミングパラメータのデフォルト値を変更することによって、
PLIP の性能を (できれば) 改善するために用いられる。
結果はパラレルポートのハードウェア・ケーブル・PLIP 接続両端の各マシンにおける
CPU 速度などに依存する。
.LP
.\"O If the single 
.\"O .B interface
.\"O argument is given,
.\"O .B plipconfig
.\"O displays the status of the given interface
.\"O only.  Otherwise, it will try to set the options.
.B interface
引数をひとつだけ与えると、
.B plipconfig
はそのインターフェースの状態を表示して終了する。
その他の場合は、そのオプションを設定しようと試みる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "nibble NN"
.\"O Sets the nibble wait value in microseconds. Default is 3000.
nibble wait の値を設定する (マイクロ秒単位)。
デフォルトは 3000。
.TP
.B "trigger NN"
.\"O Sets the trigger wait value in microseconds. Default is 500.
trigger wait の値を設定する (マイクロ秒単位)。
デフォルトは 500。
.LP
.\"O PLIP speed can in some cases be improved by lowering the default values.
.\"O Values which are too low may cause excess use of CPU, poor interrupt 
.\"O response time resulting in serial ports dropping characters, or in dropping
.\"O of PLIP packets. Changing the plip MTU can also affect PLIP speed.
デフォルトの値から小さくすることによって、 PLIP の速度が改善されることがある。
ただし小さくしすぎると CPU の負荷が大きくなり、
割り込みに対する反応時間が遅くなり、
シリアルポートが文字を取りこぼしたり、
PLIP パケットを取りこぼしたりする原因になる。
plip の MTU を変更することによっても PLIP の速度は変化する。
.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.\"O If you get no response it is far more likely the irq is wrong and needs
.\"O setting with ifconfig. The few cases where the default parameters will
.\"O be too fast are those using very long cables. Something you should
.\"O never do as the parallel port is not specified or designed for driving
.\"O long cable runs.
なんの反応もないときは、まず間違いなく IRQ の設定が正しくない。
ifconfig を用いて正しく設定する必要がある。
デフォルトのパラメータが速すぎるような場合もありうる。
例えば非常に長いケーブルを使っているような場合などである。
パラレルポートは長いケーブル接続ができるようには
規格化・設計されていないので、
このような状況にはならないようにすべきである。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .I ifconfig(8)
.BR ifconfig (8)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.\"O Non.
.SH バグ
ない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
John Paul Morrison, <jmorriso@bogomips.ee.ubc.ca>, <ve7jpm@ve7jpm.ampr.org>

