.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 keisuke ishikawa
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jan 25 23:33:13 JST 1998
.\"         by ishikawa,keisuke <kn954168@ppp.copernicus.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jan 14 21:52:22 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH RARP 8 "4 August 1997" "net-tools" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O rarp \- manipulate the system RARP table
.SH 名前
rarp \- システムの RARP テーブルを操作する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "rarp [-V] [--version] [-h] [--help]"
.br
.B "rarp -a"
.br
.B "rarp [-v] -d hostname ..."
.br
.B "rarp [-v] [-t type] -s hostname hw_addr"
.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.P
.\"O This program is obsolete.  From version 2.3, the Linux kernel 
.\"O no longer contains RARP support.  For a replacement RARP daemon, see
.\"O .I
.\"O ftp://ftp.dementia.org/pub/net-tools
このプログラムは古い。
バージョン 2.3 以降の Linux カーネルでは、
RARP サポートが含まれていない。
このプログラムの代わりとなる RARP デーモンについては
.I ftp://ftp.dementia.org/pub/net-tools
を参照すること。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.\"O .B Rarp
.\"O manipulates the kernel's RARP table in various ways.  The primary options
.\"O are clearing an address mapping entry and manually setting up one.  For
.\"O debugging purposes, the
.\"O .B rarp
.\"O program also allows a complete dump of the RARP table.
.SH 説明
.B rarp
は、カーネルの RARP テーブルをさまざまな方法で操作する。
アドレス・マッピングのエントリーをクリアしたり、
手作業でエントリーを設定したりするのが、主要なオプションである。
デバッグに
.B rarp
を利用して、RARP テーブルを完全にダンプすることも可能である。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Display the version of RARP in use.
rarp のバージョンを表示する。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Tell the user what is going on by being verbose.
詳細表示モードで動作し、何が起こっているかをユーザーに知らせる。
.TP
.B "\-t type"
.\"O When setting or reading the RARP table, this optional parameter tells
.\"O .B rarp
.\"O which class of entries it should check for.  The default value of
.\"O this parameter is
.\"O .B ether
.\"O (i.e. hardware code
.\"O .B 0x01
.\"O for
.\"O .B "IEEE 802.3 10Mbps Ethernet".
.\"O Other values might include network technologies such as
.\"O .B AX.25 (ax25)
.\"O and
.\"O .B NET/ROM (netrom).
RARP テーブルを設定したり読み出したりするとき、
エントリーのどのクラスを対象にして欲しいかを
.B rarp
に指定する。
このパラメータは、デフォルトでは
.B ether
(つまり、
.B "IEEE 802.3 10Mbps Ethernet"
に対応するハードウェア・コード 
.BR 0x01 )
に設定されている。
ほかに、たとえば
.B AX.25 (ax25)
や
.B NET/ROM (netrom)
などのネットワーク技術が指定できる。
.TP
.B "\-a"
.TP
.B "\-\-list"
.\"O Lists the entries in the RARP table.
RARP テーブルのエントリーをリストアップする。
.TP
.B "\-d hostname"
.TP
.B "\-\-delete hostname"
.\"O Remove all RARP entries for the specified host.
指定されたホストの RARP エントリーすべてを削除する。
.TP
.B "\-s hostname hw_addr"
.TP
.B "\-\-set hostname hw_addr"
.\"O Create a RARP address mapping entry for host
.\"O .B hostname
.\"O with hardware address set to
.\"O .B hw_addr
.\"O .  The format of the hardware address is dependent on the hardware
.\"O class, but for most classes one can assume that the usual presentation
.\"O can be used.  For the Ethernet class, this is 6 bytes in hexadecimal,
.\"O separated by colons.
RARP のアドレス・マッピングのエントリーを設定する。
ホスト
.B hostname
に対するハードウェア・アドレスを
.B hw_addr
に設定する。
ハードウェア・アドレスの書式は、ハードウェア・クラスによって異なるが、
ほとんどのクラスでは普通の書き方が使える。
例えば、ethernet のクラスでは 16 進数 6 バイトであり、コロンで分割されている。
.\"O .SH WARNING
.SH 警告
.\"O Some systems (notably older Suns) assume that the host replying to
.\"O a RARP query can also provide other remote boot services. Therefore 
.\"O never gratuitously add rarp entries unless you wish to meet the wrath
.\"O of the network administrator.
システムによっては (特に、SUN の古いシステムでは)、RARP 問い合わせに対して、
ホストが別のリモート・ブート・サービスも
供給できるようになっているものもある。
したがって、ネットワーク管理者の怒りを買いたくなければ、
無闇に RARP エントリーを追加してはならない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /proc/net/rarp
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
arp(8), route(8), ifconfig(8), netstat(8)
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Ross D. Martin, <martin@trcsun3.eas.asu.edu>
.br
Fred N. van Kempen, <waltje@uwalt.nl.mugnet.org>
.br
Phil Blundell, <Philip.Blundell@pobox.com>
