.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 Yoshiki Sugiura
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated  at Thu Jan 15 22:01:14 JST 1998
.\"         by Yoshiki Sugiura <yoy@mb.kcome.ne.jp>
.\" Updated  at Sat Jan 24 13:41:18 JST 1998
.\"         by Yoshiki Sugiura <yoy@mb.kcome.ne.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jan 14 22:02:13 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ROUTE 8 "2 January 2000" "net-tools" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O route \- show / manipulate the IP routing table
route \- IP 経路テーブルの表示/設定
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B route
.RB [ \-CFvnee ]
.TP
.B route 
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-A
family] 
.B add 
.RB [ \-net | \-host ] 
target 
.RB [ netmask 
Nm] 
.RB [ gw 
Gw] 
.RB [ metric 
N] 
.RB [ mss 
M] 
.RB [ window 
W] 
.RB [ irtt 
I]
.RB [ reject ]
.RB [ mod ]
.RB [ dyn ] 
.RB [ reinstate ] 
.RB [[ dev ] 
If]
.TP
.B route 
.RB [ \-v ] 
.RB [ \-A
family]
.B del 
.RB [ \-net | \-host ] 
target 
.RB [ gw 
Gw] 
.RB [ netmask 
Nm] 
.RB [ metric 
N] 
.RB [[ dev ]
If]
.TP
.B route 
.RB [ \-V ] 
.RB [ \-\-version ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \--help ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Route
.\"O manipulates the kernel's IP routing tables.  Its primary use is to set
.\"O up static routes to specific hosts or networks via an interface after
.\"O it has been configured with the
.\"O .BR ifconfig (8)
.\"O program.
.B route
はカーネルの IP 経路テーブルを操作する。
その主な目的は、特定のホストやネットワークへの静的な経路を設定することである。
経路に用いるインターフェースは、このコマンドの前に
.BR ifconfig (8)
で設定しておく必要がある。

.\"O When the
.\"O .B add
.\"O or
.\"O .B del
.\"O options are used,
.\"O .B route
.\"O modifies the routing tables.  Without these options,
.\"O .B route
.\"O displays the current contents of the routing tables.
.B add
または
.B del
オプションを使うと、
.B route
は経路テーブルを変更できる。
これらのオプションを指定しない場合、
.B route
は現在の経路テーブルの内容を表示する。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-A family
.\"O use the specified address family (eg `inet'; use `route --help' for a full 
.\"O list).
指定したアドレスファミリーを使う
(例えば `inet' を指定する。
全リストを表示するには `route --help' を使うこと)。

.TP 
.B -F
.\"O operate on the kernel's FIB (Forwarding Information Base) routing
.\"O table. 
.\"O This is the default.
カーネルの FIB (Forwarding Information Base) 経路テーブルを操作する。
これはデフォルトである。
.TP 
.B -C
.\"O operate on the kernel's routing cache.
カーネルの経路テーブルを操作する。

.TP
.B \-v
.\"O select verbose operation.
操作の際に詳細表示するモードを選択する。
.TP
.B \-n
.\"O show numerical addresses instead of trying to determine symbolic host
.\"O names. This is useful if you are trying to determine why the route to your
.\"O nameserver has vanished.
ホスト名を解決せず、アドレスを数値で表示する。
これはネームサーバが見つからない場合など、
ホスト名の解決ができない場合に有用である。
.TP
.B \-e
.\"O use
.\"O .BR netstat (8)-format
.\"O for displaying the routing table.
.\"O .B \-ee 
.\"O will generate a very long line with all parameters from the routing table.
経路テーブルの表示に 
.BR netstat (8) 
のフォーマットを使用する。
.B \-ee 
は経路情報のすべてのパラメータを 1 行で表示する。

.TP
.B del
.\"O delete a route.
経路を削除する。
.TP 
.B add 
.\"O add a new route.
新しい経路を追加する。
.TP
.B target
.\"O the destination network or host. You can provide IP addresses in dotted
.\"O decimal or host/network names.
対象とするネットワークまたはホストを指定する。
10 進ドット表記の IP アドレスか、
ホスト名もしくはネットワーク名を指定可能である。
.TP
.B \-net
.\"O the
.\"O .B target
.\"O is a network.
.B target
をネットワークとする。
.TP
.B -host
.\"O the
.\"O .B target 
.\"O is a host.
.B target
をホストとする。
.TP
.B netmask NM
.\"O when adding a network route, the netmask to be used.
ネットワーク経路を追加する場合、そこで使用されるネットマスク。
.TP
.B gw GW
.\"O route packets via a gateway.
ゲートウェイを経由した経路パケット。
.\"O .B NOTE:
.\"O The specified gateway must be reachable first. This usually means that
.\"O you have to set up a static route to the gateway beforehand. If you specify
.\"O the address of one of your local interfaces, it will be used to decide about
.\"O the interface to which the packets should be routed to. This is a BSDism
.\"O compatibility hack.
.B 注意:
記述されたゲートウェイは、まず到達可能でなければならない。
これは通常、前もってゲートウェイに静的経路を
設定しなくてはならないということである。
もし、ローカルのインタフェースのアドレスを指定した場合は、
それはパケットが通過すべきインタフェースの決定に使用される。
これは BSD の手法にのっとったやり方である。
.TP
.B metric M
.\"O set the metric field in the routing table (used by routing daemons) to M.
経路テーブルのメトリック (経路制御デーモンが使用する) を M に設定する。
.TP 
.B mss M
.\"O set the TCP Maximum Segment Size (MSS) for connections over this route
.\"O to M bytes. 
.\"O The default is the device MTU minus headers, or a lower MTU when path mtu 
.\"O discovery occured. This setting can be used to force smaller TCP packets on the
.\"O other end when path mtu discovery does not work (usually because of
.\"O misconfigured firewalls that block ICMP Fragmentation Needed)
指定の経路での接続の TCP 最大セグメントサイズ (MSS) を M バイトに設定する。
デフォルトはデバイスの MTU (Maximum Transmission Unit, 最大送信単位) から
ヘッダーを引いたサイズである。
また、ネットワークパスの MTU が見つかった場合、
小さい方の MTU がデフォルトになる。
この設定は、ネットワークパスの MTU を見付けることができなかった場合
(これは ICMP Fragmentation Needed をブロックしてしまう、
間違って設定されたファイヤーウォールなどのために起こる)、
相手側 TCP パケットを強制的に小さくするために使われる。
.TP 
.B window W 
.\"O set the TCP window size for connections over this route to W
.\"O bytes. This is typically only used on AX.25 networks and with drivers
.\"O unable to handle back to back frames.
指定の経路での接続の TCP ウィンドウサイズを W バイトに設定する。
これは一般に AX.25 ネットワークや、
連続的に送られるフレームを取りこぼしてしまうようなドライバーでのみ使用される。
.TP
.B irtt I
.\"O set the initial round trip time (irtt) for TCP connections over this
.\"O route to I milliseconds (1-12000). This is typically only used on
.\"O AX.25 networks. If omitted the RFC 1122 default of 300ms is used.
指定の経路での TCP 接続の初期ラウンドトリップ時間 (irtt) を
I (1-12000) ミリ秒の範囲で設定する。
これは一般的に AX.25 ネットワークでのみ使用される。
省略した場合、RFC 1122 でデフォルトとされている 300 ミリ秒が使用される。
.TP
.B reject
.\"O install a blocking route, which will force a route lookup to fail.
.\"O This is for example used to mask out networks before using the default
.\"O route.  This is NOT for firewalling.
ブロックする経路を設定する。
これは経路参照の失敗を強制し、例えば、デフォルトの経路を使用せずに、
ネットワークを使わないようにしてしまう場合などに用いる。
これは、ファイアーウォールの設定では"ない"。
.TP
.B mod, dyn, reinstate
.\"O install a dynamic or modified route. These flags are for diagnostic
.\"O purposes, and are generally only set by routing daemons.
動的な経路や変更経路を設定する。
これらのフラグは診断の用途に使われ、
一般的には経路制御デーモンによってのみ設定される。
.TP
.B dev If
.\"O force the route to be associated with the specified device, as the
.\"O kernel will otherwise try to determine the device on its own (by
.\"O checking already existing routes and device specifications, and where
.\"O the route is added to). In most normal networks you won't need this.
記述されたデバイスに、経路を関連づけることを強制する。
通常カーネルは自分自身でデバイスを決定しようとする
(すでにある経路とデバイスの記述、経路がどこに追加されているかによる)。
一般的なネットワークでは、これを指定する必要はない。

.\"O If 
.\"O .B dev If
.\"O is the last option on the command line, the word 
.\"O .B dev
.\"O may be omitted, as it's the default. Otherwise the order of the route
.\"O modifiers (metric - netmask - gw - dev) doesn't matter.
もし
.B dev If
がコマンド・ラインの最後のオプションの場合には、
.B dev
という語は省略しても良い。
他の場合では、経路修飾子の順番 (metric -netmask - gw - dev) は重要ではない。

.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.TP
.B route add -net 127.0.0.0
.\"O adds the normal loopback entry, using netmask 255.0.0.0 (class A net,
.\"O determined from the destination address) and associated with the 
.\"O "lo" device (assuming this device was prviously set up correctly with
.\"O .BR ifconfig (8)). 
ネットマスク 255.0.0.0 で
(クラス A のネットワークが、対象アドレスから決定される)、
通常のループバックを追加する。
それは、
.B lo
デバイスに関連づけれられる (このデバイスは
.B ifconfig(8)
に前もって設定されていると仮定している)。

.TP 
.B route add -net 192.56.76.0 netmask 255.255.255.0 dev eth0
.\"O adds a route to the network 192.56.76.x via 
.\"O "eth0". The Class C netmask modifier is not really necessary here because
.\"O 192.* is a Class C IP address. The word "dev" can be omitted here. 
.B eth0
経由のネットワーク 192.56.76.x を追加する。
ここでの 192.* はクラス C の IP アドレスなので、
クラス C のこのネットマスク修飾子は必須ではない。
この場合
.B dev
という語は省略可能である。

.TP
.B route add default gw mango-gw
.\"O adds a default route (which will be used if no other route matches).
.\"O All packets using this route will be gatewayed through "mango-gw". The
.\"O device which will actually be used for that route depends on how we
.\"O can reach "mango-gw" - the static route to "mango-gw" will have to be
.\"O set up before. 
デフォルト経路 (適切な経路が他にない場合に使用されるもの) を追加する。
この経路を使用するすべてのパケットは、 "mango-gw" を経由する。
デバイスは "mango-gw" に到達する上で実際に使用する経路に依存する。
- "mango-gw" に対する静的経路があらかじめ設定されている必要がある。

.TP
.B route add ipx4 sl0
.\"O Adds the route to the "ipx4" host via the SLIP interface (assuming that
.\"O "ipx4" is the SLIP host).
"ipx4" に対する経路を SLIP インタフェース経由
("ixp4" は SLIP ホストであると仮定する) で追加する。

.TP
.B route add -net 192.57.66.0 netmask 255.255.255.0 gw ipx4
.\"O This command adds the net "192.57.66.x" to be gatewayed through the former
.\"O route to the SLIP interface.
前述の SLIP インタフェース経路をゲートウェイとして、
ネットワーク "192.57.66.x" を追加する。

.TP
.B route add -net 224.0.0.0 netmask 240.0.0.0 dev eth0
.\"O This is an obscure one documented so people know how to do it. This sets
.\"O all of the class D (multicast) IP routes to go via "eth0". This is the
.\"O correct normal configuration line with a multicasting kernel.
この設定はわかりにくいので、あえて記述した。
これは全てのクラス D (マルチキャスト) IP の経路が
"eth0" を通って行くように設定する。
これはマルチキャスト・カーネルの正しい設定である。 

.TP
.B route add -net 10.0.0.0 netmask 255.0.0.0 reject
.\"O This installs a rejecting route for the private network "10.x.x.x."
プライベートネットワーク "10.x.x.x" への経路を
拒否 (reject) するように設定する。

.LP
.\"O .SH OUTPUT
.SH 出力
.\"O The output of the kernel routing table is organized in the following columns
カーネル経路テーブルの出力は、以下の項目で構成される。
.TP
.B Destination     
.\"O The destination network or destination host.
対象ネットワークもしくはホスト。
.TP
.B Gateway
.\"O The gateway address or '*' if none set.
ゲートウェイのアドレスか、 設定されていないなら '*' である。
.TP
.B Genmask         
.\"O The netmask for the destination net; '255.255.255.255' for a host destination
.\"O and '0.0.0.0' for the 
.\"O .B default
.\"O route.
.B Genmask        
は対象ネットワークのネットマスクである。
\&'255.255.255.255' は、ホストが対象である場合のマスクで、
\&'0.0.0.0' は、
.B デフォルト
経路のネットマスクである。
.TP
.B Flags 
.\"O Possible flags include
指定可能なフラグとしては、以下のものがある。
.br
.B U
.\"O (route is
.\"O .BR up )
(経路は
.B 有効
になっている)
.br
.B H
.\"O (target is a
.\"O .BR host )
(ターゲットは
.B ホスト
である)
.br
.B G
.\"O (use
.\"O .BR gateway )
.RB ( ゲートウェイ
を使用する)
.br
.B R
.\"O .RB ( reinstate
.\"O route for dynamic routing)
.RB ( 回復
される動的経路)
.br
.B D
.\"O .RB ( dynamically
.\"O installed by daemon or redirect)
(デーモンもしくは置き換えによる
.B 動的な
設定である)
.br
.B M
.\"O .RB ( modified
.\"O from routing daemon or redirect)
(経路制御デーモンもしくは置き換えによる
.B 変更
である)
.br
.B A
.\"O (installed by
.\"O .BR addrconf )
.RB ( addrconf
により設定されている)
.br
.B C
.\"O .RB ( cache
.\"O entry)
.RB ( キャッシュ
のエントリーである)
.br
.B !
.\"O .RB ( reject
.\"O route)
.RB ( 拒否
(reject) する経路である)
.TP
.B Metric 
.\"O The 'distance' to the target (usually counted in hops). It is not used by
.\"O recent kernels, but may be needed by routing daemons.
ターゲットの距離 (通常はホップ数) である。
最近のカーネルでは無視されるが、
経路制御デーモンが必要とする可能性がある。
.TP
.B Ref    
.\"O Number of references to this route. (Not used in the Linux kernel.)
指定のルートの参照数 (Linux カーネルでは使用しない)。
.TP
.B Use
.\"O Count of lookups for the route.  Depending on the use of -F and -C this will
.\"O be either route cache misses (-F) or hits (-C).
経路の参照回数である。
-F と -C オプションの使用に依存する。
これは経路キャッシュが失敗 (-F) とヒット (-C) した回数である。
.TP
.B Iface
.\"O Interface to which packets for this route will be sent.
この経路で使用するインタフェースである。
.TP
.B MSS 
.\"O Default maximum segement size for TCP connections over this route.
この経路での TCP 接続のデフォルト最大セグメントである。
.TP
.B Window  
.\"O Default window size for TCP connections over this route.
この経路での TCP 接続のデフォルトのウィンドウ・サイズである。
.TP
.B irtt
.\"O Initial RTT (Round Trip Time). The kernel uses this to guess about the best
.\"O TCP protocol parameters without waiting on (possibly slow) answers.
初期 RTT (ラウンドトリップ時間) である。
カーネルは、(遅いと思われる) 返信の待ち時間を含まない
最良の TCP プロトコルパラメーターを推測するために、この値を使う。
.TP
.\"O .B HH (cached only)
.\"O The number of ARP entries and cached routes that refer to the hardware
.\"O header cache for the cached route. This will be \-1 if a hardware
.\"O address is not needed for the interface of the cached route (e.g. lo).
.B HH (キャッシュのみ)
キャッシュされた経路のうちハードウェア・ヘッダー・キャッシュを参照するものと
ARP エントリの数である。
キャッシュされた経路のインタフェースが
ハードウェア・アドレスを必要としない場合 (例えば lo) では、
この値は \-1 になる。
.TP
.\"O .B Arp (cached only)
.\"O Whether or not the hardware address for the cached route is up to date.
.B Arp (キャッシュのみ)
キャッシュされた経路に対するハードウェアアドレスの更新状況である。
.LP
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /proc/net/ipv6_route
.br
.I /proc/net/route
.br
.I /proc/net/rt_cache
.LP
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.I ifconfig(8), netstat(8), arp(8), rarp(8)
.LP
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O .B Route
.\"O for Linux was originally written by Fred N.  van Kempen,
.\"O <waltje@uwalt.nl.mugnet.org> and then modified by Johannes Stille and
.\"O Linus Torvalds for pl15. Alan Cox added the mss and window options for
.\"O Linux 1.1.22. irtt support and merged with netstat from Bernd Eckenfels.
Linux 用の
.B route
コマンドは、
最初に Fred N. van Kempen, <waltje@uwalt.nl.mugnet.org> によって書かれ、
Johannes Stille と Linus Torvalds により pl15 に更新された。
Alan Cox は mss と window オプションを Linux 1.1.22 で追加した。
irtt のサポートと netstat への併合は Bernd Eckenfels によるものである。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Currently maintained by Phil Blundell <Philip.Blundell@pobox.com>.
現在は Phil Blundell <Philip.Blundell@pobox.com> がメンテナンスしている。
