.\" This page is originally in the net-tools package.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu 13 Ap 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SLATTACH 8 "12 Feb 1994" "" ""
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O slattach \- attach a network interface to a serial line
.SH 名前
slattach \- ネットワークインターフェースをシリアルラインにアタッチする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "slattach [-dehlLmnqv] [-c command] [-p proto] [-s speed] [tty]"
.br
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Slattach
.\"O is a tiny little program that can be used to put a normal terminal
.\"O ("serial") line into one of several "network" modes, thus allowing
.\"O you to use it for point-to-point links to other computers.
.B slattach
は小さなプログラムで、
は通常の端末回線 (「シリアルライン」)  を、
ある種の「ネットワーク」モードで動作できるようにする。
これによって他のコンピュータとの point-to-point の接続が可能になる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B "[-c command]"
.\"O Execute
.\"O .B command
.\"O when the line is hung up. This can be used to run scripts or re-establish
.\"O connections when a link goes down.
接続が切断されたときに
.B command
を実行する。
リンクが落ちたときにスクリプトを実行し、接続を再確立するのに利用できる。
.TP
.B "[-d]"
.\"O Enable debugging output.  Useful when determining why a given
.\"O setup doesn't work.
デバッグ出力を有効にする。
与えた設定が動作しない理由を調べるのに便利。
.TP
.B "[-h]"
.\"O Exit when the carrier is lost. This works on both /dev/tty and /dev/cua
.\"O devices by directly monitoring the carrier status every 15 seconds.
キャリアが失われたら終了する。
/dev/tty と /dev/cua 両デバイスで、
15 秒おきに直接キャリアの状態をモニターすることによって動作する。
.\"nakano: いまいち...
.TP
.\"nakano: TP 補完.
.B "[-v]"
.\"O Enable verbose output.  Useful in shell scripts.
詳細な出力を有効にする。シェルスクリプトに便利。
.TP
.B "[-q]"
.\"O Operate in quiet mode - no messages at all.
無言モードで動作する。全くメッセージを表示しない。
.TP
.B "[-l]"
.\"O Create an UUCP-style lockfile for the device in /var/lock.
UUCP スタイルの、デバイスのロックファイルを
/var/lock に作成する。
.TP
.B "[-n]"
.\"O Equivalent to the "mesg n" command.
"mesg n" コマンドと等価。
.TP
.B "[-m]"
.\"O Do \fBnot\fP initialize the line into 8 bits raw mode.
ラインを 8 ビット raw モードに初期化\fBしない\fP。
.TP
.B "[-e]"
.\"O Exit right after initializing device, instead of waiting for the
.\"O line to hangup.
デバイスを初期化したらすぐに終了する。
通常の動作ではラインの切断を待つ。
.TP
.B "[-L]"
.\"O Enable 3 wire operation. The terminal is moved into CLOCAL mode, 
.\"O carrier watching is disabled.
3 線動作 (3 wire opearation) を有効にする。
端末を CLOCAL モードに移行し、
キャリア監視を無効にする。
.br
(訳注: 3 線動作とは、
おそらく (Rx,Tx,GND) の 3 本の信号線で通信することでしょう)
.TP
.B "[-p proto]"
.\"O Set a specific kind of protocol to use on the line.  The default
.\"O is set to
.\"O .B "cslip"
.\"O , i.e. compressed SLIP.  Other possible values are
.\"O .B "slip"
.\"O (normal SLIP), 
.\"O .B "adaptive"
.\"O (adaptive CSLIP/SLIP),
.\"O .B "ppp"
.\"O (Point-to-Point Protocol)
.\"O and
.\"O .B "kiss"
.\"O (a protocol used for communicating with AX.25 packet radio terminal node controllers).
ラインに用いるプロトコルを特定のものに指定する。
デフォルトは
.B "cslip"
すなわち compressed SLIP である。
他に指定可能な値には、
.B "slip"
(normal SLIP),
.B "adaptive"
(CSLIP/SLIP 自動認識),
.B "ppp"
(Point-to-Point プロトコル),
.B "kiss"
(AX.25 パケット無線端末のノードコントローラを用いて通信するプロトコル)
などである。
.\"O The special argument
.\"O .B "tty"
.\"O can be used to put the device back into normal serial operation.
.\"O Using 'ppp' mode is not normally useful as ppp requires an additional ppp daemon
.\"O .B pppd
.\"O to be active on the line. For kiss connections the 
.\"O .B axattach
.\"O program should be used.
特殊な指定に
.B "tty"
があり、これはデバイスを通常のシリアル動作に戻す。
\&'ppp' モードを用いるのは通常は良くない。
ppp では、別に ppp デーモン
.B pppd
をラインでアクティブにする必要があるからである。
kiss 接続には、
.B axattach
プログラムを用いるほうが良い。
.TP
.B "[-s speed]"
.\"O Set a specific line speed, other than the default.
デフォルト以外の接続速度を指定する。
.PP
.\"O If no arguments are given, the current terminal line (usually: the
.\"O login device) is used.  Otherwise, an attempt is made to claim the
.\"O indicated terminal port, lock it, and open it.
引数をひとつも与えないと、現在の端末回線 (通常はログインデバイス)
を用いる。引数を与えた場合は、その端末ポートを要求し、
ロックし、オープンしようとする。
.\"nakano: claim の訳?
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /dev/cua* /var/lock/LCK.*
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O None known.
今のところない。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O axattach(8), dip(8) pppd(8), sliplogin(8).
.BR axattach (8),
.BR dip (8),
.BR pppd (8),
.BR sliplogin (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
Fred N. van Kempen, <waltje@uwalt.nl.mugnet.org>
.br
Alan Cox, <Alan.Cox@linux.org>
.br
Miquel van Smoorenburg, <miquels@drinkel.ow.org>
.br
George Shearer, <gshearer@one.net>
.br
Yossi Gottlieb, <yogo@math.tau.ac.il>
.\"O .br

