\"Shamelessly copied from zmore.1 by Philippe Troin <phil@fifi.org>
\"for Debian GNU/Linux
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Apr 29 22:55:08 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	compress	圧縮
.\"WORD:	uncompress	伸長
.\"
.TH BZDIFF 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O bzcmp, bzdiff \- compare bzip2 compressed files
bzcmp, bzdiff \- bzip2 圧縮されたファイルを比較する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B bzcmp
[ cmp_options ] file1
[ file2 ]
.br
.B bzdiff
[ diff_options ] file1
[ file2 ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I  Bzcmp
.\"O and 
.\"O .I bzdiff
.\"O are used to invoke the
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or the
.\"O .I diff
.\"O program on bzip2 compressed files.  
.I bzcmp
と
.I bzdiff
は bzip2 圧縮されたファイルに対し、それぞれ
.I cmp
と
.I diff
プログラムを呼び出すために使われる。
.\"O All options specified are passed
.\"O directly to
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or
.\"O .IR diff "."
指定されたすべてのオプションは
.I cmp
や
.I diff
に直接渡される。
.\"O If only 1 file is specified, then the files compared are
.\"O .I file1
.\"O and an uncompressed
.\"O .IR file1 ".bz2."
ファイルが 1 つしか指定されていない場合、比較されるファイルは
.I file1
と
.IR file1 ".bz2"
を伸長したファイルである。
.\"O If two files are specified, then they are uncompressed if necessary and fed to
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or
.\"O .IR diff "."
2 つのファイルが指定された場合、必要であれば伸長を行ってから、
.I cmp
や
.I diff
に渡される。
.\"O The exit status from 
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or
.\"O .I diff
.\"O is preserved.
終了状態は
.I cmp
や
.I diff
のものが採用される。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
cmp(1), diff(1), bzmore(1), bzless(1), bzgrep(1), bzip2(1)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Messages from the
.\"O .I cmp
.\"O or
.\"O .I diff
.\"O programs refer to temporary filenames instead of those specified.
.I cmp
や
.I diff
プログラムのメッセージは、指定されたファイル名ではなく、
テンポラリのファイル名を参照する。
