\"Shamelessly copied from zmore.1 by Philippe Troin <phil@fifi.org>
\"for Debian GNU/Linux
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu May  1 12:59:07 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        compress        圧縮
.\"WORD:        decompress      伸長
.\"
.TH BZGREP 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O bzgrep, bzfgrep, bzegrep \- search possibly bzip2 compressed files for a regular expression
bzgrep, bzfgrep, bzegrep \- bzip2 圧縮されている可能性のあるファイルで、正規表現の検索をする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B bzgrep
[ grep_options ]
.BI  [\ -e\ ] " pattern"
.IR filename ".\|.\|."
.br
.B bzegrep
[ egrep_options ]
.BI  [\ -e\ ] " pattern"
.IR filename ".\|.\|."
.br
.B bzfgrep
[ fgrep_options ]
.BI  [\ -e\ ] " pattern"
.IR filename ".\|.\|."
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .IR  Bzgrep
.\"O is used to invoke the
.\"O .I grep
.\"O on bzip2-compressed files. All options specified are passed directly to
.\"O .I grep.
.I bzgrep
は、bzip2 で圧縮されたファイルに対して
.I grep
を呼び出すために使われる。
指定されたすべてのオプションは
.I grep
に直接渡される。
.\"O If no file is specified, then the standard input is decompressed
.\"O if necessary and fed to grep.
ファイルが指定されない場合は、標準入力を (必要であれば伸長した後で)
.I grep 
に渡す。
.\"O Otherwise the given files are uncompressed if necessary and fed to
.\"O .I grep.
それ以外の場合は、指示されたファイルを (必要であれば伸長した後で) 
.I grep 
に渡す。
.PP
.\"O If
.\"O .I bzgrep
.\"O is invoked as
.\"O .I bzegrep
.\"O or
.\"O .I bzfgrep
.\"O then
.\"O .I egrep
.\"O or
.\"O .I fgrep
.\"O is used instead of
.\"O .I grep.
.I bzgrep
が
.I bzegrep
や
.I bzfgrep
として呼び出された場合、
.I egrep
と
.I fgrep
がそれぞれ
.I grep
の代わりに使われる。
.\"O If the GREP environment variable is set,
.\"O .I bzgrep
.\"O uses it as the
.\"O .I grep
.\"O program to be invoked. For example:
.\"O 
.\"O     for sh:  GREP=fgrep  bzgrep string files
.\"O     for csh: (setenv GREP fgrep; bzgrep string files)
環境変数 GREP が設定された場合、
.I bzgrep
はその内容を
.I grep
プログラムの代わりに呼び出す。
たとえば、

    sh の場合:  GREP=fgrep  bzgrep string files
    csh の場合: (setenv GREP fgrep; bzgrep string files)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Charles Levert (charles@comm.polymtl.ca). Adapted to bzip2 by Philippe
.\"O Troin <phil@fifi.org> for Debian GNU/Linux.
Charles Levert (charles@comm.polymtl.ca). 
Debian GNU/Linux で使うために
Philippe Troin <phil@fifi.org> が bzip2 用に改作した。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
grep(1), egrep(1), fgrep(1), bzdiff(1), bzmore(1), bzless(1), bzip2(1)
