.\"Shamelessly copied from zmore.1 by Philippe Troin <phil@fifi.org>
.\"for Debian GNU/Linux
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu May  1 14:03:39 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        compress                圧縮
.\"WORD:        uncompress              伸長
.\"WORD:        perusal                 閲覧
.\"WORD:        terminal                端末
.\"WORD:        caridge return          キャリッジリターン
.\"WORD:        sequence                シーケンス
.\"WORD:        erase charactor         削除文字
.\"WORD:        kill charactor          キル文字
.\"WORD:        teletype                テレタイプ
.\"
.TH BZMORE 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O bzmore, bzless \- file perusal filter for crt viewing of bzip2 compressed text
bzmore, bzless \- bzip2 圧縮されたテキストを CRT で見るためのファイル閲覧フィルタ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B bzmore
[ name ...  ]
.br
.B bzless
[ name ...  ]
.\"O .SH NOTE
.SH 注意
.\"O In the following description,
.\"O .I bzless
.\"O and
.\"O .I less
.\"O can be used interchangeably with
.\"O .I bzmore
.\"O and
.\"O .I more.
以下の説明では、
.I bzless
と
.I less
は、
.I bzmore
と
.I more
に置き換えて使用することができる。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I  Bzmore
.\"O is a filter which allows examination of compressed or plain text files
.\"O one screenful at a time on a soft-copy terminal.
.I bzmore
は、圧縮されたテキストファイルや通常のテキストファイルを
ソフトコピー端末上で一度に全画面で閲覧するためのフィルタである。
.\"O .I bzmore
.\"O works on files compressed with
.\"O .I bzip2
.\"O and also on uncompressed files.
.I bzmore
は
.I bzip2
で圧縮されたファイルに対して動作する
(圧縮されていないファイルに対しても動作する)。
.\"O If a file does not exist,
.\"O .I bzmore
.\"O looks for a file of the same name with the addition of a .bz2 suffix.
ファイルが存在しない場合、
.I bzmore
は、そのファイル名に拡張子 .bz2 をつけた名前のファイルを探す。
.PP
.\"O .I Bzmore
.\"O normally pauses after each screenful, printing --More--
.\"O at the bottom of the screen.
.I bzmore
は通常、1 画面毎に画面の一番下に --続ける-- と表示して一時停止する。
.\"O If the user then types a carriage return, one more line is displayed.
キャリッジリターンを打つと、1 行分表示を進める。
.\"O If the user hits a space,
.\"O another screenful is displayed.  Other possibilities are enumerated later.
スペースを打つと、1 画面分表示を進める。
他のキーについては、後に列挙する。
.PP
.\"O .I Bzmore
.\"O looks in the file
.\"O .I /etc/termcap
.\"O to determine terminal characteristics,
.\"O and to determine the default window size.
.I bzmore
は端末の特性とデフォルトのウインドウサイズを決定するために、
ファイル
.I /etc/termcap
を調べる。
.\"O On a terminal capable of displaying 24 lines,
.\"O the default window size is 22 lines.
24 行表示できる端末では、デフォルトのウインドウサイズは 22 行である。
.\"O Other sequences which may be typed when
.\"O .I bzmore
.\"O pauses, and their effects, are as follows (\fIi\fP is an optional integer
.\"O argument, defaulting to 1) :
.I bzmore
が一時停止しているときに打つことのできる、
その他のシーケンスとその結果は次の通りである
(\fIi\fP はオプションの引き数 (整数値) で、デフォルトは 1 である)。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fP<space>
.\"O display
.\"O .I i
.\"O more lines, (or another screenful if no argument is given)
.I i
行分表示を進める
(引き数が与えられない場合、1 画面分進める)。
.PP
.IP ^D
.\"O display 11 more lines (a ``scroll'').
.\"O If
.\"O .I i
.\"O is given, then the scroll size is set to \fIi\|\fP.
11 行進めて表示する (``スクロール'')。
.I i
が与えられると、スクロールサイズが \fIi\|\fP に設定される。
.PP
.IP d
.\"O same as ^D (control-D)
^D (control-D) と同じ。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fPz
.\"O same as typing a space except that \fIi\|\fP, if present, becomes the new
.\"O window size.  Note that the window size reverts back to the default at the
.\"O end of the current file.
\fIi\|\fP が与えられた場合に新しいウインドウサイズになる、という以外は
スペースを打った場合と同じ。
現在のファイルの終りでは、ウインドウサイズがデフォルトの値に
戻ることに注意すること。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fPs
.\"O skip \fIi\|\fP lines and print a screenful of lines
\fIi\|\fP 行分スキップし、画面いっぱいに表示する。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fPf
.\"O skip \fIi\fP screenfuls and print a screenful of lines
\fIi\|\fP 画面分スキップし、画面いっぱいに表示する。
.PP
.\"O .IP "q or Q"
.IP "q または Q"
.\"O quit reading the current file; go on to the next (if any)
現在のファイルの読み込みを終了し、(もしあるなら) 次のファイルに移る。
.PP
.\"O .IP "e or q"
.IP "e または q"
.\"O When the prompt --More--(Next file: 
.\"O .IR file )
.\"O is printed, this command causes bzmore to exit.
プロンプト --続ける--(次のファイル: 
.IR file )
が表示されているとき、このコマンドは bzmore を終了させる。
.PP
.IP s
.\"O When the prompt --More--(Next file: 
.\"O .IR file )
.\"O is printed, this command causes bzmore to skip the next file and continue.
プロンプト --続ける--(次のファイル: 
.IR file )
が表示されているとき、このコマンドは bzmore を次のファイルに
スキップさせ続行させる。
.PP 
.IP =
.\"O Display the current line number.
現在の行番号を表示する。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fP/expr
.\"O search for the \fIi\|\fP-th occurrence of the regular expression \fIexpr.\fP
正規表現 \fIexpr\fP の \fIi\|\fP 番目の場所を検索する。
.\"O If the pattern is not found,
.\"O .I bzmore
.\"O goes on to the next file (if any).
パターンが見つからない場合、
.I bzmore
は (もしあるなら) 次のファイルに移る。
.\"O Otherwise, a screenful is displayed, starting two lines before the place
.\"O where the expression was found.
見つかった場合は、正規表現が見つかった場所の 2 行前から始まる
1 画面分を表示する。
.\"O The user's erase and kill characters may be used to edit the regular
.\"O expression.
削除文字やキル文字を正規表現を編集するために使用してもよい。
.\"O Erasing back past the first column cancels the search command.
最初の桁を越えて削除すると、検索コマンドはキャンセルされる。
.PP
.IP \fIi\|\fPn
.\"O search for the \fIi\|\fP-th occurrence of the last regular expression entered.
前に打ち込んだ正規表現の \fIi\|\fP 番目の場所を検索する。
.PP
.IP !command
.\"O invoke a shell with \fIcommand\|\fP. 
.\"O The character `!' in "command" are replaced with the
.\"O previous shell command.  The sequence "\\!" is replaced by "!".
\fIcommand\|\fP でシェルを起動する。
"command" 内の `!' という文字は、前のシェルコマンドで置き換えられる。
"\\!" という文字列は "!" で置き換えられる。
.PP
.\"O .IP ":q or :Q"
.IP ":q または :Q"
.\"O quit reading the current file; go on to the next (if any)
.\"O (same as q or Q).
現在のファイルの読み込みを終了し、(もしあるなら) 次のファイルに移る。
(q または Q と同じ)。
.PP
.IP .
.\"O (dot) repeat the previous command.
(ドット) 前のコマンドを繰り返す。
.PP
.\"O The commands take effect immediately, i.e., it is not necessary to
.\"O type a carriage return.
コマンドはすぐに影響を及ぼす。
つまりキャリッジリターンを打つ必要はない。
.\"O Up to the time when the command character itself is given,
.\"O the user may hit the line kill character to cancel the numerical
.\"O argument being formed.
ユーザーはコマンド文字そのものを打つ前に、
数値の引き数の入力をキャンセルするために、
キル文字を打ち込むことができる。
.\"O In addition, the user may hit the erase character to redisplay the
.\"O --More-- message.
さらに、ユーザーは --続ける-- というメッセージを
もう一度表示させるために、削除文字を打ち込むことができる。
.PP
.\"O At any time when output is being sent to the terminal, the user can
.\"O hit the quit key (normally control\-\\).
出力が端末に送られるどの時点でも、ユーザーは終了キー (通常は control\-\\) を
打ち込むことができる。
.\"O .I Bzmore
.\"O will stop sending output, and will display the usual --More--
.\"O prompt.
.I bzmore
は出力を送るのを止めて、通常の --続ける-- プロンプトを表示する。
.\"O The user may then enter one of the above commands in the normal manner.
その後、ユーザーは上のコマンドを普通の方法で打ち込むことができる。
.\"O Unfortunately, some output is lost when this is done, due to the
.\"O fact that any characters waiting in the terminal's output queue
.\"O are flushed when the quit signal occurs.
終了キーを打った場合に、運悪く出力が失われることがある。
それは、終了シグナルが起きたときに、端末の出力キューで待っていた
すべての文字がフラッシュされてしまったためである。
.PP
.\"O The terminal is set to
.\"O .I noecho
.\"O mode by this program so that the output can be continuous.
.\"O What you type will thus not show on your terminal, except for the / and !
.\"O commands.
このプログラムは出力を連続的なものにするために、端末を
.I noecho
モードにする。/ と ! コマンドを除いて、打ち込まれた文字は端末上に見えない。
.PP
.\"O If the standard output is not a teletype, then
.\"O .I bzmore
.\"O acts just like
.\"O .I bzcat,
.\"O except that a header is printed before each file.
標準出力がテレタイプでない場合、
.I bzmore
は
.I bzcat
のように動作する。
ただし、ヘッダが各ファイルの前に表示される。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.DT
.\"O /etc/termcap		Terminal data base
/etc/termcap		端末データベース
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
more(1), less(1), bzip2(1), bzdiff(1), bzgrep(1)
