.ig \"-*- nroff -*-
Copyright (C) 1999-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Feb 15 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.de TQ
.br
.ns
.TP \\$1
..
.TH GROFF_MAN 7 "22 May 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.
.\"O groff_man \- groff `man' macros to support generation of man pages
groff_man \- マニュアルページ生成用の groff `man' マクロ
.
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.
.B groff
.B \-man
[
.IR options .\|.\|.
]
[
.IR files .\|.\|.
]
.
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.
.\"O The 
.\"O .B tmac.an 
.\"O macros used to generate man pages with 
.\"O .I groff
.\"O were written by James Clark.  
.\"O This document provides a brief summary of the use of each macro in that
.\"O package.
.I groff
がマニュアルページを生成するときに使われる
.B tmac.an
マクロは、James Clark により記述された。
このドキュメントは、パッケージに含まれるそれぞれのマクロの使用法
を簡単に説明する。
.
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.
.\"O The
.\"O .B man
.\"O macros understand the following command line options (which define various
.\"O registers).
.B man
マクロは以下のようなコマンドラインオプションを解釈する
(オプションは、さまざまなレジスタ値を定義する)。
.TP
.B \-rC1
.\"O If more than one manual page is given on the command line, number the
.\"O pages continuously, rather than starting each at\ 1.
コマンドラインに一つ以上のマニュアルページが与えられたときに、
ページ番号をそれぞれ 1 から始めるのではなく連番にする。
.TP
.B \-rD1
.\"O Double-sided printing.
.\"O Footers for even and odd pages are formatted differently.
両面印刷。
フッタの偶数・奇数ページは異なる整形になる。
.TP
.BI \-rP nnn
.\"O Enumeration of pages will start with
.\"O .I nnn
.\"O rather than with\ 1.
開始ページ番号を 1 からではなく
.I nnn
からにする。
.TP
.BI \-rS xx
.\"O Base document font size is
.\"O .I xx
.\"O points
.\"O .RI ( xx
.\"O can be 10, 11, or\ 12) rather than 10\ points.
基準となるドキュメントフォントサイズを 10 ポイントではなく
.I xx
ポイントにする。
.RI ( xx
は 10, 11, 12 が選択できる)
.TP
.BI \-rX nnn
.\"O After page\ \c
.\"O .IR nnn ,
.\"O number pages as
.\"O .IR nnn a,
.\"O .IR nnn b,
.\"O .IR nnn c,
.\"O etc.
.\"O For example, the option `\-rX2' will produce the following page numbers:
.\"O 1, 2, 2a, 2b, 2c, etc.
.I nnn
ページの後のページ番号を、
.IR nnn a,
.IR nnn b,
.IR nnn c,
のようにする。
例えば、オプション `\-rX2' は以下のようなページ番号を生成する:
1, 2, 2a, 2b, 2c, ...
.
.\"O .SH USAGE
.SH 使用法
.
.\"O This section describes the available macros for manual pages.
.\"O For further customization, put additional macros and requests into the file
.\"O .B man.local
.\"O which will be loaded immediately after
.\"O .BR tmac.an .
このセクションでは、マニュアルページに使用できるマクロについて説明する。
さらに調整する場合は、
.B tmac.an
の直後にロードされる
.B man.local
ファイルに追加のマクロとリクエストを記述すること。
.TP
.BI .TH " title section " [ extra1 "] [" extra2 "] [" extra3 ]
.\"O Sets the title of the man page to 
.\"O .I title
.\"O and the section to
.\"O .IR section ,
.\"O which must take on a value between 1 and\ 8.
マニュアルページのタイトルを
.I titie
に、セクション番号を
.I section
に設定する。
セクション番号は 1 から 8 までの値にすること。
.\"O The value
.\"O .I section
.\"O may also have a string appended, e.g. `.pm', to indicate a specific
.\"O subsection of the man pages.
.I section
の値は `.pm' のような文字列を追加して、マニュアルページの特別なサブセクション
を指定してもかまわない。
.\"O Both
.\"O .I title
.\"O and
.\"O .I section
.\"O are positioned at the left and right in the header line (with
.\"O .I section
.\"O in parentheses immediately appended to
.\"O .IR title .
.I title
と
.I section
は、ヘッダの左右に配置される。
.RI ( section
は、括弧でくくられて
.I title
の直後に置かれる)
.\"O .I extra1
.\"O will be positioned in the middle of the footer line.
.I extra1
は、フッタ行の中央に配置される。
.\"O .I extra2
.\"O will be positioned at the left in the footer line (resp. at the left on
.\"O even pages and at the right on odd pages if double-sided printing is
.\"O active).
.I extra2
は、フッタ行の左側に配置される。(両面印刷の時は、偶数ページには右側、
奇数ページには左側にそれぞれ配置される)
.\"O .I extra3
.\"O is centered in the header line.
.I extra3
は、ヘッダ行の中央に配置される。
.IP
.\"O For HTML output, headers and footers are completely supressed.
HTML出力時は、ヘッダ行とフッタ行はまったく出力されない。
.IP
.\"O Additionally, this macro starts a new page; the new line number is\ 1 again
.\"O (except if the `-rC1' option is given on the command line) -- this feature
.\"O is intended only for formatting multiple man pages; a single man page should
.\"O contain exactly one
.\"O .B TH
.\"O macro at the beginning of the file.
さらに、このマクロは新しいページを開始する。新しいページ番号は再び 1 になる。
(コマンドラインに `-rC1' オプションが指定された場合は除く) -- この特徴は
複数のマニュアルページを整形する場合だけを想定している。
単一のマニュアルページには
.B TH
マクロは一つだけ、ファイル先頭に含まれるべきである。
.TP
.BI ".SH [" "text for a heading" ]
.\"O Sets up an unnumbered section heading sticking out to the left.
.\"O Prints out all the text following
.\"O .B SH
.\"O up to the end of the line (resp. the text in the next line if there is no
.\"O argument to
.\"O .BR SH )
.\"O in bold face, one size larger than the base document size.
.\"O Additionally, the left margin for the following text is reset to its default
.\"O value.
数字のないセクションの見出し (heading) を、左側に突き出すように設定する。
.B SH
に続くテキストは、行末までのすべてがボールド体かつ標準のドキュメントフォントサイズ
よりひとまわり大きな文字で出力される。
.RB ( SH
に引き数がない場合は、次の行のテキストが見出しになる)
さらに、後に続くテキストの左側マージンはデフォルト値にリセットされる。
.TP
.BI ".SS [" "text for a heading" ]
.\"O Sets up an secondary, unnumbered section heading.
.\"O Prints out all the text following
.\"O .B SS
.\"O up to the end of the line (resp. the text in the next line if there is no
.\"O argument to
.\"O .BR SS )
.\"O in bold face, at the same size as the base document size.
.\"O Additionally, the left margin for the following text is reset to its default
.\"O value.
第 2 レベルの、数字のないセクションの見出しを設定する。
.B SS
に続くテキストは、行末までのすべてがボールド体かつ標準のドキュメントフォントサイズ
と同じサイズで出力される。
.RB ( SS
に引き数がない場合は、次の行のテキストが見出しになる)
さらに、後に続くテキストの左側マージンはデフォルト値にリセットされる。
.TP
.BI ".TP [" nnn ]
.\"O Sets up an indented paragraph with label.
.\"O The indentation is set to 
.\"O .I nnn
.\"O if that argument is supplied (the default unit is `n' if omitted), otherwise
.\"O it is set to the default indentation value.
.\"O The first line of text following this macro is interpreted as a string to be
.\"O printed flush-left, as it is appropriate for a label.
.\"O It is not interpreted as part of a paragraph, so there is no attempt to fill
.\"O the first line with text from the following input lines.
.\"O Nevertheless, if the label is not as wide as the indentation, then the
.\"O paragraph starts at the same line (but indented), continuing on the
.\"O following lines.
.\"O If the label is wider than the indentation, then the descriptive part of the
.\"O paragraph begins on the line following the label, entirely indented.
.\"O Note that neither font shape nor font size of the label is set to a default
.\"O value; on the other hand, the rest of the text will have default font
.\"O settings.
.\"O The
.\"O .B TP
.\"O macro is the macro used for the explanations you are just reading.
ラベル付きの、インデントされた段落を設定する。
引き数が指定された場合は、インデント量が
.I nnn
に設定される。(単位を省略した場合のデフォルトは `n' (半角) になる)
引き数を省略すると、デフォルトのインデント量が設定される。
このマクロの次行のテキストは、左ぞろいに表示される文字列とみなされて、
ラベルとしてあつかわれる。
この行は段落の一部として処理されないので、その次の入力行が行送りされて
連結されることはない。
そのかわり、ラベルがインデント量より長くない場合には、段落は同じ行から
始まり、後に続く行が連結されていく。(ただし段落はインデントされる)
ラベルがインデント量より長い場合は、段落の記述部分はラベルの次行から
始まり、すべてインデントされる。
ラベルのフォント形もフォントサイズもデフォルト値に設定されないことに
注意すること。一方で、テキストの残りはデフォルトのフォントに設定される。
.B TP
マクロは、今まさにあなたが読んでいる説明に使用されている。
.TP
.B .LP
.TQ
.B .PP
.TQ
.B .P
.\"O These macros are mutual aliases.
.\"O Any of them causes a line break at the current position, followed by a
.\"O vertical space downwards by the amount specified by the
.\"O .B PD
.\"O macro.
.\"O The font size and shape are reset to the default value (10pt resp. Roman).
.\"O Finally, the current left margin is restored.
これらのマクロはそれぞれの別名である。
これらは、現在の位置で改行をして、
.B PD
マクロで指定された量だけ下方に行送りをする。
フォントサイズと形状はデフォルト値にリセットされる。(10pt の ローマン体)
最後に、現在の左マージンは保持される。
.TP
.BI ".IP [" designator "] [" nnn ]
.\"O Sets up an indented paragraph, using 
.\"O .I designator 
.\"O as a tag to mark its beginning.
.\"O The indentation is set to
.\"O .I nnn
.\"O if that argument is supplied (default unit is `n'), otherwise the default
.\"O indentation value is used.
.\"O Font size and face of the paragraph (but not the designator) are reset to
.\"O its default values.
.\"O To start an indented paragraph with a particular indentation but without a
.\"O designator, use `""' (two doublequotes) as the second argument.
インデントされた段落を設定する。
.I designator
を段落開始の見出し記号とする。
引き数が指定された場合は、インデント量が
.I nnn
に設定される。(デフォルトの単位は `n' (半角) である)
引き数を省略すると、デフォルトのインデント量が設定される。
見出し記号以外の、段落のフォントサイズと形状はデフォルト値にリセットされる。
特定のインデント量の段落を設定したいが、見出し記号は必要ない場合は
第二引き数に `""' (二つのダブルクォーテーション) を使用する。
.IP
.\"O For example, the following paragraphs were all set up with bullets as the
.\"O designator, using `.IP\ \\(bu\ 4':
例として、以下の段落はすべて見出し記号として中黒 (bullets) を設定するため、
`.IP\ \\(bu\ 4' を使用している:
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
.B IP
.\"O is one of the three macros used in 
.\"O .B tmac.an
.\"O to format lists.
は、
.B tmac.an
で使用されるリストを整形する三つのマクロの一つである。
.IP \(bu 4
.B HP
.\"O is another.
.\"O This macro produces a paragraph with a left hanging indentation.
もその一つである。
このマクロは左側にとびだしたインデントをもつ段落を生成する。
.IP \(bu 4
.B TP
.\"O is another.
.\"O This macro produces an unindented label followed by an indented paragraph.
もその一つである。
このマクロはインデントしていないラベルに続いて、インデントされた段落を生成する。
.RE
.TP
.BI ".HP [" nnn ]
.\"O Sets up a paragraph with hanging left indentation.
.\"O The indentation is set to
.\"O .I nnn
.\"O if that argument is supplied (default unit is `n'), otherwise the default
.\"O indentation value is used.
.\"O Font size and face are reset to its default values.
.\"O The following paragraph illustrates the effect of this macro with hanging
.\"O indentation set to\ 4:
.\"O .RS
.\"O .HP 4
.\"O This is a paragraph following an invocation of the
.\"O .B HP
.\"O macro.
.\"O As you can see, it produces a paragraph where all lines but the first are
.\"O indented.
.\"O .RE
左側にとびだしたインデントをもつ段落を設定する。
引き数が指定された場合は、インデント量が
.I nnn
に設定される。(デフォルトの単位は `n' (半角) である)
引き数を省略すると、デフォルトのインデント量が設定される。
フォントサイズと形状はデフォルト値にリセットされる。
以下の段落で、インデント量を 4 にしたこのマクロの効果を示す:
.RS
.HP 4
この段落は、
.B HP
マクロの影響下にある。
見てのとおり、このマクロは最初の行以外がすべてインデントしている段落を
生成する。
.RE
.TP
.BI ".RS [" nnn ]
.\"O This macro moves the left margin to the right by the value
.\"O .I nnn
.\"O if specified (default unit is `n'); otherwise the default indentation value
.\"O is used.
.\"O Calls to the
.\"O .B RS
.\"O macro can be nested.
このマクロは、引き数が指定されると左側マージン量を右方向へ
.I nnn
の値だけ増加する。(デフォルトの単位は `n' (半角) である)
引き数を省略すると、デフォルトのインデント量が設定される。
.B RS
マクロの呼び出しは入れ子にできる。
.TP
.BI ".RE [" nnn ]
.\"O This macro moves the left margin back to level
.\"O .IR nnn ;
.\"O if no argument is given, it moves one level back.
.\"O The first level (i.e., no call to
.\"O .B RS
.\"O yet) has number\ 1, and each call to
.\"O .B RS
.\"O increases the level by\ 1.
このマクロは、左側マージンを
.I nnn
のレベルに戻す。
引き数が与えられなかった場合は、1 レベル戻る。
最初のレベル (例えば
.B RS
の呼び出しがまだ行われていないときなど) は 1 であり、
.B RS
が呼び出されるたびにレベルは 1 ずつ増加していく。
.PP
.\"O To summarize, the following macros cause a line break with the insertion of
.\"O vertical space (which amount can be changed with the
.\"O .B PD
.\"O macro):
.\"O .BR SH ,
.\"O .BR SS ,
.\"O .BR TP ,
.\"O .B LP
.\"O .RB ( PP ,
.\"O .BR P ),
.\"O .BR IP ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR HP .
.\"O The macros
.\"O .B RS
.\"O and
.\"O .B RE
.\"O also cause a break but no insertion of vertical space.
まとめると、以下のマクロ
.RB ( SH ,
.BR SS ,
.BR TP ,
.B LP
.RB ( PP ,
.BR P ),
.BR IP ,
.BR HP )
による改行は指定量の行送り幅が挿入される。(行送りの量は、
.B PD
マクロにより変更できる)
また、
.B RS
と
.B RE
のマクロは、改行時に行送り幅の変更はしない。
.
.\"O .SH "MACROS TO SET FONTS"
.SH フォント設定用のマクロ
.
.\"O The standard font is Roman; the default text size is 10\ point.
標準のフォントはローマン体であり、デフォルトのサイズは 10 ポイントである。
.TP
.BI ".SM [" text ]
.\"O Causes the text on the same line or the text on the next line to appear in a
.\"O font that is one point size smaller than the default font.
同じ行のテキストまたは次の行のテキストを、デフォルトのフォントから 1 ポイント
小さいサイズで表す。
.TP
.BI ".SB [" text ]
.\"O Causes the text on the same line or the text on the next line to appear in
.\"O boldface font, one point size smaller than the default font.
同じ行のテキストまたは次の行のテキストを、ボールド体かつデフォルトのフォント
から 1 ポイント小さいサイズで表す。
.TP
.BI ".BI " text
.\"O Causes text on the same line to appear alternately in bold face and italic.
.\"O The text must be on the same line as the macro call.
.\"O Thus
.\"O .RS
.\"O .IP
.\"O \&.BI this "word and" that
.\"O .PP
.\"O would cause `this' and `that' to appear in bold face, while `word and'
.\"O appears in italics.
.\"O .RE
同じ行のテキストを、ボールド体とイタリック体で交互に表す。
テキストは、マクロ呼び出しと同じ行に示す必要がある。
例えば、
.RS
.IP
\&.BI this "word and" that
.PP
という設定では、`this' と `that' がボールド体、`word and' がイタリック体で
表される。
.RE
.TP
.BI ".IB " text
.\"O Causes text to appear alternately in italic and bold face.
.\"O The text must be on the same line as the macro call.
テキストを、イタリック体とボールド体で交互に表す。
テキストは、マクロ呼び出しと同じ行に示す必要がある。
.TP
.BI ".RI " text
.\"O Causes text on the same line to appear alternately in roman and italic.
.\"O The text must be on the same line as the macro call.
テキストを、ローマン体とイタリック体で交互に表す。
テキストは、マクロ呼び出しと同じ行に示す必要がある。
.TP
.BI ".IR " text
.\"O Causes text on the same line to appear alternately in italic and roman.
.\"O The text must be on the same line as the macro call.
テキストを、イタリック体とローマン体で交互に表す。
テキストは、マクロ呼び出しと同じ行に示す必要がある。
.TP
.BI ".BR " text
.\"O Causes text on the same line to appear alternately in bold face and roman.
.\"O The text must be on the same line as the macro call.
テキストを、ボールド体とローマン体で交互に表す。
テキストは、マクロ呼び出しと同じ行に示す必要がある。
.TP
.BI ".RB " text
.\"O Causes text on the same line to appear alternately in roman and bold face.
.\"O The text must be on the same line as the macro call.
テキストを、ローマン体とボールド体で交互に表す。
テキストは、マクロ呼び出しと同じ行に示す必要がある。
.TP
.BI ".R [" text ]
.\"O Causes
.\"O .I text
.\"O to appear in roman font.
.\"O If no text is present on the line where the macro is called, then the text
.\"O of the next line appears in roman.
.\"O This is the default font to which text is returned at the end of processing
.\"O of the other macros.
.I text
をローマン体で表す。
マクロ呼び出し行にテキストが指定されなかった場合は、次の行のテキストを
ローマン体で表す。
このフォントが、他のマクロの処理が終了して戻ってきたときのデフォルトである。
.TP
.BI ".B [" text ]
.\"O Causes
.\"O .I text
.\"O to appear in bold face.
.\"O If no text is present on the line where the macro is called, then the text
.\"O of the next line appears in bold face.
.I text
をボールド体で表す。
マクロ呼び出し行にテキストが指定されなかった場合は、次の行のテキストを
ボールド体で表す。
.TP
.BI ".I [" text ]
.\"O Causes
.\"O .I text
.\"O to appear in italic.
.\"O If no text is present on the line where the macro is called, then the text
.\"O of the next line appears in italic.
.I text
をイタリック体で表す。
マクロ呼び出し行にテキストが指定されなかった場合は、次の行のテキストを
イタリック体で表す。
.
.\"O .SH "MISCELLANEOUS"
.SH その他
.
.\"O The default indentation is 7.2n for all output devices except for
.\"O .B grohtml
.\"O which uses 1.2i instead.
すべての出力デバイスにおいて、デフォルトのインデント量は 7.2n である。
ただし、
.B grohtml
は例外で、1.2i に設定される。
.TP
.B .DT
.\"O Sets tabs every 0.5 inches.
.\"O Since this macro is always called during a
.\"O .B TH
.\"O request, it makes sense to call it only if the tab positions have been
.\"O changed.
タブ幅をすべて 0.5 インチに設定する。
このマクロは常に
.B TH
呼び出しのもとで使用され、タブ位置を変更するためにだけ呼び出される。
.TP
.BI ".PD [" nnn ]
.\"O Adjusts the empty space before a new paragraph (resp. section).
.\"O The optional argument gives the amount of space (default units are `v');
.\"O without parameter, the value is reset to its default value (1\ line for tty
.\"O devices, 0.4v\ otherwise).
.\"O This affects the macros
.\"O .BR SH ,
.\"O .BR SS ,
.\"O .BR TP ,
.\"O .B LP
.\"O (resp.\&
.\"O .B PP
.\"O and
.\"O .BR P ),
.\"O .BR IP ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR HP .
.\"O .PP
セクションのような新しい段落の、直前の空白量を調整する。
引き数により、空白の量を指定する。(デフォルトの単位は `v')
引き数を指定しなかった場合は、デフォルトの値にリセットされる。
(tty デバイスなら 1 行、それ以外なら 0.4v)
以下のマクロに影響する:
.BR SH ,
.BR SS ,
.BR TP ,
.B LP
(および
.B PP
と
.BR P ),
.BR IP ,
.BR HP
.PP
.\"O The following strings are defined:
以下の文字列が定義されている:
.TP
.B \e*S
.\"O Switch back to the default font size.
デフォルトのフォントサイズに戻す。
.TP
.B \e*R
.\"O The `registered' sign.
登録記号。
.TP
.B \e*(Tm
.\"O The `trademark' sign.
商標記号。
.TP
.B \e*(lq
.TQ
.B \e*(rq
.\"O Left and right quote.
.\"O This is equal to `\e(lq' and `\e(rq', respectively.
左および右引用符号。
`\e(lq' と `\e(rq' にそれぞれ等しい。
.PP
.\"O If a preprocessor like
.\"O .B tbl
.\"O or
.\"O .B eqn
.\"O is needed, it has become usage to make the first line of the man page look
.\"O like this:
.B tbl
や
.B eqn
のようなプリプロセッサが必要な場合は、以下のようにマニュアルページの最初の行に
使用するプリプロセッサを指定する。
.PP
.RS
.BI .\e"\  word
.RE
.PP
.\"O Note the single space character after the double quote.
.\"O .I word
.\"O consists of letters for the needed preprocessors: `e' for
.\"O .BR eqn ,
.\"O `r' for
.\"O .BR refer ,
.\"O and `t' for
.\"O .BR tbl .
.\"O Modern implementations of the
.\"O .B man
.\"O program read this first line and automatically call the right
.\"O preprocessor(s).
ダブルクォーテーションの後には空白があることに注意すること。
.I word
は必要とするプリプロセッサの指定子である: `e' は
.BR eqn 、
`r' は
.BR refer 、
`t' は
.B tbl
をそれぞれ表す。
最近の
.B man
プログラムの実装では、この最初の行を読み込んで自動的に適切なプリプロセッサ
を呼び出している。
.\"O .
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.
.\"O Since the 
.\"O .B tmac.an
.\"O macros consist of groups of 
.\"O .I groff 
.\"O requests, one can, in principle, supplement the functionality of the
.\"O .B tmac.an
.\"O macros with individual 
.\"O .I groff
.\"O requests where necessary.
.B tmac.an
マクロは
.I groff
のリクエストの集合であるので、原則としては必要に応じて
.B tmac.an
マクロに個々の
.I groff
リクエストのマクロを追加することができる。
.\"O A complete list of these requests is available on the WWW at
これらのリクエストの完全なリストは、以下の WWW で参照できる。
.PP
.ce 1
http://www.cs.pdx.edu/~trent/gnu/groff/groff_toc.html
.PP
.BR tbl (1),
.BR eqn (1),
.BR refer (1),
.BR man (1)
.
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.
.\"O This manual page was originally written for the Debian GNU/Linux system by
.\"O Susan G. Kleinmann <sgk@debian.org>, corrected and updated by Werner Lemberg
.\"O <wl@gnu.org>, and is now part of the GNU troff distribution.
このマニュアルページは、もともと Susan G. Kleinmann <sgk@debian.org> によって
Debian GNU/Linux システムのために書かれた。
Werner Lemberg <wl@gnu.org> によって加筆・修正されて、GNU troff パッケージの
一部となった。


