.TH GROFF_MARKUP 7 "6 February 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.\" Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"      Written by Gaius Mulley (gaius@glam.ac.uk)
.\"
.\" This file is part of groff.
.\" 
.\" groff is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" version.
.\" 
.\" groff is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
.\" WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
.\" for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with groff; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" user level guide to using the -markup macroset
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Feb 15 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.do mso tmac.arkup
.LINE
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O groff_markup \- groff macros for authoring web pages
.SH 名前
groff_markup \- web ページを生成する groff マクロ
.LINE
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "groff \-markup"
[ options ]
file ... 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This manual page describes the GNU \-markup macros, which is part of the
.\"O groff document formatting system.
.\"O The manual page is very a basic guide, and the html device driver
.\"O .RB ( grohtml )
.\"O is still very alpha.
.\"O It has been included into the distribution so that a lot of people have a
.\"O chance to test it.
.\"O Note that this macro file will be automatically called (via the
.\"O \fCtroffrc\fP file) if you use \fC-Thtml\fP.
このマニュアルページは、groff ドキュメント整形システムの一部である
GNU \-markup マクロについて説明する。
マニュアルページはごく基本的なガイドであり、HTML デバイスドライバ
.RB ( grohtml )
もまだまだ開発版である。
これは多くの人がテストすることができるように配布パッケージに入れられた。
このマクロファイルは、\fC-html\fP オプションを使うと
(\fCtroffrc\fP ファイルによって) 自動的に呼び出される
ことに注意すること。
.PP
.\"O To see the hyperlinks in action, please format this man page with the
.\"O .B grohtml
.\"O device.
ハイパーリンクが動作することを確認するには、このマニュアルページを
.B grohtml
デバイスで整形してみてほしい。
.PP
.\"O Here is a summary of the functions found in this macro set.
ここでは、このマクロセットにある機能の概要を示す。
.\"O .SH SYNPOSIS
.SH 書式
.ta 2iL
.\"O \&.HTMLINDEX	determine automatic link cut off
.\"O .br
.\"O 	point for sections/headers
\&.HTMLINDEX	セクション/ヘッダに対して自動生成される
.br
	リンクのレベルを決定する
.br
.\"O \&.BODYCOLOR	specify colours on a web page
\&.BODYCOLOR	web ページの色を指定する
.br
.\"O \&.BACKGROUND	specify background image
\&.BACKGROUND	背景画像を指定する
.br
.\"O \&.URL	create a url using two parameters
\&.URL	2 つのパラメータから URL を生成する
.br
.\"O \&.MAILTO	create a html email address
\&.MAILTO	HTML 用の email アドレスを生成する
.br
.\"O \&.FTP	create an ftp reference
\&.FTP	FTP リファレンスを生成する
.br
.\"O \&.IMAGE	include an image file
\&.IMAGE	画像ファイルを含める
.br
.\"O \&.HTML	pass an html raw request to the
.\"O .br
.\"O 	device driver
\&.HTML	HTML の書式そのものを
.br
	デバイスドライバに通す
.br
.\"O \&.TAG	generate an html name tag from $1
\&.TAG	$1 から HTML の名前タグを生成する
.br
.\"\&.CDFTP	optionally create two different links
.\".br
.\"	depending on hostname
.\".br
.\"O \&.LINE	create a full width horizontal rule
\&.LINE	画面幅の水平線を生成する
.br
.PP
.\"O Output of the
.\"O .IR pic ,
.\"O .IR eqn ,
.\"O .IR refer ,
.\"O and
.\"O .I tbl
.\"O preprocessors is acceptable as input.
.IR pic ,
.IR eqn ,
.IR refer ,
.I tbl
の出力も、入力として受け付けることができる。
.\"O .SH REQUESTS 
.SH リクエスト
.TP
.B HTMLINDEX
.\"O determines the cut off point for automatic link generation to headings.
.\"O By default all headings found in a troff document have links created to them
.\"O at the top of the html web page.
.\"O It maybe that many of the lower heading levels do not require links.
.\"O Alternatively some web pages may not need any heading links at all, in which
.\"O case:
自動的に生成される見出しへのリンクの、切り捨てレベルを決定する。
デフォルトでは、troff ドキュメントに含まれるすべての見出しへのリンクが
HTML ウェブページの先頭に生成される。
おそらく、ほとんどの細かいレベルの見出しへのリンクは必要ないだろう。
あるいは、ウェブページによっては見出しへのリンクはまったくいらないだろう。
その場合には、
.sp
.nf
\fC\&.HTMLINDEX 0\fP
.fi
.sp
.\"O will tell
.\"O .B grohtml
.\"O not to generate links.
のようにして、
.B grohtml
がリンクを生成しないようにする。
.\"O An \fCHTMLINDEX\fP of 2 will mean that a heading
\fCHTMLINDEX\fP に 2 を指定した場合は、以下のような見出し
.sp
.B "1.1.1 Some Title"
.sp
.\"O will not be included in the links either as it is said to have a heading
.\"O level of three.
はリンクには含まれない。これは、第 3 レベルの見出しを意味しているからである。
.TP
.B BODYCOLOR
.\"O takes five parameters: foreground, background, active hypertext link,
.\"O hypertext link not yet visited, and visited hypertext link colour.
5 つのパラメータをとる: 文字色、背景色、フォーカスのあるハイパーリンクの色、
閲覧していないハイパーリンクの色、閲覧したハイパーリンクの色。
.TP
.B BACKGROUND
.\"O the only parameter to this macro is the background image file.
このマクロの唯一のパラメータは、背景画像ファイルである。
.TP
.B URL
.\"O generates
.\"O .TAG URL
.\"O a URL using either two or three arguments.
.\"O $1 is the name of the link, $2 is the actual URL, and $3 is optional stuff
.\"O to be printed immediately after $2.
.\"O Here is how to encode
.\"O .URL "homepage for groff" http://groff.ffii.org/ :
2 つまたは 3 つの引き数をとり、
.TAG URL
URL を生成する。
$1 はリンクの名前、$2 は実際の URL、$3 は $2 の直後に表示される内容 ($3 は省略可能)。
.URL "groff のホームページ" http://groff.ffii.org/
の表記法を例にあげると以下のようになる:
.sp
.nf
\s-2\fC\&.URL "groff のホームページ" http://groff.ffii.org/ :\fP\s+2
.fi
.sp
.\"O If this is processed by a device other than \fC-Thtml\fP
.\"O it appears as:
.\"O homepage for groff \(lahttp://groff.ffii.org\(ra.
.\"O The URL macro can be of any type; for example we can reference
.\"O .URL "Eric Raymond's pic guide" pic.html
.\"O by:
これは \fC-Thtml\fP 以外のデバイスで処理されると、次のように表示される:
groff のホームページ \(lahttp://groff.ffii.org\(ra 。
URL マクロはどんな種類にも使用できる。例えば、
.URL "Eric Raymond の pic ガイド" pic.html
を参照するには以下のようにする:
.sp
.nf
\s-2\fC\&.URL "Eric Raymond の pic ガイド" pic.html\fP\s+2
.fi
.sp
.TP
.B MAILTO
.\"O generates an email html reference.
.\"O The first argument is mandatory as the email address.
.\"O The optional second argument is the text you see in your browser, and
.\"O an optional third argument is stuff printed immediately after the
.\"O second argument.
HTML 用の email リファレンスを生成する。
第 1 引き数は email アドレスで必須である。
第 2 引き数は省略可能で、ブラウザに表示されるテキストである。
第 3 引き数も省略可能で、第 2 引き数のテキスト直後に表示される。
.\"O For example, the groff maintainers are
.\"O .MAILTO wl@gnu.org "Werner Lemberg"
.\"O and
.\"O .MAILTO Ted.Harding@nessie.mcc.ac.uk "Ted Harding" .
.\"O This is achieved by the following macros:
例として、groff のメンテナは
.MAILTO wl@gnu.org "Werner Lemberg"
と
.MAILTO Ted.Harding@nessie.mcc.ac.uk "Ted Harding"
である。これは、以下のようなマクロで記述される:
.sp
.nf
\s-2\fC\&.MAILTO wl@gnu.org "Werner Lemberg"\fP
.sp
\fC\&.MAILTO Ted.Harding@nessie.mcc.ac.uk \\
.br
"Ted Harding" .\s+2\fP
.fi
.sp
.\"O Note that all the urls actually are treated as consuming no textual space
.\"O in groff.
.\"O This could be considered as a bug since it causes some problems.
.\"O To circumvent this, \fCtmac.arkup\fP inserts a zero-width character which
.\"O expands to a harmless space (only if in HTML mode)
groff は、すべての URL に含まれる (テキストとしての) 空白を取り除くことに
注意すること。
これはいくつかの問題の原因となるので、バグとみなして良いかもしれない。
この問題を避けるため、\fCtmac.arkup\fP は影響を及ぼさない空白として
幅ゼロの文字を挿入する (HTML モードの時のみ)。
.TP
.B FTP
.\"O indicates that data can be obtained via ftp.
.\"O The first argument is the browser text and the second is the url.
.\"O A third argument, similar to the macros above, is intended for stuff printed
.\"O immediately after the second argument.
FTP によって入手できるデータを指示する。
第 1 引き数はブラウザに表示されるテキスト、第 2 引き数は URL である。
第 3 引き数は、上記マクロと同様に、第 2 引き数の直後に表示されるテキストとして扱われる。
.\"O The second and the third parameter are optional.
第 2 および第 3 引き数は省略可能である。
.\"O As an example, here the location of the
.\"O .FTP "current groff development distribution" \
.\"O ftp://ftp.ffii.org/pub/groff/devel/groff-current.tar.gz .
例として、これが
.FTP "現在の groff 開発パッケージ" \
ftp://ftp.ffii.org/pub/groff/devel/groff-current.tar.gz
である。
.\"O The macro example above was specified by:
.\"O .sp
.\"O \s-2\fC\&.FTP "current groff development distribution" \\
.\"O .br
.\"O ftp://ftp.ffii.org/pub/groff/devel/groff-current.tar.gz .\fP\s+2
.\"O .sp
上記をマクロの例に挙げると以下のようになる:
.sp
\s-2\fC\&.FTP "現在の groff 開発パッケージ" \\
.br
ftp://ftp.ffii.org/pub/groff/devel/groff-current.tar.gz .\fP\s+2
.sp
.TP
.B IMAGE
.\"O allows the document to include pictures.
.\"O The first argument is the image file.
.\"O The next two arguments are optional:
.\"O Argument two is the width in pixels (default is 400 pixels if absent).
.\"O The third argument is the height in pixels (default is the width value if
.\"O absent).
これを用いるとドキュメントに画像を含めることができる。
第 1 引き数は画像ファイルである。
次の 2 つの引き数は省略可能である。
第 2 引き数は画像の幅 (画素数) である (省略時のデフォルト値は 400 画素)。
第 3 引き数は画像の高さ (画素数) である (省略時のデフォルトは画像の幅の値)。
.sp
.TP
.B HTML
.\"O all text after this macro is treated as raw html.
.\"O If the document is processed \fIwithout\fP \fC-Thtml\fP then
.\"O the macro is ignored.
.\"O This macro is a building block for other higher level macros.
.\"O .sp
.\"O For example, the \fCBACKGROUND\fP macro is defined as:
このマクロの後のテキストは、HTML 書式であるとみなす。
ドキュメントが \fC-Thtml\fP を\fI指定されない\fPで処理された場合は、
このマクロは無視される。
このマクロは、他の高水準マクロ用の構成要素である。
.sp
例えば、\fCBACKGROUND\fP マクロは以下のように定義されている:
.nf
\fC\&.de BACKGROUND
\&.   HTML <body background=\\$1>
\&..
\fP
.fi
.TP
.B TAG
.\"O generates an html name tag from its argument.
.\"O This can then be referenced using the
.\"O .URL URL #URL
.\"O macro.
.\"O As you can see, you must precede the tag name with `\fC#\fP' since it is
.\"O a local reference.
.\"O This link was achieved via placing a TAG in the URL description above;
.\"O the source looks like this:
引き数から HTML の名前タグを生成する。
このタグは、
.URL URL #URL
マクロによって参照できる。
もちろん、同一ドキュメントの参照をするためには
タグ名の先頭に `\fC#\fP' を付けなければならない。
このリンクは、上記の URL の説明にあるタグを参照している。
ソースは以下のようになっている:
.\"O .sp
.\"O \s-2\fC\&.TP
.\"O .br
.\"O \&.B URL
.\"O .br
.\"O generates
.\"O .br
.\"O \&.TAG URL
.\"O .br
.\"O a URL using either two or three
.\"O .br
.\"O arguments.
.\"O .br
.\"O $1 is the name of the link, $2 is the actual URL
.\"O .br
.\"O \fP\s+2etc.
.\"O .sp
.sp
\s-2\fC\&.TP
.br
\&.B URL
.br
2 つまたは 3 つの引き数をとり、
.br
\&.TAG URL
.br
URL を生成する。
.br
$1 はリンクの名前、$2 は実際の URL、
.br
\fP\s+2(後略)
.sp
.\".TP
.\".B CDFTP
.\"takes four arguments.
.\"Basically it is the FTP macro with optional local reference.
.\"It was designed to allow the same groff source to be built on two different
.\"machines and access the ftp data differently.
.\"For example, on a web server you might wish for the web page to reference
.\"a web site.
.\"However, if you were producing a CDROM of your information you might wish
.\"for the ftp data to be also stored on your CDROM and referenced as a file.
.\"An example to get the current groff development distribution
.\".CDFTP merlin "click here." \
.\"ftp://ftp.ffii.org/pub/groff/devel/groff-current.tar.gz \
.\"../../groff.tar.gz
.\"The source for this CDFTP invocation is
.\".sp
.\"\fC\s-2\&.CDFTP merlin "click here." \
.\"ftp://ftp.ffii.org/pub/groff/devel/groff-current.tar.gz \
.\"../../groff.tar.gz\fP\s+2
.\".sp
.\"which means if the html is generated on machine \fCmerlin\fP
.\"then generate a URL to \fC../../groff.tar.gz\fP.
.\"Otherwise construct an FTP URL to 
.\"\fCftp://ftp.ffii.org/pub/groff/devel/groff-current.tar.gz\fP.
.TP
.B LINE
.\"O generates a full width horizontal rule.
.\"O Example:
横幅一杯の水平線を生成する。
例を挙げると:
.sp
\fC\s-2\&.LINE\fP\s+2
.sp
.SH
.\"O SECTION HEADING LINKS
セクション見出しのリンク
.LP
.\"O By default
.\"O .B grohtml
.\"O generates links to all section headings and places these at the top of the
.\"O html document.
.\"O .B Grohtml
.\"O has to guess what a section heading looks like \(em remember that all
.\"O .B grohtml
.\"O actually sees is a device independent language telling it where to place
.\"O text, draw lines, change font sizes and faces etc.
.\"O It believes a section heading to be a line of bold text which starts at the
.\"O left most margin.
.\"O Consequently it may misinterpret.
.\"O Users can turn off all heading and title guessing by giving invoking groff
.\"O with \fCgroff -P-g\fP.
デフォルトでは
.B grohtml
はすべてのセクションの見出しのリンクを生成し、
HTML ドキュメントの先頭に配置する。
.B grohtml
は、セクションの見出しがどのように見えるのか推測しなければならない \(em
.B grohtml
が実際に見ているものは、テキストの配置やラインの描画、フォントサイズや
フォントフェースの変更などのデバイスに依存しない言語であることを忘れないように。
.B grohtml
は、一番左側のマージンから始まるボールド体のテキストを
セクションの見出しであるとみなす。
したがって間違った解釈をするかもしれない。
\fCgroff -P-g\fP を指定することで、すべての見出しとタイトルの推測を抑制する
ことができる。
.SH
.\"O LIMITATIONS OF GROHTML
GROHTML の制限
.LP
.\"O Although basic text can be translated in a straightforward fashion there are
.\"O some areas where
.\"O .B grohtml
.\"O has to try and guess text relationship.
.\"O In particular, whenever
.\"O .B grohtml
.\"O encounters text tables and indented paragraphs or two column mode it will
.\"O try and utilize the html table construct to preserve columns.
.\"O .B Grohtml
.\"O also attempts to work out which lines should be automatically formatted by
.\"O the browser.
.\"O Ultimately in trying to make reasonable guesses most of the time it will
.\"O make mistakes.
.\"O Hopefully these mistakes will happen less and less as we get bug reports
.\"O and patches :-).
通常のテキストは頭から順に変換されていくのだが、
.B grohtml
がテキストの関係を推測しなければならない場合がある。
特に、
.B grohtml
はテキストの表とかインデントされた段落や 2 段組のモードにでくわしたときに、
列をそろえるために HTML の表形式を利用しようとする。
.B grohtml
は、どの行がブラウザに自動的に整形されるべきなのかを決めようともする。
結局、妥当な推測をしようとしてしばしば間違えることもある。
きっと、これらの間違いはバグレポートやパッチがあればどんどん少なく
することができるだろう。 :-)
.PP
.\"O Tbl, pic, eqn's are also generated using images which may be
.\"O considered a limitation.
tbl や pic、eqn は画像として生成されるが、これも制限とみなされるだろう。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/usr/local/share/groff/tmac/tmac.arkup
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR groff (1),
.BR troff (1)
.BR grohtml (1),
.LP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B Grohtml
.\"O is written by
.\"O .MAILTO gaius@glam.ac.uk "Gaius Mulley"
.B grohtml
は、
.MAILTO gaius@glam.ac.uk "Gaius Mulley"
によって書かれた。
.LINE
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Report bugs to the
.\"O .MAILTO bug-groff@gnu.org "Groff Bug Mailing List" .
.\"O Include a complete, self-contained example that will allow the bug to be
.\"O reproduced, and say which version of groff you are using.
バグレポートは、
.MAILTO bug-groff@gnu.org "groff バグメーリングリスト"
に送って欲しい。
その際に、バグを再現できる完全な例と、どのバージョンの groff を使ったのかを
添えて欲しい。
.LINE


