.\"
.\" $Id: mmroff.7,v 1.2 2001/02/14 21:04:03 jm Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Feb 15 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.TH MMROFF 7 "22 February 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O mmroff \- reference preprocessor
.SH 名前
mmroff \- リファレンス プリプロセッサ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mmroff
[
.I -x
]
.I groff_arguments
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBmmroff\fP is a simple preprocessor for \fBgroff\fP, it is
.\"O used for expanding references in \fBmm\fP, see
.\"O \fBgroff_mm(7)\fP.
.\"O \fBgroff\fP is executed twice, first with \fB-z\fP and \fB-rRef=1\fR
.\"O to collect all references and then to do the real processing
.\"O when the reference file is up to date.
\fBmmroff\fP は \fBgroff\fP のためのシンプルなプリプロセッサで、
\fBmm\fP におけるリファレンスを展開するために使用される。
\fBgroff_mm(7)\fP を参照のこと。
\fBgroff\fP は 2 回実行される。まず \fB-z\fP と \fB-rRef=1\fR
オプションによってすべてのリファレンスが集められ、続いて
リファレンスファイルを最新の状態に更新するときに実際の処理が行われる。
.TP
\fB\-x\fR
.\"O Just create the reference file. This can be used to refresh
.\"O the reference file, it isn't always needed to have accurate
.\"O references and by using this option \fBgroff\fP will only
.\"O be run once.
リファレンスファイルの作成だけを行う。このオプションはリファレンス
ファイルを更新するために使用できる。厳密なリファレンスを得るためには
常にこのオプションが必要なわけではない。このオプションを使用すると
\fBgroff\fP は一度だけ実行される。
.\".SH BUGS
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.ie t J\(:orgen H\(:agg, Lund, Sweden <jh@axis.se>.
.el Jorgen Hagg, Lund, Sweden <jh@axis.se>.
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.B /usr/local/share/groff/tmac/tmac.m
.TP
.B /usr/local/share/groff/tmac/mm/*.cov
.TP
.B /usr/local/share/groff/tmac/mm/*.MT
.TP
.B /usr/local/share/groff/tmac/mm/locale
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR groff_mm(7),
.BR groff_mmse(7),
.BR groff (1),
.BR troff (1),
.BR tbl (1),
.BR pic (1),
.BR eqn (1)
.br
.BR mm (7)
.BR mmse (7)


