.\"                        -*- nroff -*- 
.ig
roff.7

This file is part of groff, the GNU roff type-setting system.

Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
written by Bernd Warken <bwarken@mayn.de>

Last update: 17 May 2000

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being this .ig-section and AUTHOR, with no
Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts.

A copy of the Free Documentation License is included as a file called
FDL in the main directory of the groff source package.
..
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 UCHIDA Norihiro all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Feb 15 2001 by UCHIDA Norihiro <KY4N-UCD@asahi-net.or.jp>
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Setup
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.if n \{\
.  mso tmac.tty-char
.  ftr CR R
.  ftr CI I
.  ftr CB B
.\}
.
.\" text lines in macro definitions or bracketed sections \{...\}
.de text
.  if 1 \&\\$*\&
..
.
.de option
.  ds @tmp@ \f(CB\\$1\fP
.  shift 1
.  text \\*[@tmp@]\\$*
.  rm @tmp@
..
.
.de 'char
.  ds @tmp@ `\f(CB\\$1\fP'
.  shift
.  text \\*[@tmp@]\\$*
.  rm @tmp@
..
.
.de esc
.  ds @tmp@ \f(CB\e\\$1\fP
.  shift
.  text \\*[@tmp@]\\$*
.  rm @tmp@
..
.
.de argname
.  ds @tmp@ \f(CI\\$1\fP
.  shift 1
.  text \\*[@tmp@]\\$*
.  rm @tmp@
..
.
.de prefixednumber
.  ds @tmp@ \&\\$1\ \f(CR\\$2\fP
.  shift 2
.  text \\*[@tmp@]\\$*
.  rm @tmp@
..
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Title
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH ROFF 7 "29 May 2000" "Groff Version 1.16.1"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O roff \- a survey of the roff typesetting system
.SH 名前
roff \- roff テキスト整形システムの概観
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .I roff
.\"O is the general name for a set of type-setting programs, known under
.\"O names like
.\"O .IR troff ,
.\"O .IR nroff ,
.\"O .IR groff ,
.\"O etc.
.I roff
は、テキスト整形プログラムの集合の一般名であり、
.IR troff ,
.IR nroff ,
.IR groff
などといった名前で知られている。
.LP
.\"O The roff type-setting system consists of a formatting language, macro
.\"O packages, preprocessors, postprocessors for output devices, user
.\"O front-end programs, and conversion tools.
roff テキスト整形システムは、整形用言語・マクロパッケージ・プリプロセッサ・
出力デバイス用のポストプロセッサ・利用者用のフロントエンドプログラム・
変換用ツールから構成される。
.LP
.\"O The most common roff system today is the free software implementation
.\"O .I groff
.\"O (from `GNU\ roff').
.\"O The pre-groff implementations are referred to as `classical' (dating
.\"O back as long as 1973).
最近のもっとも普及している roff システムは、フリーソフトウェアとして
実装された
.I groff
(GNU\ roff) である。
groff 以前の実装は、ここでは「古典的」と呼ぶ (1973 年までさかのぼる)。
.LP
.\"O .I groff
.\"O is backward-compatible to its classical ancestors, but has many
.\"O extensions, and is still evolving.
.\"O As it is available for almost every computer system it is the de-facto
.\"O roff standard today.
.I groff
はその古えの先祖と後方互換性を持つが、数多くの拡張が加えられ、
今なお進化している。
ほとんどすべてのコンピュータシステムで利用できることからも、
今日の roff の事実上の標準と言える。
.LP
.\"O In spite of its age, roff is in wide use today, e.g., the manual pages
.\"O on UNIX systems
.\"O .RI ( man-pages )
.\"O are written in roff.
.\"O The roff output for text devices is still unmatched, and its graphical
.\"O output has the same quality as the other free type-setting programs and
.\"O is better than some of the commercial systems.
年月を経ているにもかかわらず、roff は今でも広く使われている。
例えば、UNIX システムのマニュアルページ
.RI ( man-pages )
は roff によって書かれている。
テキストデバイスに対する roff の出力は他の追随を許さず、
グラフィックデバイスへの出力は他のフリーな整形プログラムと同等な品質を持ち、
いくつかの商用システムと比べても勝るとも劣らない。
.LP
.\"O This document gives only an overview and provides pointers to further
.\"O documentation.
このドキュメントでは概要のみを示し、さらなるドキュメントへの道標を提供する。

.\"O This document is not maintained and might be out of date.  For the real
.\"O documentation refer to the groff info file that contains the detailed,
.\"O actual and concise reference information.
このドキュメントはメンテナンスされておらず、時代遅れかもしれない。
正確なドキュメントとしては、groff の info ファイルを参照してほしい。
詳細かつ最新の情報が簡潔に示されている。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "FORMATTING LANGUAGE"
.SH 整形用言語
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O There are three terms that refer to the language of the
.\"O .I roff
.\"O system.
.\"O The term
.\"O .I troff language
.\"O is used when the classical aspects of
.\"O .I roff
.\"O are stressed, the term
.\"O .I groff language
.\"O includes the GNU extensions, whereas
.\"O .I roff language
.\"O is the general term.
.I roff
システム用の言語に関しては 3 つの用語がある。
.I roff
の古典的な側面が強調される場合は
.IR "troff 言語" 、
GNU の拡張を含む場合は
.IR "groff 言語" 、
一般的な場合は
.I roff 言語
である。
.LP
.\"O The main source of documentation for all aspects of the
.\"O .I groff language
.\"O is the groff info file.  The manual page
.\"O .BR groff (7)
.\"O gives a short description of all predefined language elements.
.I groff 言語
についての詳細なドキュメントは、groff info ファイルが一次情報源である。
マニュアルページ
.BR groff (7)
には、すべての定義済み言語要素に対して短い説明が与えられている。
.LP
.\"O Documents using roff are normal text files decorated by formatting
.\"O elements.
.\"O It is very easy to write high-quality documents by using one of the
.\"O macro packages.
.\"O These are like high-level programming languages, while the bare roff
.\"O language compares to a low-level language like C or assembler.
roff を用いるドキュメントは、整形要素で修飾された通常のテキストファイル
である。
マクロパッケージのひとつを使用することで、高品質なドキュメントを容易に
記述できる。
マクロパッケージは高水準プログラム言語のようなものであり、一方で素の
roff 言語は C やアセンブラのような低水準言語になぞらえられる。
.LP
.\"O The roff language is a full programming language providing low-level
.\"O requests, definition of macros, escape sequences, string variables,
.\"O number or size registers, and C-like flow controls.
roff 言語は、低水準なリクエスト・マクロ定義・エスケープシーケンス・
文字列変数・数値レジスタおよびサイズレジスタ・C 言語風の制御構造を提供する
完全なプログラム言語である。
.ig /
In the 1980s, it was even possible to write the common utilities for
system administration by only using troff.
There were contests on writing the most unreadable program fake by
exclusively using troff.
Because of security impacts, these dangerous features were removed in
.IR groff .
./
.LP
.\"O Some clarification on the language elements seems to be wanted.
.\"O Requests are basic formatting commands defined by programming languages
.\"O like C, C++, etc., whereas macros are formatting commands that are
.\"O written in the roff language.
.\"O A document writer will not note any difference in usage for requests or
.\"O macros, both are written on a line on their own starting with a dot
.\"O .'char . .
.\"O But the user may define her own macros if desired.
言語要素の説明がいくつか必要だろう。
リクエストとは、整形コマンドのうち、(C や C++ のような) プログラム言語で
定義されているもの
である。一方、マクロとは roff 言語で記述された整形コマンドである。
ドキュメントの著者はリクエストとマクロの使用方法の違いについて気をつかう
必要はない。どちらも 1 行にドット
.'char .
を先頭にして記述すればよい。
しかし、必要ならば自分専用のマクロを定義できる。
.LP
.\"O Escape sequences are in-line elements starting with a backslash
.\"O .'char \e .
.\"O They are used to implement various features, including the insertion of
.\"O non-ASCII characters with
.\"O .esc ( ,
.\"O the content of strings with
.\"O .esc *
.\"O and register variables with
.\"O .esc n ,
.\"O font changes with
.\"O .esc f ,
.\"O in-line comments with
.\"O .esc \(dq ,
.\"O the escaping of special control characters like
.\"O .esc \e ,
.\"O and many other features.
エスケープシーケンスはバックスラッシュ
.'char \e
で始まるインライン要素である。
これらはさまざまな機能を実装するために使用される。
非アスキー文字を挿入するための
.esc ( 、
文字列の内容の
.esc * 、
レジスタ変数の
.esc n 、
フォント変更の
.esc f 、
文中のコメントの
.B \e" 、
特殊制御文字をエスケープする
.esc \e
など、多くの機能がある。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH FORMATTERS
.SH フォーマッタ
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O Formatters are the front-end programs that analyze a groff document and
.\"O translate it into a form that is suitable for a special device.
.\"O The traditional
.\"O .I roff
.\"O had two formatters,
.\"O .B nroff
.\"O for text devices and
.\"O .B troff
.\"O for graphical devices.
フォーマッタは groff ドキュメントを解析するフロントエンドプログラムであり、
groff ドキュメントを特殊デバイスに適した形式に変換する。
伝統的な
.I roff
には 2 つのフォーマッタがあり、
.B nroff
はテキストデバイス用、
.B troff
はグラフィックデバイス用である。
.LP
.\"O These programs still exist in the
.\"O .I groff
.\"O implementation, but usually they are accessed through a program called
.\"O .BR groff .
.\"O This combined and extended the old functionality into a single program.
.\"O It has many command-line options, most of them herited from
.\"O .BR troff .
.\"O To ease the option jungle, the user-friendly utility
.\"O .B grog
.\"O (from `groff guess') was created.
.\"O It tries to guess from the document which arguments should be used and
.\"O displays a suitable command line.
.\"O Though not being perfect, it is a good starting point.
これらのプログラムは
.I groff
の実装でもまだ存在するが、通常これらは
.B groff
というプログラムを通して処理を行う。
このプログラムは、古い機能はひとつのプログラムへと結合・拡張したものである。
.B groff
には多くのコマンドラインオプションがあるが、そのほとんどは
.B troff
から継承されている。
オプションの混乱を緩和するために、ユーザフレンドリなユーティリティ
.B grog
(`groff guess' にちなんでいる) が作られた。
このユーティリティは、ドキュメントからどのオプション引き数を使えばいいのか
推測し、適切なコマンドラインを表示する。
まだまだ完璧とは言い難いが、出発点としてはなかなかなものだ。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH PREPROCESSORS
.SH プリプロセッサ
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The classical preprocessors that are still available in groff.
古典的なプリプロセッサのうち、 groff でも使えるものを示す。
.RS
.LP
.PD 0
.TP
.I eqn
.\"O for including mathematical equations.
数式用
.TP
.I grap
.\"O for constructing graphical elements (this preprocessor doesn't come with
.\"O groff; it is an extra package).
画像要素構築用 (このプリプロセッサは groff には入っていない。別パッケージである)
.TP
.I grn
.\"O for including gremlin pictures.
gremlin 画像用
.TP
.I pic
.\"O for creating diagrams.
図形作成用
.TP
.I refer
.\"O for bibliographic references.
参考文献目録用
.TP
.I soelim
.\"O for including other roff files.
他の roff ファイル参照用
.TP
.I tbl
.\"O for rectangular tables.
表作成用
.PD
.RE
.LP
.\"O Each of these preprocessors defines its own language that is translated
.\"O into roff code when run through the preprocessor program.
.\"O So parts written in these languages may be included within a roff
.\"O document.
.\"O Such an enhanced document is run through one or more corresponding
.\"O preprocessors before it is fed into the actual formatter.
それぞれのプリプロセッサは独自の言語を定義していて、その言語は
プリプロセッサが処理することで roff コードへと変換される。
したがって、それらの言語で記述された部分は roff ドキュメントに含める
ことができる。
そのような拡張されたドキュメントは、本来のフォーマッタで処理される
前に該当するプリプロセッサを経由することになる。
.LP
.\"O The preprocessor programs extract and transform the document parts
.\"O determined for them.
.\"O They can be called either in a UNIX pipeline with their program name or
.\"O automatically with a groff option.
プリプロセッサは、それぞれに割り当てられたドキュメントの一部を展開・変換する。
プログラム名を UNIX パイプラインでつないで呼び出すことも、
groff のオプションで自動的に呼び出すこともできる。
.LP
.TS
center, box, tab (@);
C | C
CfCB | CfCB.
.\"O preprocessor@groff option
プリプロセッサ@groff オプション
=
eqn@\-e
grap@\-G
grn@\-g
pic@\-p
refer@\-R
tbl@\-r
soelim@\-s
.TE
.LP
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "MACRO PACKAGES"
.SH マクロパッケージ
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O Macro packages are collections of macros that are suitable to format a
.\"O special kind of documents in a convenient way.
.\"O This greatly eases the usage of roff.
.\"O The macro definitions of a package are kept in a file called
.\"O .BI tmac. name
.\"O where
.\"O .I name
.\"O is the internal roff name for this package.
.\"O All tmac files are stored in a single or few directories at standard
.\"O positions.
マクロパッケージとは、特殊な種類のドキュメントを簡単に整形するのに
適したマクロの集合である。
これは roff の使い方を著しく簡便化する。
パッケージにおけるマクロ定義は
.BI tmac. name
というファイルに格納される。
ここで
.I name
はそのパッケージの内部 roff 名である。
すべての tmac ファイルは標準的な場所にある、単一または少数の
ディレクトリに保存される。
.LP
.\"O A macro package that is used in a document is specified by the command line
.\"O option
.\"O .option \-m
.\"O for the formatter like
.\"O .option "troff\ \-m"
.\"O .argname name
.\"O or
.\"O .option "groff\ \-m"
.\"O .argname name .
.\"O General details on the naming of macro packages and their placement is
.\"O found in
.\"O .BR tmac (5).
ドキュメントで使われているマクロパッケージは、コマンドラインオプション
.option \-m
でフォーマッタに指定する。例えば、
.option "troff\ \-m"
.argname name
や
.option "groff\ \-m"
.argname name
のように。
マクロパッケージ命名法やパッケージの場所についての詳細な記述は
.BR tmac (5)
にある。
.LP
.\"O Famous classical macro packages are
.\"O .IR man ,
.\"O .IR mandoc ,
.\"O and
.\"O .I mdoc
.\"O for manual pages and
.\"O .IR me ,
.\"O .IR ms ,
.\"O and
.\"O .I mm
.\"O for books, articles, and letters.
.\"O Besides these collections, groff provides an increasing number of new
.\"O macro packages for various applications, for example integration of or
.\"O conversion into other file formats.
名の知れた古典的マクロパッケージには、マニュアルページ用の
.IR man ,
.IR mandoc ,
.I mdoc
などがあり、書籍・記事・メモ用にはそれぞれ
.IR me ,
.IR ms ,
.I mm
がある。
これらの他にも、groff はさまざまなアプリケーション向けに
たくさんの新しいマクロパッケージを提供している。
例えば、他のファイルフォーマットを統合するものやそれに変換するものなどがある。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "FILE NAME EXTENSIONS"
.SH ファイル名拡張子
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O Manual pages (man-pages) take the section number as a file name
.\"O extension, e.g., the filename for this document is
.\"O .IR roff.7 ,
.\"O i.e., it is kept in
.\"O .prefixednumber section 7
.\"O of the man-pages.
マニュアルページ (man-pages) はファイル名の拡張子としてセクション番号を
とる。例えばこのドキュメントのファイル名は
.I roff.7
である。つまり、マニュアルページの
.prefixednumber section 7
に格納されているということである。
.LP
.\"O The classical macro packages take the package name as an extension, e.g.
.\"O .IB file. me
.\"O for a document using the
.\"O .I me
.\"O macro package,
.\"O .IB file. mm
.\"O for
.\"O .IR mm ,
.\"O .IB file. ms
.\"O for
.\"O .IR ms ,
.\"O .IB file. pic
.\"O for
.\"O .I pic
.\"O files,
.\"O etc.
古典的なマクロパッケージは、そのパッケージ名を拡張子に持つ。
例えば、
.I me
マクロパッケージを使用するドキュメント用には
\fIfile.\fBme\fR、
.I mm
には
\fIfile.\fBmm\fR、
.I ms
には
\fIfile.\fBms\fR、
.I pic
には
.IB file. pic
といった具合である。
.ig
.LP
But there is no general naming scheme for roff documents, though
.IB file. roff
or
.IB file. rof
seems to be a good choice.
.LP
File name extensions can be very handy in conjunction with the
.BR less (1)
pager.
It provides the possibility to feed all input into a command-line pipe that
is specified in the shell environment variable
.B LESSOPEN
This process is not well documented, so here an example
.B LESSOPEN='|lesspipe %s'
where
.B lesspipe
is either a system supplied command or a shell script of your own.
..
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH EDITING
.SH 編集方法
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O Most text editors provide support for editing documents using roff.
.\"O Especially useful is the
.\"O .B nroff-mode
.\"O in all flavors of the Emacs editor.
多くのテキストエディタは、roff 用のドキュメントの編集をサポートする
機能を提供している。
特に、Emacs エディタの仲間における
.B nroff-mode
は使い勝手が良い。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.SM
.B GROFF_TMAC_PATH
.\"O A colon separated list of directories in which to search for
.\"O macro files, see
.\"O .BR tmac (5).
コロン区切りの、マクロファイル検索ディレクトリのリスト。
.BR tmac (5)
を参照。
.TP
.SM
.B GROFF_TYPESETTER
.\"O Default device.
デフォルトのデバイス。
.TP
.SM
.B GROFF_FONT_PATH
.\"O A colon separated list of directories in which to search for the
.\"O .BI dev name
.\"O directory.
.\"O .B troff
.\"O will search in directories given in the
.\"O .option \-F
.\"O option before these, and in standard directories
.\"O .RB ( .:/usr/local/share/groff/font:/usr/lib/font )
.\"O after these.
コロン区切りの、
.BI dev name
検索ディレクトリのリスト。
.B troff
は、このリストの前に
.option \-F
オプションで指定されたディレクトリを検索し、
標準ディレクトリ
.RB ( .:/usr/local/share/groff/font:/usr/lib/font )
はこのリストの後に検索する。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O By default,
.\"O .I groff
.\"O installs all of its library files in a directory tree under
.\"O .IR /usr/local/share/groff .
.\"O This location might vary for different systems.
.\"O In the following, this directory is referred to as
.\"O .IR <groff_dir> .
デフォルトでは
.I groff
はライブラリファイルを
.I /usr/local/share/groff
ディレクトリツリーの配下にインストールする。
この場所は、システムごとに異なるだろう。
以下では、このディレクトリを
.I <groff_dir>
で表す。
.LP
.TP
.IB <groff_dir> /tmac/troffrc
.\"O Initialization file for troff.
troff の初期設定ファイル
.TP
.IB <groff_dir> /tmac/tmac. name
.\"O Macro files.
マクロファイル
.TP
.IB <groff_dir> /font/dev name /DESC
.\"O Device description file for device
.\"O .IR name .
デバイス
.I name
用のデバイス記述ファイル
.TP
.IB <groff_dir> /font/dev name / F
.\"O Font file for font
.\"O .I F
.\"O of device
.\"O .IR name .
デバイス
.I name
用のフォント
.I F
のためのフォントファイル
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The groff documentation is in evolution at the moment.
.\"O It is possible that small inconsistencies between different documents exist
.\"O temporarily.
groff のドキュメントは、現在は発展途上にある。
いろいろなドキュメントの間には、一時的に小さな矛盾が見受けられるかもしれない。
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O This document is part of groff, the GNU roff distribution.  It was
.\"O written by Bernd Warken <bwarken@mayn.de>.
このドキュメントは、groff (GNU roff パッケージ) の一部である。
Bernd Warken <bwarken@mayn.de> によって記述された。
.LP
.\"O It is distributed under the terms of the FDL (GNU Free Documentation
.\"O License) version 1.1 or later.  You should have received a copy of the
.\"O FDL on your system, it is also available on-line under
このドキュメントは
FDL (GNU Free Documentation License) バージョン 1.1 およびそれ以降の条件の
もとに配布される。FDL のコピーはあなたのシステムにもあるはずである。
以下でもオンラインで参照できる。
.RS
.LP
.IR <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html> .
.RE
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"O The main source of information is the
.\"O .I groff
.\"O .BR info (1)
.\"O file.
主要な情報源は、
.I groff
.BR info (1)
ファイルである。
.LP
.\"O The predefined elements of the
.\"O .I groff
.\"O language are also documented in the manual page
.\"O .BR groff (7).
.I groff
言語の定義済み要素はマニュアルページ
.BR groff (7)
にも記述されている。
.LP
.\"O Formatters and their wrappers:
フォーマッタとそのラッパープログラムについては:
.BR groff (1),
.BR grog (1),
.BR nroff (1),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR troff (1).
.BR troff (1)
.LP
.\"O Postprocessors for the output devices:
出力デバイス用のポストプロセッサについては:
.BR grodvi (1),
.BR grohtml (1),
.BR grolbp (1),
.BR grolj4 (1),
.BR grops (1),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR grotty (1).
.BR grotty (1)
.LP
.\"O Standard preprocessors:
標準的なプリプロセッサは:
.BR eqn (1),
.BR grn (1),
.BR grap (1),
.BR pic (1),
.BR refer (1),
.BR soelim (1),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR tbl (1).
.BR tbl (1)
.LP
.\"O The man pages for macro packages include
マクロパッケージのマニュアルページは:
.BR groff_tmac (5),
.BR groff_man (7),
.BR groff_markup (7),
.BR groff_mdoc (7),
.BR groff_mdoc.samples (7),
.BR groff_me (7),
.BR groff_mm (7),
.BR groff_mmroff (7),
.BR groff_ms (7),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR groff_msafer (7).
.BR groff_msafer (7)
.LP
.\"O The following utilities are available:
利用できるユーティリティ:
.BR addftinfo (1),
.BR afmtodif (1),
.BR hpftodit (1),
.BR indxbib (1),
.BR lookbib (1),
.BR pfbtops (1),
.BR tfmtodit (1),
.\"O and
.\"O .BR gxditview (1).
.BR gxditview (1)
.LP
.\"O For details on the GNU implementation of the
.\"O .I roff
.\"O system see
.I roff
システムの、GNU の実装についての詳細は:
.BR groff_char (7),
.BR groff_font (7),
.\"O .BR groff_out (7),
.BR groff_out (7)
.\"O and the file
.\"O .I README
.\"O in the main directory of the groff source distribution.
それから、groff ソースパッケージのメインディレクトリにある
.I README
ファイルも参照のこと。
.\"O These also give details on how to contact or join the
.\"O .I groff
.\"O developer group.
これらには、
.I groff
開発者グループへの連絡方法や参加方法についても示してある。
.LP
.\"O Many classical
.\"O .troff
.\"O documents are still available on-line.
.\"O Especially informative are the original Bell Labs proceedings for the old,
.\"O free UNIX 7 found at
.\"O .I http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/cstr.html
.\"O and the collection of the late Richard S. Stevens at 
.\"O .IR http://www.kohala.com/start/troff/ .
多くの古典的
.I troff
ドキュメントはまだオンラインで参照できる。
特に有益なものは、かのフリーな UNIX 7 を生みだしたもともとのベル研にある
.I http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/cstr.html
であり、故 Richard S. Stevens が収集した
.I http://www.kohala.com/start/troff/
である。


