.\" Copyright 1999, George Staikos (staikos@0wned.org)
.\" This file may be used subject to the terms and conditions of the
.\" GNU General Public License Version 2, or any later version
.\" at your option, as published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details."
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SYSCTL.CONF 5 "21 Sep 1999" "" ""
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O sysctl.conf \- sysctl(8) preload/configuration file 
.SH 名前
sysctl.conf \- sysctl(8) のプリロード/設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I sysctl.conf
.\"O is a simple file containing sysctl values to be read in and set by sysctl(8).
.\"O The syntax is simply as follows:
.I sysctl.conf
は sysctl の値を含む簡単なファイルであり、
.BR sysctl (8)
によって読み込まれ、sysctl 設定に用いられる。
書式は以下の通り。
.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
# comment
; comment

  token  =   value
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP
.\"O Note that blank lines are ignored, and whitespace before and after a token or
.\"O value is ignored, although a value can contain whitespace within.  Lines which
.\"O begin with a # or ; are considered comments and ignored.
空行は無視され、トークンや値の前後に置かれた空白も無視される。
ただし値は空白を含むことができる。 # または ;
ではじまる行はコメントとみなされ、無視される。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
# sysctl.conf sample
#

  kernel.domainname = example.com
.\"O ; this one has a space which will be written to the sysctl!
  ; この値には空白が入っており、このまま sysctl に書き込まれる!!
  kernel.modprobe = /sbin/mod probe

.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR sysctl(8)
.BR sysctl (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
George Staikos, <staikos@0wned.org>

