.\"O .TH LIDSADM 8
.TH LIDSADM 8
.\"
.\" Man page written by Sander Klein <roedie@roedie.nl> (May 2003)
.\" It is based on the original lidsadm page by Steve Bremer.
.\" TODO: I will think of something in the end...
.\"
.\"	This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"     Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Omo Kazuki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Oct 1 11:00:39 JST 2003
.\"         by Kazuki Omo


.\"
.\"O 
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O lidsadm \- administration tool for the Linux Intrusion Detection System
.\"O 
lidsadm \- Linux Intrusion Detection System 用の管理ツール

.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .B "lidsadm -[S|I] -- [+|-][LIDS_FLAG] [...]"
.\"O .br
.\"O .B "lidsadm -V"
.\"O .br
.\"O .B "lidsadm -h"
.\"O 
.B "lidsadm -[S|I] -- [+|-][LIDS_FLAG] [...]"
.br
.B "lidsadm -V"
.br
.B "lidsadm -h"

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B lidsadm
.\"O is a adminsitration tool for
.\"O .I Linux Intrusion Detection System (LIDS).
.\"O 
.B lidsadm
は
.I Linux Intrusion Detection System (LIDS)
用の管理ツールである。

.\"O LIDS is a kernel patch to enhance the current Linux kernel. With LIDS, you can protect important files, directories, and devices. You can also define ACLs that restrict the access control on the entire system. For more information about LIDS, please go to
.\"O .I http://www.lids.org.
.\"O 
LIDS は現在のLinux カーネルを拡張する、カーネルパッチである。LIDS によっ
て、重要なファイルや、ディレクトリや、デバイスを保護することができる。
さらにシステム全体に対して、アクセス制限をかけるACL を定義することもで
きる。LIDS の詳しい情報に関しては、
.I http://www.lids.org
を参照のこと。


.\"O .B lidsadm
.\"O is used to define ACLs and administer the LIDS protections online.
.\"O 
.B lidsadm
は、ACL を定義し、LIDS の保護機能を管理するために使用される。

.\"O .SH COMMANDS
.\"O Commands define the individual functions of the lidsadm utility.  They cannot be combined.
.SH コマンド
それぞれのlidsadm ユーティリティの機能ごとに、コマンドは独立して定義さ
れる。組み合わせて使用することはできない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B -P
.\"O Encrypt a LIDS password with RipeMD-160 (stored in lids.pw).
.TP
.B -P
RipeMD-160 で暗号化されたLIDS のパスワード(lids.pw に保存される) を設
定する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B -S
.\"O Change LIDS protections (requires your LIDS password).
.TP
.B -S
LIDS の保護機能を変更する(LIDS パスワードが必要)。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B -I
.\"O Changes LIDS protections once without a password (used only to "seal the kernel").
.TP
.B -I
LIDS の保護状態をパスワード無しで変更する("カーネルの封印"のときだけ
使用される)。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B -V
.\"O Lets you view the current state of you LIDS system.
.TP
.B -V
LIDS システムの現在の状態を表示する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B -v
.\"O Shows the version of the lidsadm.
.TP
.B -v
lidsadm のバージョンを表示する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B -h
.\"O List the help.
.\"O 
.TP
.B -h
ヘルプを表示する。

.\"O .SH LIDS_FLAG's
.SH LIDS_FLAG 
.\"O .TP
.\"O There are many flags you can set. They can be used to set or unset capabilities but they can also switch you LIDS system on or off.
.\"O 
.TP
たくさんのフラグをセットすることができる。権限をセットしたり外し
たり、さらにLIDS システムをオンにしたりオフにしたりすることもできる。

.\"O .SH Available capabilities
.\"O The capabilities used in LIDS are shown below. You can use the name to enable or disable the capability when sealing and switching. You can also grant the capability to a program even if the capability is disabled globally on the system.
.SH 使用可能な権限
LIDS で使われる権限には、下記のものがある。封印して切替えをすると
きに、権限を有効や無効にするために名前を使用することができる。
さらに、権限がシステム全体で無効になっているときでも、プログラムに権限
を与えることができる。

.\"O 
.\"O .SP
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B CAP_CHOWN
.\"O chown(2)/chgrp(2)

.SP
.TP
.B CAP_CHOWN
chown(2)/chgrp(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B    CAP_DAC_OVERRIDE
.\"O DAC access.
.TP
.B    CAP_DAC_OVERRIDE
DAC access.
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH
.\"O DAC read.
.TP
.B CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH
DAC read.
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B          CAP_FOWNER
.\"O Owner ID not equal user ID.
.TP
.B          CAP_FOWNER
ユーザーID とオーナーID が等しくない
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B          CAP_FSETID
.\"O Effective user ID not equal owner ID.
.TP
.B          CAP_FSETID
実行ユーザーID とオーナーID が等しくない
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B            CAP_KILL
.\"O Real/effective ID not equal process ID.
.TP
.B            CAP_KILL
実/有効ID とプロセスID が等しくない
.\"O .TP 
.\"O .B         CAP_SETGID
.\"O setgid(2)
.TP 
.B         CAP_SETGID
setgid(2)
.\"O .TP 
.\"O .B          CAP_SETUID 
.\"O set*uid(2)
.TP 
.B          CAP_SETUID 
set*uid(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B         CAP_SETPCAP
.\"O Transfer capability.
.TP
.B         CAP_SETPCAP
転送権限
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_LINUX_IMMUTABLE
.\"O Immutable and append file attributes.
.TP
.B  CAP_LINUX_IMMUTABLE
不変か、付け加えられるファイル特性
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE
.\"O Binding to ports below 1024.
.TP
.B CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE
1024 未満のポートへのバインディング
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B   CAP_NET_BROADCAST
.\"O Broadcasting/listening to multicast.
.TP
.B   CAP_NET_BROADCAST
マルチキャストのブロードキャスト/リスニング
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_NET_ADMIN
.\"O Interface/firewall/routing changes.
.TP
.B       CAP_NET_ADMIN
インターフェース/ファイアーウォール/ルーティング 変更
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B         CAP_NET_RAW
.\"O Raw sockets (ping).
.TP
.B         CAP_NET_RAW
RAW ソケット(ping) 
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B        CAP_IPC_LOCK
.\"O Locking of shared memory segments.
.TP
.B        CAP_IPC_LOCK
共有メモリーセグメントのロック
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_IPC_OWNER
.\"O IPC ownership checks.
.TP
.B       CAP_IPC_OWNER
IPC 所有者のチェック
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B      CAP_SYS_MODULE
.\"O Insertion and removal of kernel modules.
.TP
.B      CAP_SYS_MODULE
カーネルモジュールの挿入と削除
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_SYS_RAWIO
.\"O ioperm(2)/iopl(2) access
.TP
.B       CAP_SYS_RAWIO
ioperm(2)/iopl(2) アクセス
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B      CAP_SYS_CHROOT
.\"O chroot(2)
.TP
.B      CAP_SYS_CHROOT
chroot(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B      CAP_SYS_PTRACE
.\"O ptrace(2)
.TP
.B      CAP_SYS_PTRACE
ptrace(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_SYS_PACCT
.\"O Configuration of process accounting.
.TP
.B       CAP_SYS_PACCT
プロセスアカウンティングの設定
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_SYS_ADMIN
.\"O Tons of admin stuff.
.TP
.B       CAP_SYS_ADMIN
管理者の重み
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B        CAP_SYS_BOOT
.\"O reboot(2)
.TP
.B        CAP_SYS_BOOT
reboot(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B        CAP_SYS_NICE
.\"O nice(2)
.TP
.B        CAP_SYS_NICE
nice(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B    CAP_SYS_RESOURCE
.\"O Setting resource limits.
.TP
.B    CAP_SYS_RESOURCE
リソース制限の設定
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B        CAP_SYS_TIME
.\"O Setting system time.
.TP
.B        CAP_SYS_TIME
システム時間の設定
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_SYS_TTY_CONFIG
.\"O TTY configuration.
.TP
.B  CAP_SYS_TTY_CONFIG
TTY 設定
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_MKNOD
.\"O Allow the privileged aspects of mknod().
.TP
.B  CAP_MKNOD
mknod() の特別な許可
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_LEASE
.\"O Allow taking of leases on files.
.TP
.B  CAP_LEASE
ファイルにリースを許可
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_HIDDEN
.\"O Make a program hidden from the entire system.
.TP
.B  CAP_HIDDEN
システムからプログラムを隠す
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_KILL_PROTECTED
.\"O Allow/disallow a process to kille protected processes.
.TP
.B  CAP_KILL_PROTECTED
プロセスに、保護されているプロセスをkill させることを許可/不許可
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_PROTECTED
.\"O Protect the process from signals.
.\"O 
.TP
.B  CAP_PROTECTED
シグナルからプロセスを保護

.\"O .SH Available FLAGS
.\"O 
.SH 有効なフラグ

.\"O These flags are used with the ADMIN option "-S".
これらのフラグは、管理オプションの"-S" と共に用いられる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B LIDS_GLOBAL
.\"O Enable/disable LIDS system-wide.
.TP
.B LIDS_GLOBAL
LIDS システム全体を有効/無効にする。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B RELOAD_CONF
.\"O Reload config files and inode/dev numbers of special programs.
.TP
.B RELOAD_CONF
設定ファイルと、プログラムのinode/dev 番号を再読込させる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B LIDS
.\"O Enable/disable LIDS locally (the shell & childs). This is known as a LIDS free session (LFS).
.\"O 
.TP
.B LIDS
LIDS をローカルに(シェルと子プロセスも) を有効/無効にする。これは、
LIDS フリーセッション(LFS) として知られている。

.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.\"O Here are some examples of using lidsadm.
.SH 例
下記にlidsadm の使用例をいくつか示す。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsadm -I
.\"O Seal the kernel with the default capabilities set in /etc/lids/lids.cap. You should edit that file by youself.
.TP
.B lidsadm -I
カーネルを、デフォルトの/etc/lids/lids.cap にある権限セットを用い
て封印する。そのファイルは、自分自身で編集する必要がある。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsadm -S -- -LIDS
.\"O Switch LIDS off in your current terminal session, we recomend you use this.
.TP
.B lidsadm -S -- -LIDS
LIDS を現在のターミナルセッション上でオフにするときは、このオプションを
使用することを薦める。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsadm -S -- -LIDS_GLOBAL
.\"O Switch LIDS off globally.  Your system is no longer protected by LIDS.
.\"O 
.TP
.B lidsadm -S -- -LIDS_GLOBAL
LIDS を全体的にオフにする。システムは、もはやLIDS で守られていない。
.\"O .SH OTHER SOURCES OF INFORMATION.
.SH その他の情報源
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B Mailing List
.\"O To subscribe, unsubscribe, go to:
.\"O .I http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/lids-user
.TP
.B メーリングリスト
参加、退会するときには、次のサイトを参照-
.I http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/lids-user
.\"O .br
.\"O To post a message to the list, send an e-mail to:
.\"O .B lids-user@lists.sourceforge.net
.br
メッセ-ジをメーリングリストに投稿するときは、メールを次のところまで送信
してほしい-
.B lids-user@lists.sourceforge.net
.\"O .br
.\"O Current LIDS archive can be found at:
.\"O .I http://www.geocrawler.com/redir-sf.php3?list=lids-user
.br
最新のLIDS メーリングリストのアーカイブは、次のところにある-
.I http://www.geocrawler.com/redir-sf.php3?list=lids-user
.\"O .br
.\"O An outdated searchable archive can be found at:
.\"O .I http://groups.yahoo.com/group/lids
.\"O 
.br
古いアーカイブは、次のところにある-
.I http://groups.yahoo.com/group/lids

.\"O .TP
.\"O .B LIDS FAQ
.\"O The LIDS FAQ is located at:
.\"O .br
.\"O .I http://www.lids.org/lids-faq/lids-faq.html
.\"O .br
.\"O or
.\"O .br
.\"O .I http://www.roedie.nl/lids-faq
.\"O 
.TP
.B LIDS FAQ
LIDS FAQ は次のところにある-
.br
.I http://www.lids.org/lids-faq/lids-faq.html
.br
あるいは、
.br
.I http://www.roedie.nl/lids-faq

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Any bugs found with LIDS itself should be sent to Xie, Phil, or the mailing list
.\"O .B (lids-user@lists.sourceforge.net).
.\"O Please include your .config file used to compile your kernel, and the lids.conf and lids.cap files located in /etc/lids directory.  Any errors found in this man page should be sent to Sander Klein.
LIDS に関するバグは、Xie やPhil に送るか、あるいはメーリングリスト
.B (lids-user@lists.sourceforge.net)
に送ってほしい。
カーネルをコンパイルするときに使った、.config ファイルと、/etc/lids に
あるlids.conf とlids.cap ファイルを一緒に送ること。また、このマ
ニュアルページでエラーを見付けたら、Sander Klein まで知らせて欲しい。
.\"O .SH FILES
.\"O \fB/etc/lids/lids.conf\fR \- LIDS configuration file.
.\"O .br
.\"O \fB/etc/lids/lids.cap\fR \- Defines the global capabilities.
.\"O .br
.\"O \fB/etc/lids/lids.net\fR \- Configuration file for e-mail alerts.
.\"O .br
.\"O \fB/etc/lids/lids.pw\fR \- Contains the encrypted LIDS password.
.\"O 
.SH ファイル
\fB/etc/lids/lids.conf\fR \- LIDS 設定ファイル
.br
\fB/etc/lids/lids.cap\fR \- 全体の権限の定義
.br
\fB/etc/lids/lids.net\fR \- e-mail アラートの設定
.br
\fB/etc/lids/lids.pw\fR \- 暗号化されたLIDS パスワード

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.\"O .BR lidsconf (8)
.\"O 
.SH 関連項目
.BR lidsconf (8)

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.\"O Huagang Xie
.\"O .I <xie@lids.org>
.\"O .PP
.\"O Philippe Biondi
.\"O .I <biondi@cartel-securite.fr>
.\"O .PP
.\"O Manpage written by Sander Klein
.\"O .I <roedie@roedie.nl>
.\"O .PP
.\"O 
.SH AUTHORS
Huagang Xie
.I <xie@lids.org>
.PP
Philippe Biondi
.I <biondi@cartel-securite.fr>
.PP
マニュアルページは、Sander Klein によって書かれた。
.I <roedie@roedie.nl>
.PP

.\"O .SH DISTRIBUTION
.\"O The newest version of 
.\"O .I LIDS 
.\"O can be obtained from 
.\"O .I http://www.lids.org/ 
.\"O or the mirrors.
.\"O 
.SH 配布
.I LIDS 
の最新のバージョンは、
.I http://www.lids.org/ 
か、ミラーからダウンロードできる。

.\"O .Sp
.\"O .I LIDS 
.\"O is (C) 1999-2003 by Huagang Xie(xie@lids.org).
.\" See the lidsadm (8) man page for some funny remarks...
.\"
.\"O 
.Sp
.I LIDS 
is (C) 1999-2003 by Huagang Xie(xie@lids.org)。
その他の注意点は、lidsadm (8) のマニュアルを参照のこと。
