.\"O .TH LIDSCONF 8
.TH LIDSCONF 8
.\"
.\" Man page written by Sander Klein <roedie@roedie.nl> (May 2003)
.\" It is based on the original lidsadm page by Steve Bremer.
.\" TODO: I will think of something in the end...
.\"
.\"	This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"     Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2003 Omo Kazuki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Oct 1 11:00:39 JST 2003
.\"         by Kazuki Omo
.\"
.\"O 
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O lidsconf \- configuration tool for Linux Intrusion Detection System
lidsconf \- Linux Intrusion Detection System 用の設定ツール
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O .B lidsconf -A [-s subject] -o object [-d] [-t from-to] [-i level] -j ACTION
.B lidsconf -A [-s subject] -o object [-d] [-t from-to] [-i level] -j ACTION
.\"O .br
.br
.\"O .B lidsconf -D [-s file] [-o file]
.B lidsconf -D [-s file] [-o file]
.\"O .br
.br
.\"O .B lidsconf -Z
.B lidsconf -Z
.\"O .br
.br
.\"O .B lidsconf -U
.B lidsconf -U
.\"O .br
.br
.\"O .B lidsconf -L [-e]
.B lidsconf -L [-e]
.\"O .br
.br
.\"O .B lidsconf -P
.B lidsconf -P
.\"O .br
.br
.\"O .B lidsconf -v
.B lidsconf -v
.\"O .br
.br
.\"O .B lidsconf [-h|H]
.B lidsconf [-h|H]
.\"O 

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O 

.\"O .I lidsconf 
.\"O is a configuration tool for 
.\"O .I Linux Intrusion Detection System (LIDS).
.\"O 
.I lidsconf 
は、Linux Intrusion Detection System (LIDS) の設定ツールである。

.\"O LIDS is a kernel patch to enhance the current Linux kernel. With LIDS, you can protect important files, directories, and devices. You can also define ACLs that restrict the access control on the entire system. For more information about LIDS, please go to 
.\"O .I http://www.lids.org.
.\"O 
LIDS は現在のLinux カーネルを拡張する、カーネルパッチである。LIDS によっ
て、重要なファイルや、ディレクトリや、デバイスを保護することができる。
さらにシステム全体に対して、アクセス制限をかけるACL を定義することもで
きる。LIDS の詳しい情報に関しては、
.I http://www.lids.org
を参照のこと。

.\"O .I lidsconf
.\"O is used to configure the access restriction information for LIDS. All of the information is stored in "/etc/lids/lids.conf".
.\"O 
.I lidsconf
はLIDS に対してのアクセス制限情報を設定するために使用される。それに
関する全ての情報は、"/etc/lids/lids.conf" に保存される。
.\"O 

.\"O .SH Options (ACL's)
.SH オプション (ACL の)
.\"O ACL is short for "Access Control List". The ACL in LIDS defines how a subject can access an object. The subject can be any program file on the system. The object can be a file, directory, or a special option (MEM devices, RAW IO, a HIDDEN process, etc). The target defines the access type that the subject has on the object.
.\"O .TP
ACL は "Access Control List" の略である。LIDS のACL では、Subject がどの
様にObject に対してアクセス出来るのかを定義している。 Subject は、シ
ステム上の、任意のプログラムファイルを指している。Object はファイルや、ディ
レクトリや、その他の特別なオプション (MEM デバイス、RAW IO、隠しプロセ
ス)を指している。Target は、Sbject のObject に対するアクセスタイプを定義
している。
.TP
.\"O The synopsis of the ACL is 
.\"O .B
ACL の書式は 
.B
.\"O [-s subject] [-d|-i TTL] -o object [-t timescale] -j TARGET
.\"O .TP
[-s subject] [-d|-i TTL] -o object [-t timescale] -j TARGET
.TP
.\"O When a subject is not specified, the ACL defines the object's default access.
.\"O 
.\"O .TP
Subject を省略すると、ACL はそのObject に対するデフォルトのアクセスを
定義する。
.TP
.\"O .B -s subject
.\"O A subject can be any program on the system, such as "/bin/login".
.\"O .TP
.B -s subject
Subject とは、システム上の"/bin/login" のような、任意のプログラムであ
る。
.TP
.\"O .B -o object [portscale]
.\"O An object can be a file, directory, or a special option (CAP_SYS_RAWIO, CAP_HIDDEN, CAP_INIT_KILL, etc).  If the object is CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE, you must specify the port scale following it. For example, "20-299,400-1002".
.\"O .TP
.B -o object [portscale]
Object はファイルや、ディレクトリや、その他の特別なオプション
(CAP_SYS_RAWIO, CAP_HIDDEN, CAP_INIT_KILL, など) である。.  Object が
CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE の場合には、例えば、"20-299,400-1002" のように、続けてポート番号の範囲を指定する必要がある。
.TP
.\"O .B -d
.\"O This is for the DOMAIN setting. When defined, the subject can only access objects in the domain specified. Any operation that affects an object outside of this domain will not be permitted.
.\"O .TP
.B -d
これは、DOMAIN 設定用である。これを指定すると、Subject はDomain で定義さ
れているObject にのみアクセスが可能になる。このDomain 以外のObject
に関する全てのアクセスは、できなくなる。
.TP
.\"O .B -i <inheritance level>
.\"O This specifies that the ACL is inheritable by the subject's children.  The 
.\"O .B inheritance level
.\"O affects how far the ACL is inherited.  An inheritance level of "-1" means 
.\"O .B unlimited 
.\"O inheritance.  An inheritance level of 1 means that a child process spawned by the parent which is not the same program as the parent will inherit the ACL, but a child process spawned from the child (i.e. a grandchild of the orignal process) won't.
.\"O The Inheritance level only affect the children which is not the same program as its parent. If the child is the same program as the parent, it will gain all the permission from its parent.
.B -i <inheritance level>
これで、Subjectの子プロセスに対してのACL の継承を指定する。
.B inheritance level
は、どれぐらいまでACL が影響するのかを表している。継承レベル"-1" は、
無制限の継承を表す。
継承レベル1 は、親プロセスにより発生された、同じプログラムでは無い子プ
ロセスがACL を継承するが、子プロセスが発生した子プロセス(すなわち、オ
リジナルのプロセスから見た孫プロセス)には、ACL は継承されないというこ
とを表している。
継承レベルは、親プロセスとは異なるプログラムの、子プロセスにのみ有効に
なる。もし子プロセスが親プロセスと同じ場合には、親プロセスと完全に
同じ権限が与えられる。

.\"O .TP
.\"O .B -t timescale
.\"O This is time restriction for an ACL. This restrition only applies to an ACL with a subject. The time restriction sets the time when an ACL will be true. The timescale format here is "hourminute-hourminute". For example, "0905-1021" means "From 9 o'clock and 5 minutes to 10 o'clock and 21 minutes".
.TP
.B -t タイムスケール
これは、ACL に対する時間制限である。この制限は、Subject 付きのACL に
のみ、作用する。時間制限とは、ACL が有効になる時間帯である。タイム
スケールの書式は、"hourminute-hourminute" になる。例えば、"0905-1021" は、
"9 時5 分から、10 時21 分まで" となる。
.\"O 
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B -j Target
.\"O The Target can be READ, APPEND, WRITE, or IGNORE for normal file access ACLs. For a special object, the Target can only be GRANT.

.TP
.B -j Target
Target には、通常のファイルアクセスACL に対してREAD, APPEND, WRITE, あ
るいは IGNORE が設定できる。特殊なObject に対しては、Target はGRANT
だけが設定できる。
.\"O 
.\"O .TP
.\"O .SH Available capabilities
.\"O The capabilities used in LIDS are shown below. You can use the name to enable or disable the capability when sealing and switching. You can also grant the capability to a program even if the capability is disabled globally on the system.

.TP
.SH 使用可能な権限
LIDS で使われる権限には、下記のものがある。封印して切替えをすると
きに、権限を有効や無効にするために名前を使用することができる。
さらに、権限がシステム全体で無効になっているときでも、プログラムに権限
を与えることができる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SP
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B CAP_CHOWN
.\"O chown(2)/chgrp(2)

.SP
.TP
.B CAP_CHOWN
chown(2)/chgrp(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B    CAP_DAC_OVERRIDE
.\"O DAC access.
.TP
.B    CAP_DAC_OVERRIDE
DAC access.
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH
.\"O DAC read.
.TP
.B CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH
DAC read.
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B          CAP_FOWNER
.\"O Owner ID not equal user ID.
.TP
.B          CAP_FOWNER
ユーザーID とオーナーID が等しくない
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B          CAP_FSETID
.\"O Effective user ID not equal owner ID.
.TP
.B          CAP_FSETID
実行ユーザーID とオーナーID が等しくない
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B            CAP_KILL
.\"O Real/effective ID not equal process ID.
.TP
.B            CAP_KILL
実/有効ID とプロセスID が等しくない
.\"O .TP 
.\"O .B         CAP_SETGID
.\"O setgid(2)
.TP 
.B         CAP_SETGID
setgid(2)
.\"O .TP 
.\"O .B          CAP_SETUID 
.\"O set*uid(2)
.TP 
.B          CAP_SETUID 
set*uid(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B         CAP_SETPCAP
.\"O Transfer capability.
.TP
.B         CAP_SETPCAP
転送権限
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_LINUX_IMMUTABLE
.\"O Immutable and append file attributes.
.TP
.B  CAP_LINUX_IMMUTABLE
不変か、付け加えられるファイル特性
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE
.\"O Binding to ports below 1024.
.TP
.B CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE
1024 未満のポートへのバインディング
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B   CAP_NET_BROADCAST
.\"O Broadcasting/listening to multicast.
.TP
.B   CAP_NET_BROADCAST
マルチキャストのブロードキャスト/リスニング
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_NET_ADMIN
.\"O Interface/firewall/routing changes.
.TP
.B       CAP_NET_ADMIN
インターフェース/ファイアーウォール/ルーティング 変更
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B         CAP_NET_RAW
.\"O Raw sockets (ping).
.TP
.B         CAP_NET_RAW
RAW ソケット(ping) 
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B        CAP_IPC_LOCK
.\"O Locking of shared memory segments.
.TP
.B        CAP_IPC_LOCK
共有メモリーセグメントのロック
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_IPC_OWNER
.\"O IPC ownership checks.
.TP
.B       CAP_IPC_OWNER
IPC 所有者のチェック
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B      CAP_SYS_MODULE
.\"O Insertion and removal of kernel modules.
.TP
.B      CAP_SYS_MODULE
カーネルモジュールの挿入と削除
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_SYS_RAWIO
.\"O ioperm(2)/iopl(2) access
.TP
.B       CAP_SYS_RAWIO
ioperm(2)/iopl(2) アクセス
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B      CAP_SYS_CHROOT
.\"O chroot(2)
.TP
.B      CAP_SYS_CHROOT
chroot(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B      CAP_SYS_PTRACE
.\"O ptrace(2)
.TP
.B      CAP_SYS_PTRACE
ptrace(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_SYS_PACCT
.\"O Configuration of process accounting.
.TP
.B       CAP_SYS_PACCT
プロセスアカウンティングの設定
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B       CAP_SYS_ADMIN
.\"O Tons of admin stuff.
.TP
.B       CAP_SYS_ADMIN
管理者の重み
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B        CAP_SYS_BOOT
.\"O reboot(2)
.TP
.B        CAP_SYS_BOOT
reboot(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B        CAP_SYS_NICE
.\"O nice(2)
.TP
.B        CAP_SYS_NICE
nice(2)
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B    CAP_SYS_RESOURCE
.\"O Setting resource limits.
.TP
.B    CAP_SYS_RESOURCE
リソース制限の設定
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B        CAP_SYS_TIME
.\"O Setting system time.
.TP
.B        CAP_SYS_TIME
システム時間の設定
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_SYS_TTY_CONFIG
.\"O TTY configuration.
.TP
.B  CAP_SYS_TTY_CONFIG
TTY 設定
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_MKNOD
.\"O Allow the privileged aspects of mknod().
.TP
.B  CAP_MKNOD
mknod() の特別な許可
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_LEASE
.\"O Allow taking of leases on files.
.TP
.B  CAP_LEASE
ファイルにリースを許可
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_HIDDEN
.\"O Make a program hidden from the entire system.
.TP
.B  CAP_HIDDEN
システムからプログラムを隠す
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_KILL_PROTECTED
.\"O Allow/disallow a process to kille protected processes.
.TP
.B  CAP_KILL_PROTECTED
プロセスに、保護されているプロセスをkill させることを許可/不許可
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B  CAP_PROTECTED
.\"O Protect the process from signals.
.\"O 
.TP
.B  CAP_PROTECTED
シグナルからプロセスを保護

.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例
.\"O Here are some examples of using lidsconf.  They range from simple/normal to a little more complex/esoteric.  Note that actual file names are used to make things more concrete. In their place you should substitute file/directories from
以下に、いくつかのlidsconf を使った例を示す。これらは簡単/平易なも
のから、複雑/難解なものまである。 実際のファイル名はもっと具体的な
ものが使われることに注意すること。
.B 実際のシステム
に合わせてファイル/ディレクトリを置き換えること。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -o /sbin -j READ
.\"O This ACL protects the /sbin directory as read-only.
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -o /sbin -j READ
このACL は、/sbin ディレクトリを読込み専用に保護する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -o /var/log/message -j APPEND
.\"O Protects /var/log/message as append only.
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -o /var/log/message -j APPEND
/var/log/messages を付加専用にする。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -o /sbin/test -j IGNORE
.\"O Specifies that the read-only protection of /sbin doesn't apply to /sbin/test.
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -o /sbin/test -j IGNORE
/sbin を読込専用で保護するが、/sbin/test は保護しない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -o /etc/passwd -j DENY
.\"O Make /etc/passwd hidden from everyone. Nothing can see the file (open,stat,..).
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -o /etc/passwd -j DENY
/etc/passwd を全てのユーザーから隠す。ファイルを見るようなこと
(open, stat, など)は、できなくなる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -s /bin/login -o /etc/passwd -j READ
.\"O Allows the /bin/login program to read the /etc/passwd even though it has been defined as hidden above.
.\"O In this case, only /bin/login can read /etc/passwd.  No other program or user can see the file (/etc/passwd).
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -s /bin/login -o /etc/passwd -j READ
/bin/login プログラムに、先ほどの設定で隠しファイルにされている
/etc/passwd を読み込むことを許可する。
この場合、/bin/login のみが/etc/passwd を読むことができる。その他の
プログラムやユーザーは、そのファイル(/etc/passwd) を見ることはできない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -o /home/httpd -j DENY
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -s /usr/sbin/httpd -o /home/httpd -j READ
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -s /usr/sbin/httpd -o CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE 80 -i -1 -j GRANT
.\"O Protects the server root of a web server (/home/httpd) as DENY, and allow only the httpd binary (/usr/sbin/httpd) to read the server root (/home/httpd),and the httpd can only bind to port 80.
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -o /home/httpd -j DENY
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -s /usr/sbin/httpd -o /home/httpd -j READ
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -s /usr/sbin/httpd -o CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE 80 -i -1 -j GRANT
Web サーバーのServerROOT (/home/httpd) をDENY で保護し、httpd バ
イナリー(/usr/sbin/httpd) のみがServerROOT (/home/httpd) を読み込む
ことを許可して、さらにhttpd がポート番号80 番にのみバインドできるよう
にすることを許可する。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -s /bin/program -i 2 -o CAP_NET_ADMIN -j GRANT
.\"O Grant the /bin/program the capability of CAP_NET_ADMIN, and the inheritance level is 2.
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -s /bin/program -i 2 -o CAP_NET_ADMIN -j GRANT
/bin/program にCAP_NET_ADMIN の権限を与え、継承レベルを2 に設定してい
る。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -s /usr/X11/bin/XF86_SVGA -o CAP_SYS_RAWIO -j GRANT
.\"O Grants the program XF86_SVGA the capability of CAP_SYS_RAWIO if the CAP_SYS_RAWIO has been disabled in /etc/lids/lids.cap.
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -s /usr/X11/bin/XF86_SVGA -o CAP_SYS_RAWIO -j GRANT
XF86_SVGA にCAP_SYS_RAWIO の権限を、CAP_SYS_RAWIO が/etc/lids/lids.cap
で無効になっているときにも、与える。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -s /usr/sbin/httpd -d -o /home/httpd -j READ
.\"O Define the program httpd's EXEC DOMAIN as /home/httpd.  Any operation outside of /home/httpd is not allowed when httpd running.
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -s /usr/sbin/httpd -d -o /home/httpd -j READ
httpd の実行ドメインを/home/httpd として定義している。/home/httpd 以外か
らの、どのようなオペレーションも、httpd が動いているときには許可しない。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -s /bin/login -o /etc/shadow -t 0900:1800 -j READ
.\"O Define the /bin/login can read /etc/shadow only during 09:00 to 18:00.With this, you can restrict the login event occur during this time.
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -s /bin/login -o /etc/shadow -t 0900:1800 -j READ
/bin/login に/etc/shadow ファイルを、09:00 から18:00 の間だけ読み込ま
せることを許可する。これにより、ユーザーのログインを、この時間だけに
制限することができる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B lidsconf -A -s /usr/sbin/sshd -o CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE 10-22,300-1020 -j GRANT
.\"O Define the /usr/sbin/sshd can bind to port number from 10 to 22 and 300 to 1020 , in this case, ssh can only bind to that port scale.
.\"O 
.TP
.B lidsconf -A -s /usr/sbin/sshd -o CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE 10-22,300-1020 -j GRANT
/usr/sbin/sshd がポート番号10 から22 までと、300 から1020 までバイン
ドすることができるように定義している。このケースでは、ssh はこの番号
の範囲のみでしかバインドできない。

.\"O .SH OTHER SOURCES OF INFORMATION.
.SH その他の情報源
.\"O .TP
.\"O .B Mailing List
.\"O To subscribe, unsubscribe, go to:
.\"O .I http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/lids-user
.TP
.B メーリングリスト
参加、退会するときには、次のサイトを参照-
.I http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/lids-user
.\"O .br
.\"O To post a message to the list, send an e-mail to:
.\"O .B lids-user@lists.sourceforge.net
.br
メッセ-ジをメーリングリストに投稿するときは、メールを次のところまで送信
してほしい-
.B lids-user@lists.sourceforge.net
.\"O .br
.\"O Current LIDS archive can be found at:
.\"O .I http://www.geocrawler.com/redir-sf.php3?list=lids-user
.br
最新のLIDS メーリングリストのアーカイブは、次のところにある-
.I http://www.geocrawler.com/redir-sf.php3?list=lids-user
.\"O .br
.\"O An outdated searchable archive can be found at:
.\"O .I http://groups.yahoo.com/group/lids
.\"O 
.br
古いアーカイブは、次のところにある-
.I http://groups.yahoo.com/group/lids

.\"O .TP
.\"O .B LIDS FAQ
.\"O The LIDS FAQ is located at:
.\"O .br
.\"O .I http://www.lids.org/lids-faq/lids-faq.html
.\"O .br
.\"O or
.\"O .br
.\"O .I http://www.roedie.nl/lids-faq
.\"O 
.TP
.B LIDS FAQ
LIDS FAQ は次のところにある-
.br
.I http://www.lids.org/lids-faq/lids-faq.html
.br
あるいは、
.br
.I http://www.roedie.nl/lids-faq

.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Any bugs found with LIDS itself should be sent to Xie, Phil, or the mailing list
.\"O .B (lids-user@lists.sourceforge.net).
.\"O Please include your .config file used to compile your kernel, and the lids.conf and lids.cap files located in /etc/lids directory.  Any errors found in this man page should be sent to Sander Klein.
LIDS に関するバグは、Xie やPhil に送るか、あるいはメーリングリスト
.B (lids-user@lists.sourceforge.net)
に送ってほしい。
カーネルをコンパイルするときに使った、.config ファイルと、/etc/lids に
あるlids.conf とlids.cap ファイルを一緒に送ること。また、このマ
ニュアルページでエラーを見付けたら、Sander Klein まで知らせて欲しい。
.\"O .SH FILES
.\"O \fB/etc/lids/lids.conf\fR \- LIDS configuration file.
.\"O .br
.\"O \fB/etc/lids/lids.cap\fR \- Defines the global capabilities.
.\"O .br
.\"O \fB/etc/lids/lids.net\fR \- Configuration file for e-mail alerts.
.\"O .br
.\"O \fB/etc/lids/lids.pw\fR \- Contains the encrypted LIDS password.
.\"O 
.SH ファイル
\fB/etc/lids/lids.conf\fR \- LIDS 設定ファイル
.br
\fB/etc/lids/lids.cap\fR \- 全体の権限の定義
.br
\fB/etc/lids/lids.net\fR \- e-mail アラートの設定
.br
\fB/etc/lids/lids.pw\fR \- 暗号化されたLIDS パスワード

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.\"O .BR lidsadm (8)
.\"O 
.SH 関連項目
.BR lidsadm (8)

.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.\"O Huagang Xie
.\"O .I <xie@lids.org>
.\"O .PP
.\"O Philippe Biondi
.\"O .I <biondi@cartel-securite.fr>
.\"O .PP
.\"O Manpage written by Sander Klein
.\"O .I <roedie@roedie.nl>
.\"O .PP
.\"O 
.SH AUTHORS
Huagang Xie
.I <xie@lids.org>
.PP
Philippe Biondi
.I <biondi@cartel-securite.fr>
.PP
マニュアルページは、Sander Klein によって書かれた。
.I <roedie@roedie.nl>
.PP

.\"O .SH DISTRIBUTION
.\"O The newest version of 
.\"O .I LIDS 
.\"O can be obtained from 
.\"O .I http://www.lids.org/ 
.\"O or the mirrors.
.\"O 
.SH 配布
.I LIDS 
の最新のバージョンは、
.I http://www.lids.org/ 
か、ミラーからダウンロードできる。

.\"O .Sp
.\"O .I LIDS 
.\"O is (C) 1999-2003 by Huagang Xie(xie@lids.org).
.\" See the lidsadm (8) man page for some funny remarks...
.\"

.Sp
.I LIDS 
.is (C) 1999-2003 by Huagang Xie(xie@lids.org)。
その他の注意点は、lidsadm (8) のマニュアルを参照のこと。
