.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)vipw.8	6.7 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"	$Id: vipw.8,v 1.1 1999/07/28 01:19:48 nakano Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Aug 22 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd 7 July 1996
.Dt VIPW 8
.Os Util-Linux 2.6
.Sh 名前
.Nm vipw, vigr
.Nd passwd ファイル、 group ファイルを編集する
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm vipw
.Op -V
.Op --version
.Nm vigr
.Op -V
.Op --version
.Sh 説明
.Nm vipw
はパスワードファイルに適当なロックをかけてからこれを編集する。そしてア
ンロックしてから必要な後処理を行う。
もしパスワードファイルがすでに他のユーザによって編集用にロックされてい
たら、
.Nm vipw
は時間をおいてから再度実行するようにプロンプトを出す。
.Nm vipw
のデフォルトのエディタは
.Xr vi 1
である。
.br
.Nm vigr
はグループファイルを vipw と同じように編集する。
.Sh 環境変数
以下の環境変数が設定されている場合は
.Nm vipw
はこれを利用する:
.Bl -tag -width EDITOR
.It Ev EDITOR
文字列
.Ev EDITOR
で設定されているエディタがデフォルトのエディタ
.Xr vi 1
の代わりに実行される。
.El
.Sh 関連情報
.Xr passwd 1 ,
.Xr vi 1 ,
.Xr passwd 5
.Sh 履歴
.Nm vipw
コマンドは
.Bx 4.0 .
から導入された。
.br
.Nm vigr
コマンドは Util-Linux 2.6 から導入された。

