.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Kazuyoshi Furutaka and Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 1997
.\"	by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Thu Nov  2 18:23:49 JST 2000
.\"	by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Sat May  8 17:11:08 JST 2004
.\"	by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH QUOTA 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O quota \- display disk usage and limits
quota \- ディスクの使用状況と使用限度を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B quota
[
.B -F
.I format-name
] [
.BR -guvsil \ |
.B q
]
.br
.B quota
[
.B -F
.I format-name
] [
.BR -uvsil \ |
.B q
]
.I user
.br
.B quota
[
.B -F
.I format-name
] [
.BR -gvsil \ |
.B q
]
.I group
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B quota
.\"O displays users' disk usage and limits.
.\"O By default only the user quotas are printed.
.B quota
はユーザーのディスク使用状況と使用限度を表示する。
デフォルトではユーザーの quota のみが表示される。
.PP
.\"O .B quota
.\"O reports the quotas of all the filesystems listed in
.\"O .BR /etc/mtab .
.B quota
は
.B /etc/mtab
でリストされている全てのファイルシステムの quota を表示する。
.\"O For filesystems that are NFS-mounted a call to the rpc.rquotad on
.\"O the server machine is performed to get the information.
NFS マウントされているファイルシステムに対しては、
サーバマシン上の rpc.rquotad に問い合わせを行なって情報を得る。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-F \f2format-name\f1
.\"O Show quota for specified format (ie. don't perform format autodetection).
指定されたフォーマットの quota を表示する
(つまり、フォーマットの自動判定を行わない)。
.\"O Possible format names are:
.\"O .B vfsold
.\"O (version 1 quota),
.\"O .B vfsv0
.\"O (version 2 quota),
.\"O .B rpc
.\"O (quota over NFS),
.\"O .B xfs
.\"O (quota on XFS filesystem)
指定可能なフォーマット名は以下の通り:
.B vfsold
(バージョン 1 の quota),
.B vfsv0
(バージョン 2 の quota),
.B rpc
(NFS 越しの quota),
.B xfs
(XFS ファイルシステム上の quota)。
.TP
.B \-g
.\"O Print group quotas for the group 
.\"O of which the user is a member.
.\"O The optional
そのユーザーが所属するグループの quota を表示する。
.TP
.B \-u
.\"O flag is equivalent to the default.
このフラグはデフォルトと等価である。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O will display quotas on filesystems
.\"O where no storage is allocated.
記憶媒体が割り当てられていないファイルシステムの quota も表示する。
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O option will make
.\"O .BR quota (1)
.\"O try to choose units for showing limits, used space and used inodes.
このオプションは、使用限度・使用容量・使用 inode を表示する単位を
.BR quota (1)
に選択させる。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O ignore mountpoints mounted by automounter
automount によってマウントされたマウントポイントを無視する。
.TP
.B \-l
.\"O report quotas only on local filesystems (ie. ignore NFS mounted filesystems).
ローカルファイルシステムの quota のみを表示する
(すなわち NFS マウントされたファイルシステムは無視する)。
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Print a more terse message,
.\"O containing only information
.\"O on filesystems where usage is over quota.
より簡潔なメッセージ
(使用量が quota を超過しているファイルシステムの情報だけ)
を表示する。
.TP
.B \-Q
.\"O Do not print error message if connection to rpc.rquotad is refused (usually this happens
.\"O when rpc.rquotad is not running on the server).
rpc.rquotad への接続が拒否された場合にエラーメッセージを表示しない
(これは通常 rpc.rquotad がサーバ上で動作していない場合に起こる)。
.TP
.B -V
バージョン番号とコンパイルオプションを表示して、終了する
(註: このオプションに関する説明は、日本語訳に際して追加された)。
.LP
.\"O Specifying both
.\"O .B \-g
.\"O and
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O displays both the user quotas and the group quotas (for
.\"O the user).
.B \-g
と
.B \-u
の両方を指定した場合、
ユーザーの quota と (そのユーザーの属する) グループの quota を表示する。
.LP
.\"O Only the super-user may use the
.\"O .B \-u
.\"O flag and the optional
.\"O .B user
.\"O argument to view the limits of other users.
.\"O Non-super-users can use the the
.\"O .B \-g
.\"O flag and optional
.\"O .B group
.\"O argument to view only the limits of groups of which they are members.
スーパーユーザーのみが、
.B \-u
フラグとオプションの引き数
.B user
を用いて、他のユーザーの使用限度を調べることができる。
スーパーユーザー以外のユーザーは、
.B \-g
フラグとオプションの引き数
.B group
を用いて、自分が所属するグループに対してのみ
使用限度を調べることができる。
.LP
.\"O The
.\"O .B \-q
.\"O flag takes precedence over the
.\"O .B \-v
.\"O flag.
.B \-q
フラグは
.B \-v
フラグよりも優先される。
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O If
.\"O .B quota
.\"O exits with a non-zero status, one or more filesystems
.\"O are over quota.
.B quota
が 0 以外の状態を返して終了した場合、
1 つ以上のファイルシステムに quota の超過が存在する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル

.PD 0
.TP 20
.\"O .B aquota.user " or " aquota.group
.B aquota.user " または " aquota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 2 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 2 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP 20
.\"O .B quota.user " or " quota.group
.B quota.user " または " quota.group
.\"O quota file at the filesystem root (version 1 quota, non-XFS filesystems)
ファイルシステムのルートに置かれた quota ファイル
(バージョン 1 の quota, XFS 以外のファイルシステム)。
.TP
.B /etc/mtab
.\"O default filesystems
デフォルトのファイルシステム。
.PD
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR quotactl (2),
.BR fstab (5),
.BR edquota (8),
.BR quotacheck (8),
.BR quotaon (8),
.BR repquota (8)
