.\" Copyright (c) 1994 Peter Tobias (tobias@server.et-inf.fho-emden.de),
.\" This file may be distributed under the GNU General Public License.
.\"
.\" $Id: ftpusers.5,v 1.3 2000/12/25 21:13:28 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Dec 14 18:22:51 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.Dd April 22, 1994
.Dt FTPUSERS 5
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm ftpusers
.\"O .Nd file which lists users who are not allowed to use ftp
.Nd ftp の使用を許可しないユーザーをリストするファイル
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O .Pa /etc/ftpusers
.\"O is used by
.\"O .Xr ftpd 8 ;
.\"O the file contains a list of users who are not allowed to use the
.\"O ftp command. For security reasons at least users like ``root'', ``bin'',
.\"O ``uucp'' and ``news'' should be listed in this file. 
.\"O Blank lines and lines beginning with `#' are ignored.
.Pa /etc/ftpusers
は
.Xr ftpd 8
によって使われる。
このファイルには ftp コマンドの使用を許可しない
ユーザーのリストが含まれている。
セキュリティ上の問題から、少なくとも
``root'', ``bin'', ``uucp'', ``news'' といったユーザーが
このファイルにリストされているべきである。
空行と `#' で始まる行は無視される。
.Pp
.\"O Note: a lines with `#' in the
.\"O .Em middle
.\"O is 
.\"O .Em not
.\"O a comment. Don't put `#' after a name to comment it; use another line,
.\"O or things will silently fail on you.
注意: `#' が行の
.Em 途中
にある行は、コメント
.Em ではない
。
ユーザー名を説明する目的で、
ユーザー名の後に `#' を付けてコメントを書いてはならない。
別の行にコメントを書くこと。
さもなければ、黙って失敗するだろう。
.\"O .Sh EXAMPLES
.Sh 例
.Pa /etc/ftpusers
.\"O might contain the following entries:
には以下のようなエントリがあるだろう:
.Bd -literal
#
# /etc/ftpusers
#
root
uucp
news
.Ed
.\"O .Sh FILES
.Sh ファイル
.Pa /etc/ftpusers
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr ftp 1 ,
.Xr ftpd 8
