.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1989, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: @(#)ftp.1	6.18 (Berkeley) 7/30/91
.\"	from: ftp.1,v 1.2 1997/06/08 20:01:35 dholland Exp
.\"     $Id: netrc.5,v 1.1.1.1 2000/10/19 08:22:16 ysato Exp $
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Dec 14 18:22:51 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        identify	  識別する
.\"
.Dd September 23, 1997
.Dt NETRC 5
.Os "Linux NetKit (0.17)"
.\"O .Sh NAME
.Sh 名前
.Nm netrc, .netrc
.\"O .Nd user configuration for ftp
.Nd ftp のためのユーザー設定ファイル
.\"O .Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh 説明
.\"O This file contains configuration and autologin information for the 
.\"O File Transfer Protocol client 
.\"O .Xr ftp 1 .
このファイルには、ファイル転送プロトコル
(File Transfer Protocol) クライアント
.Xr ftp 1
のための、設定情報と自動ログイン情報が書かれている。
.Pp
.\"O The
.\"O .Pa .netrc
.\"O file contains login and initialization information
.\"O used by the auto-login process.
.\"O It resides in the user's home directory.
.\"O The following tokens are recognized; they may be separated by spaces,
.\"O tabs, or new-lines:
.Pa .netrc
ファイルには、自動ログインプロセスで使われる
ログイン情報と初期化情報が書かれている。
このファイルはユーザーのホームディレクトリにある。
以下のトークン (token) が認識される。
トークンはスペース・タブ・改行で区切られる。
.Bl -tag -width password
.It Ic machine Ar name
.\"O Identify a remote machine
.\"O .Ar name .
.\"O The auto-login process searches the
.\"O .Pa .netrc
.\"O file for a
.\"O .Ic machine
.\"O token that matches the remote machine specified on the
.\"O .Nm ftp
.\"O command line or as an
.\"O .Ic open
.\"O command argument.
リモートマシンの名前
.Ar name
を識別する。
自動ログインプロセスでは、
.Nm ftp
のコマンドラインまたは
.Ic open
コマンドの引き数として指定されたリモートマシンの名前にマッチする
.Ic machine
トークンを
.Pa .netrc
ファイル中で検索する。
.\"O Once a match is made, the subsequent
.\"O .Pa .netrc
.\"O tokens are processed,
.\"O stopping when the end of file is reached or another
.\"O .Ic machine
.\"O or a
.\"O .Ic default
.\"O token is encountered.
マッチするものが見つかった場合、その後の
.Pa .netrc
トークンが処理される。
トークンの処理は、ファイルの終りに達した場合、または
別の
.Ic machine
トークンか
.Ic default
トークンに出会った場合に停止する。
.It Ic default
.\"O This is the same as
.\"O .Ic machine
.\"O .Ar name
.\"O except that
.\"O .Ic default
.\"O matches any name.
.\"O There can be only one
.\"O .Ic default
.\"O token, and it must be after all
.\"O .Ic machine
.\"O tokens.
.\"O This is normally used as:
.Ic machine
.Ar name
と同じような働きをするが、
.Ic default
トークンは全てのマシン名とマッチする。
.Ic default
トークンは 1 個だけ置くことができるが、
全ての
.Ic machine
トークンの後でなければならない。
このトークンは通常、以下のようにして使われる:
.Pp
.Dl default login anonymous password user@site
.Pp
.\"O thereby giving the user
.\"O .Ar automatic
.\"O anonymous ftp login to
.\"O machines not specified in
.\"O .Pa .netrc .
.\"O This can be overridden
.\"O by using the
.\"O .Fl n
.\"O flag to disable auto-login.
これにより、ユーザーは
.Pa .netrc
に指定されていないマシンに
.Ar 自動的に
匿名 ftp ログインできる。
この設定は、自動ログインを不可にする
.Fl n
フラグを使うことで上書きできる。
.It Ic login Ar name
.\"O Identify a user on the remote machine.
.\"O If this token is present, the auto-login process will initiate
.\"O a login using the specified
.\"O .Ar name .
リモートマシンでのユーザー名を識別する。
このトークンがある場合、自動ログインプロセスでは
指定された名前
.Ar name
を使ってログインの初期化が行われる。
.It Ic password Ar string
.\"O Supply a password.
.\"O If this token is present, the auto-login process will supply the
.\"O specified string if the remote server requires a password as part
.\"O of the login process.
.\"O Note that if this token is present in the
.\"O .Pa .netrc
.\"O file for any user other
.\"O than
.\"O .Ar anonymous  ,
.\"O .Nm ftp
.\"O will abort the auto-login process if the
.\"O .Pa .netrc
.\"O is readable by
.\"O anyone besides the user.
パスワードを与える。
このトークンがある場合、自動ログインプロセスで
リモートサーバーがログインプロセスの一部として
パスワードを要求したときは、ここで指定された文字列を送る。
.Pa .netrc
ファイルに
.Ar anonymous
以外のユーザーについてのトークンがあり、もし
.Pa .netrc
が他のユーザーから読める場合は、
.Nm ftp
は自動ログインプロセスを中止 (abort) する。
.It Ic account Ar string
.\"O Supply an additional account password.
.\"O If this token is present, the auto-login process will supply the
.\"O specified string if the remote server requires an additional
.\"O account password, or the auto-login process will initiate an
.\"O .Dv ACCT
.\"O command if it does not.
追加のアカウントパスワードを与える。
このトークンがある場合、自動ログインプロセスで
リモートサーバーが追加のアカウントパスワードを要求したときは、
ここで指定された文字列を送る。
このトークンがない場合、自動ログインプロセスでは
.Dv ACCT
コマンドで初期化を行う。
.It Ic macdef Ar name
.\"O Define a macro.
.\"O This token functions like the
.\"O .Nm ftp
.\"O .Ic macdef
.\"O command functions.
マクロを定義する。
このトークン関数は、
.Nm ftp
の
.Ic macdef
コマンド関数に似ている。
.\"O A macro is defined with the specified name; its contents begin with the
.\"O next
.\"O .Pa .netrc
.\"O line and continue until a null line (consecutive new-line
.\"O characters) is encountered.
マクロは指定された名前で定義される。
マクロの内容は
.Pa .netrc
の次の行から始まり、空行 (改行の連続) に出会うまで続く。
.\"O If a macro named
.\"O .Ic init
.\"O is defined, it is automatically executed as the last step in the
.\"O auto-login process.
マクロ名
.Ic init
が定義されると、自動ログインプロセスの最後のステップとして実行される。
.El
.\"O .Sh SEE ALSO
.Sh 関連項目
.Xr ftp 1 ,
.Xr ftpd 8
