.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Oct  8 21:53:44 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: access concentrators	アクセス集信装置
.\"
.\" $Id: pppoe.conf.5,v 1.5 2002/04/09 17:28:38 dfs Exp $
.\" LIC: GPL
.\""
.TH PPPOE.CONF 5 "21 February 2000"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pppoe.conf \- Configuration file used by \fBadsl-start\fR(8),
.\"O \fBadsl-stop\fR(8), \fBadsl-status(8)\fR and \fBadsl-connect\fR(8).
pppoe.conf \- \fBadsl-start\fR(8), \fBadsl-stop\fR(8), \fBadsl-status(8)\fR, \fBadsl-connect\fR(8) で使われる設定ファイル

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fB/etc/ppp/pppoe.conf\fR is a shell script which contains configuration
.\"O information for Roaring Penguin's ADSL scripts.  Note that \fBpppoe.conf\fR
.\"O is used only by the various adsl-* shell scripts, not by \fBpppoe\fR
.\"O itself.
\fB/etc/ppp/pppoe.conf\fR は
Roaring Penguin の ADSL スクリプトの
設定情報が書かれたシェルスクリプトである。
\fBpppoe.conf\fR は adsl-* というシェルスクリプトのみで使用され、
\fBpppoe\fR 自体には使用されない点に注意すること。

.\"O \fBpppoe.conf\fR consists of a sequence of shell variable assignments.
.\"O The variables and their meanings are:
\fBpppoe.conf\fR にはシェル変数の指定が書かれる。
変数とその意味は以下の通りである:

.TP
.B ETH
.\"O The Ethernet interface connected to the ADSL modem (for example, eth0).
ADSL モデムに接続されているイーサーネットインターフェース (例えば eth0)。

.TP
.B USER
.\"O The ADSL user-id (for example, b1xxnxnx@sympatico.ca).
ADSL ユーザー ID (例えば b1xxnxnx@sympatico.ca)。

.TP
.B SERVICENAME
.\"O If this is not blank, then it is passed with the \fB\-S\fR option to
.\"O \fBpppoe\fR.  It specifies a service name to ask for.  Usually, you
.\"O should leave it blank.
空でなければ、\fBpppoe\fR の \fB\-S\fR オプションに渡される。
使用したいサービスの名前を指定する。
通常は空にしておくべきである。

.TP
.B ACNAME
.\"O If this is not blank, then it is passed with the \fB\-C\fR option to
.\"O \fBpppoe\fR.  It specifies the name of the access concentrator to connect
.\"O to.  Usually, you should leave it blank.
空でなければ、\fBpppoe\fR の \fB\-C\fR オプションに渡される。
接続するアクセス集信装置の名前を指定する。
通常は空にしておくべきである。

.TP
.B DEMAND
.\"O If set to a number, the link is activated on demand and brought down
.\"O after after \fBDEMAND\fR seconds.  If set to \fBno\fR, the link is kept
.\"O up all the time rather than being activated on demand.
数値を設定すると、
要求があった時点で接続を開き、\fBDEMAND\fR 秒後に接続を閉じる。
\fBno\fR に設定すると、要求ごとに接続を行うのではなく、
常に接続したままにする。

.TP
.B DNSTYPE
.\"O One of \fBNOCHANGE\fR, \fBSPECIFY\fR or \fBSERVER\fR.  If
.\"O set to NOCHANGE, \fBadsl-connect\fR will not adjust the DNS setup in
.\"O any way.  If set to SPECIFY, it will re-write /etc/resolv.conf with
.\"O the values of DNS1 and DNS2.  If set to \fBSERVER\fR, it will
.\"O supply the \fIusepeerdns\fR option to \fBpppd\fR, and make a symlink
.\"O from /etc/resolv.conf to /etc/ppp/resolv.conf.
\fBNOCHANGE\fR, \fBSPECIFY\fR, \fBSERVER\fR のいずれか 1 つである。
NOCHANGE に設定すると \fBadsl-connect\fR は DNS 設定を全く変更しない。
SPECIFY に設定すると /etc/resolv.conf を DNS1 と DNS2 の値に書き換える。
\fBSERVER\fR に設定すると
\fIusepeerdns\fR オプションをつけて \fBpppd\fR を実行し、
/etc/resolv.conf から /etc/ppp/resolv.conf へのシンボリックリンクを作成する。

.TP
.B DNS1, DNS2
.\"O IP addresses of DNS servers if you use DNSTYPE=SPECIFY.
DNSTYPE=SPECIFY を使った場合の DNS サーバーの IP アドレス。

.TP
.B NONROOT
.\"O If the line \fBNONROOT=OK\fR (exactly like that; no whitespace or comments)
.\"O appears in the configuration file, then \fBpppoe-wrapper\fR will allow
.\"O non-root users to bring the conneciton up or down.  The wrapper is installed
.\"O only if you installed the rp-pppoe-gui package.
\fBNONROOT=OK\fR (厳密にこの通りで、空白やコメントがあってはならない)
という行が設定ファイルにあると、
root 以外のユーザーが \fBpppoe-wrapper\fR を使って 
接続を開いたり閉じたりするのが可能になる。
ラッパープログラムは rp-pppoe-gui パッケージを
インストールした場合にのみインストールされる。

.TP
.B USEPEERDNS
.\"O If set to "yes", then \fBadsl-connect\fR will supply the \fIusepeerdns\fR
.\"O option to \fBpppd\fR, which causes it to obtain DNS server addresses
.\"O from the peer and create a new \fB/etc/resolv.conf\fR file.  Otherwise,
.\"O \fBadsl-connect\fR will not supply this option, and \fBpppd\fR will not
.\"O modify \fB/etc/resolv.conf\fR.
"yes" に設定すると、\fBadsl-connect\fR は
\fIusepeerdns\fR オプションをつけて \fBpppd\fR を実行する。
こうすると、接続先 (peer) から DNS サーバーのアドレスを取得し、
新しい \fB/etc/resolv.conf\fR ファイルを作成する。
それ以外の場合、\fBadsl-connect\fR はこのオプションをつけずに
\fBpppd\fR を実行するので、\fBpppd\fR は \fB/etc/resolv.conf\fR を修正しない。

.TP
.B CONNECT_POLL
.\"O How often (in seconds) \fBadsl-start\fR should check to see if a new PPP
.\"O interface has come up.  If this is set to 0, the \fBadsl-start\fR simply
.\"O initiates the PPP session, but does not wait to see if it comes up
.\"O successfully.
\fBadsl-start\fR が新しい PPP インターフェースの起動を
チェックする時間間隔 (秒数)。
0 に設定すると、\fBadsl-start\fR は単に PPP セッションを初期化するだけで、
起動に成功したかを確認するために待たない。

.TP
.B CONNECT_TIMEOUT
.\"O How long (in seconds) \fBadsl-start\fR should wait for a new PPP interface
.\"O to come up before concluding that \fBadsl-connect\fR has failed and killing
.\"O the session.
\fBadsl-connect\fR が新しい PPP	インターフェースの起動に失敗して
セッションを終了させるまでに待つ時間 (秒数)。

.TP
.B PING
.\"O A character which is echoed every \fBCONNECT_POLL\fR seconds while
.\"O \fBadsl-start\fR is waiting for the PPP interface to come up.
\fBadsl-start\fR が PPP インターフェースの起動を待つ間に、
\fBCONNECT_POLL\fR 秒毎に表示 (echo) する文字。

.TP
.B FORCEPING
.\"O A character which is echoed every \fBCONNECT_POLL\fR seconds while
.\"O \fBadsl-start\fR is waiting for the PPP interface to come up.  Similar
.\"O to \fBPING\fR, but the character is echoed even if \fBadsl-start\fR's
.\"O standard output is not a tty.
\fBadsl-start\fR が PPP インターフェースの起動を待つ間に、
\fBCONNECT_POLL\fR 秒毎に表示 (echo) する文字。
\fBPING\fR と似ているが、\fBadsl-start\fR の標準出力が
端末 (tty) でなくても表示される。

.TP
.B PIDFILE
.\"O A file in which to write the process-ID of the adsl-connect process
.\"O (for example, \fB/var/run/pppoe.pid\fR).  Two additional files
.\"O ($PIDFILE.pppd and $PIDFILE.pppoe) hold the process-ID's of the
.\"O \fBpppd\fR and \fBpppoe\fR processes, respectively.
adsl-connect のプロセス ID が書かれるファイル
(例えば \fB/var/run/pppoe.pid\fR)。
さらに 2 つのファイル ($PIDFILE.pppd と $PIDFILE.pppoe) には、
それぞれ \fBpppd\fR と \fBpppoe\fR のプロセス ID が入る。

.TP
.B SYNCHRONOUS
.\"O An indication of whether or not to use synchronous PPP (\fByes\fR or
.\"O \fBno\fR).  Synchronous PPP is safe on Linux machines with the n_hdlc
.\"O line discipline.  (If you have a file called "n_hdlc.o" in your
.\"O modules directory, you have the line discipline.)  It is \fInot
.\"O recommended\fR on other machines or on Linux machines without the
.\"O n_hdlc line discipline due to some known and unsolveable race
.\"O conditions in a user-mode client.
同期 PPP を使うかどうか (\fByes\fR または \fBno\fR)。
同期 PPP は n_hdlc ライン制御機能 (discipline) を備えた
Linux マシンでは安全である。
(モジュールディレクトリに "n_hdlc.o" というファイルがあれば、
ライン制御機能を備えている)。
他の (OS の) マシンや n_hdlc ライン制御機能を備えていない Linux マシンでは、
ユーザーモードクライアントで不明または解決できない競合条件があるので、
同期 PPP は\fI推奨されない\fR。

.TP
.B CLAMPMSS
.\"O The value at which to "clamp" the advertised MSS for TCP sessions.  The
.\"O default of 1412 should be fine.
TCP セッションの advertised MSS を「固定 (clamp)」 する値。
デフォルトの 1412 が良い。

.TP
.B LCP_INTERVAL
.\"O How often (in seconds) \fBpppd\fR sends out LCP echo-request packets.
\fBpppd\fR が LCP echo リクエストパケットを送る時間間隔 (秒数)。

.TP
.B LCP_FAILURE
.\"O How many unanswered LCP echo-requests must occur before \fBpppd\fR
.\"O concludes the link is dead.
ここで指定された回数だけ LCP echo リクエストに返答がないと、
\fBpppd\fR は接続が切れていると判断する。

.TP
.B PPPOE_TIMEOUT
.\"O If this many seconds elapse without any activity seen by \fBpppoe\fR,
.\"O then \fBpppoe\fR exits.
\fBpppoe\fR が活動も観察しないままこの秒数が経過すると、
\fBpppoe\fR は終了する。

.TP
.B FIREWALL
.\"O One of NONE, STANDALONE or MASQUERADE.  If NONE, then \fBadsl-connect\fR does
.\"O not add any firewall rules.  If STANDALONE, then it clears existing firewall
.\"O rules and sets up basic rules for a standalone machine.  If MASQUERADE, then
.\"O it clears existing firewall rules and sets up basic rules for an Internet
.\"O gateway.  If you run services on your machine, these simple firewall scripts
.\"O are inadequate; you'll have to make your own firewall rules and set FIREWALL
.\"O to NONE.
NONE, STANDALONE, MASQUERADE のうちのいずれか 1 つ。
NONE の場合、\fBadsl-connect\fR はファイアウォールルールを何も追加しない。
STANDALONE の場合、既存のファイアウォールルールを消去して
スタンドアロンマシン用の基本的なルールを設定する。
MASQUERADE の場合、既存のファイアウォールルールを消去して
インターネットゲートウェイ用の基本的なルールを設定する。
マシン上でサービスを実行している場合、
簡単なファイアウォールスクリプトでは不十分である。
独自のファイアウォールルールを作り、FIREWALL を NONE に設定する必要がある。

.TP
.B PPPOE_EXTRA
.\"O Any extra arguments to pass to \fBpppoe\fR
\fBpppoe\fR に渡すその他の引き数。

.TP
.B PPPD_EXTRA
.\"O Any extra arguments to pass to \fBpppd\fR
\fBpppd\fR に渡すその他の引き数。

.TP
.B LINUX_PLUGIN
.\"O If non-blank, the full path of the Linux kernel-mode PPPoE plugin
.\"O (typically \fB/etc/ppp/plugins/rp-pppoe.so\fR.)  This forces
.\"O \fBadsl-connect\fR to use kernel-mode PPPoE on Linux 2.4.x systems.
.\"O This code is experimental and unsupported.  Use of the plugin causes
.\"O \fBadsl-connect\fR to ignore CLAMPMSS, PPPOE_EXTRA, SYNCHRONOUS and
.\"O PPPOE_TIMEOUT.
空でなければ、Linux カーネルモード PPPoE プラグインの完全なパス
(一般には \fB/etc/ppp/plugins/rp-pppoe.so\fR)。
これを指定すると、Linux 2.4.x システムで \fBadsl-connect\fR に
Linux カーネルモード PPPoE を使わせる。
これは実験的なものでサポートされていない。
このプラグインを使うと、\fBadsl-connect\fR は
CLAMPMSS, PPPOE_EXTRA, SYNCHRONOUS, PPPOE_TIMEOUT を無視する。

.P
.\"O By using different configuration files with different PIDFILE
.\"O settings, you can manage multiple PPPoE connections.  Just specify the
.\"O configuration file as an argument to \fBadsl-start\fR and \fBadsl-stop\fR.
別々の PIDFILE を設定してそれぞれの設定ファイルを使えば、
複数の PPPoE 接続を管理できる。
\fBadsl-start\fR と \fBadsl-stop\fR の引き数として、
その設定ファイルを指定するだけでよい。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
pppoe(8), adsl-connect(8), adsl-start(8), adsl-stop(8), pppd(8), adsl-setup(8),
pppoe-wrapper(8)
