.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This file is distributed accroding to the GNU General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the top level source directory for details.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997,1999 HANATAKA Shinya and FUJIWARA Teruyoshi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Aug 30 13:42:42 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Merged with another translation Sun Aug 15 09:55:42 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        loadable module         ローダブル・モジュール
.\"
.TH CREATE_MODULE 2 "26 Dec 1996" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O create_module \- create a loadable module entry
create_module \- ローダブルモジュールのエントリを生成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <linux/module.h>
.sp
.BI "caddr_t create_module(const char *" name ", size_t " size );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B create_module
.\"O attempts to create a loadable module entry and reserve the kernel memory
.\"O that will be needed to hold the module.  This system call is only open
.\"O to the superuser.
.B create_module
はローダブルモジュール(loadable module)のエントリを作成し、そのモジュール
の保持に必要なカーネルメモリを予約しようとする。このシステムコールを使
えるのはスーパーユーザだけである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, returns the kernel address at which the module will reside.
.\"O On error \-1 is returned and \fIerrno\fP is set appropriately.
成功した場合は、モジュールを常駐させるためのカーネルメモリ上のアドレス
が返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、\fIerrno\fP の値が適切に設定
される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EPERM
.\"O The user is not the superuser.
呼び出しを行ったのがスーパーユーザでない。
.TP
.B EEXIST
.\"O A module by that name already exists.
その名前のモジュールが既に存在している。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O The requested size is too small even for the module header information.
要求したサイズが小さすぎて、モジュールのヘッダ情報すら格納できない。
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.\"O The kernel could not allocate a contiguous block of memory large
.\"O enough for the module.
モジュールを格納するのに必要な大きさの連続したメモリブロックをカーネル
が確保できなかった。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O .I name
.\"O is outside the program's accessible address space.
.I name
が、プログラムがアクセスできるアドレス空間の外部にある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR init_module "(2), " delete_module "(2), " query_module "(2)."
.BR init_module "(2), " delete_module "(2), " query_module "(2)"

