.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This file is distributed accroding to the GNU General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the top level source directory for details.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997,1999 HANATAKA Shinya and FUJIWARA Teruyoshi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Aug 30 14:10:38 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Merged with another translation Sun Aug 15 10:38:59 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        loadable module         ローダブルモジュール
.\"
.TH DELETE_MODULE 2 "26 Dec 1996" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O delete_module \- delete a loadable module entry
delete_module \- ローダブルモジュールのエントリを削除する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <linux/module.h>
.sp
.BI "int delete_module(const char *" name );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B delete_module
.\"O attempts to remove an unused loadable module entry.  If \fIname\fP
.\"O is \fBNULL\fP, all unused modules marked auto-clean will be removed.
.B delete_module
は未使用のローダブルモジュールのエントリを削除しようと試みる。
\fIname\fP が \fBNULL\fP ならば、
使用されていないモジュールのうち「自動削除(all-clean)」マークのついた
ものを全て削除する。
.\"O This system call is only open to the superuser.
このシステムコールを使えるのはスーパーユーザだけである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned and \fIerrno\fP
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合は 0 が返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、\fIerrno\fP 
に適切な値が設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EPERM
.\"O The user is not the superuser.
呼び出しを行ったのがスーパーユーザでない。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O No module by that name exists.
その名前を持つモジュールが存在しない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O \fIname\fP was the empty string.
\fIname\fP が空文字列である。
.TP
.B EBUSY
.\"O The module is in use.
そのモジュールは使用中である。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O .I name
.\"O is outside the program's accessible address space.
.I name
がプログラムがアクセスできるアドレス空間の外部にある。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR create_module "(2), " init_module "(2), " query_module "(2).
.BR create_module "(2), " init_module "(2), " query_module "(2)

