.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This file is distributed accroding to the GNU General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the top level source directory for details.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997,1999 HANATAKA Shinya and FUJIWARA Teruyoshi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Aug 30 13:20:06 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Merged with another translation Sun Aug 15 10:33:03 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        export          エクスポート
.\"
.TH GET_KERNEL_SYMS 2 "26 Dec 1996" Linux "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O get_kernel_syms \- retrieve exported kernel and module symbols
get_kernel_syms \- エクスポートされているカーネルとモジュールのシンボルを取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <linux/module.h>
.sp
.BI "int get_kernel_syms(struct kernel_sym *" table );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O If \fItable\fP is \fBNULL\fP, \fBget_kernel_syms\fP returns the
.\"O number of symbols available for query.  Otherwise it fills in a
.\"O table of structures:
\fItable\fP が \fBNULL\fP ならば、\fBget_kernel_syms\fP は問い合わせで
きるシンボルの数を返す。\fBNULL\fP でなければ、以下の構造体に値を入れ
て返す:
.PP
.RS
.nf
struct kernel_sym
{
  unsigned long value;
  char name[60];
};
.fi
.RE
.PP
.\"O The symbols are interspersed with magic symbols of the form
.\"O .BI # module-name
.\"O with the kernel having an empty name.
シンボルの中には
.BI # モジュール名
という形式の、カーネルが空の名前を持っているマジックシンボルが散在して
いる。
.\"O The value associated with a symbol of this form is the address at
.\"O which the module is loaded.
この形式のシンボルに対応する値は、モジュールがロードされた位置のアドレ
スである。
.PP
.\"O The symbols exported from each module follow their magic module tag
.\"O and the modules are returned in the reverse order they were loaded.
それぞれのモジュールからエクスポートされたシンボルは、マジックモジュール
タグの後に置かれる。また、モジュールはロードされた順番と逆順で返される。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O Returns the number of symbols returned.  There is no possible error return.
返り値は返されるシンボル数である。エラーで復帰することはない。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR create_module "(2), " init_module "(2), " delete_module "(2), "
.\"O .BR query_module "(2)."
.BR query_module "(2)"
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O There is no way to indicate the size of the buffer allocated for
.\"O \fItable\fP.  If symbols have been added to the kernel since the
.\"O program queried for the symbol table size, memory will be corrupted.
\fItable\fP のために確保したバッファの大きさを伝える方法がない。
プログラムがシンボルテーブルの大きさを問い合わせた後にカーネルに
シンボルが追加されると、メモリの内容が破壊される。
.PP
.\"O The length of exported symbol names is limited to 59.
エクスポートされるシンボル名の長さは 59 文字に制限される。
.PP
.\"O Because of these limitations, this system call is deprecated in
.\"O favor of \fBquery_module\fP.
以上の制限により、このシステムコールよりは \fBquery_module\fP を使う方
が望ましい。

