.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This file is distributed accroding to the GNU General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the top level source directory for details.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997,1999 HANATAKA Shinya and FUJIWARA Teruyoshi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Aug 30 13:53:25 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Merged with another translation Sun Aug 15 10:39:49 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        loadable module         ローダブルモジュール
.\"
.TH INIT_MODULE 2 "26 Dec 1996" "Linux 2.1.17" "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O init_module \- initialize a loadable module entry
init_module \- ローダブルモジュールのエントリを初期化する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <linux/module.h>
.sp
.BI "int init_module(const char *" name ", struct module *" image );
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B init_module
.\"O loads the relocated module image into kernel space and runs the
.\"O module's \fIinit\fP function.
.B init_module
は再配置されたモジュールイメージをカーネル空間にロードし、その
モジュールの \fIinit\fP 関数を実行する。
.PP
.\"O The module image begins with a module structure and is followed by
.\"O code and data as appropriate.  The module structure is defined as follows:
モジュールイメージは、先頭部分にモジュール構造体が置かれ、その後に適切
なコードとデータが配置される。モジュール構造体の定義を以下に示す:
.PP
.RS
.nf
struct module
{
  unsigned long size_of_struct;
  struct module *next;
  const char *name;
  unsigned long size;
  long usecount;
  unsigned long flags;
  unsigned int nsyms;
  unsigned int ndeps;
  struct module_symbol *syms;
  struct module_ref *deps;
  struct module_ref *refs;
  int (*init)(void);
  void (*cleanup)(void);
  const struct exception_table_entry *ex_table_start;
  const struct exception_table_entry *ex_table_end;
#ifdef __alpha__
  unsigned long gp;
#endif
};
.fi
.RE
.PP
.\"O All of the pointer fields, with the exception of \fInext\fP and
.\"O \fIrefs\fP, are expected to point within the module body and be
.\"O initialized as appropriate for kernel space, i.e. relocated with
.\"O the rest of the module.
\fInext\fP と \fIrefs\fP 以外の全てのポインタ要素は、
モジュールの本体内部を指し、カーネル空間での適切な値で初期化される
(つまりモジュールの残りの部分と共に再配置される)ことが期待される。
.PP
.\"O This system call is only open to the superuser.
このシステムコールを使えるのはユーパーユーザだけである。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned and \fIerrno\fP
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合は 0 が返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、\fIerrno\fP 
に適切な値が設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B EPERM
.\"O The user is not the superuser.
呼び出しを行ったユーザがスーパーユーザでない。
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O No module by that name exists.
その名前を持つモジュールが存在しない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O Some \fIimage\fP slot filled in incorrectly, \fIimage->name\fP does not
.\"O correspond to the original module name, some \fIimage->deps\fP entry
.\"O does not correspond to a loaded module, or some other similar inconsistency.
\fIimage\fP スロットの一部に誤った値が入っているか、
\fIimage->name\fP が元のモジュールの名前に一致していないか、
\fIimage->deps\fP エントリの一部がロードされたモジュールに対応していない。
あるいは同様の別の矛盾が起きている。
.TP
.B EBUSY
.\"O The module's initialization routine failed.
モジュールの初期化ルーチンが失敗した。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O \fIname\fP or \fIimage\fP
.\"O is outside the program's accessible address space.
\fIname\fP あるいは \fIimage\fP が、プログラムがアクセスできる
アドレス空間の外部である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR create_module "(2), " delete_module "(2), " query_module "(2)."
.BR create_module "(2), " delete_module "(2), " query_module "(2)"

