.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" This file is distributed accroding to the GNU General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the top level source directory for details.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997,1999 HANATAKA Shinya and FUJIWARA Teruyoshi
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Aug 30 14:17:18 JST 1997
.\"         by HANATAKA Shinya <hanataka@abyss.rim.or.jp>
.\" Merged with another translation Sun Aug 15 10:37:42 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        loadable module         ローダブルモジュール
.\"
.TH QUERY_MODULE 2 "26 Dec 1996" "Linux 2.1.17" "Linux Module Support"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O query_module \- query the kernel for various bits pertaining to modules.
query_module \- モジュールに関連する各種の情報をカーネルに問い合わせる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.B #include <linux/module.h>
.sp
\fBint query_module(const char *\fIname\fB, int \fIwhich\fB,
void *\fIbuf\fB, size_t \fIbufsize\fB, size_t *\fIret\fB);
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B query_module
.\"O requests information related to loadable modules from the kernel.  The
.\"O precise nature of the information and its format depends on the \fIwhich\fP
.\"O sub function.  Some functions require \fIname\fP to name a currently 
.\"O loaded module, some allow \fIname\fP to be \fBNULL\fP indicating the
.\"O kernel proper.
.B query_module
は、ローダブルモジュールに関連する情報をカーネルに問い合わせる。情報の
フォーマットと正確な意味は、副関数 \fIwhich\fP によって異なる。
現在ロードされているモジュールを指すために \fIname\fP を必要とする関数
もあるし、カーネル固有であることを示すために \fIname\fP に \fBNULL\fP 
を指定できるものもある。

.\"O .SS "VALUES OF WHICH"
.SS "引き数 which の値"
.TP
.B 0
.\"O Always returns success.  Used to probe for the system call.
必ず成功を返す。システムコールを調べるために使われる。
.TP
.B QM_MODULES
.\"O Returns the names of all loaded modules.  The output buffer format is
.\"O adjacent null-terminated strings; \fIret\fP is set to the number of
.\"O modules.
ロードされている全てのモジュールの名前を返す。出力バッファのフォーマット
は、NULL で終端する文字列を並べたものである。モジュールの数が 
\fIret\fP にセットされる。
.TP
.B QM_DEPS
.\"O Returns the names of all modules used by the indicated module.  The
.\"O output buffer format is adjacent null-terminated strings; \fIret\fP is
.\"O set to the number of modules.
指定されたモジュールが使っている全てのモジュール名を返す。出力バッファ
のフォーマットは、NULL で終端する文字列を並べたものである。モジュール
の数が \fIret\fP にセットされる。
.TP
.B QM_REFS
.\"O Returns the names of all modules using the indicated module.  This is
.\"O the inverse of \fBQM_DEPS\fP.  The output buffer format is adjacent
.\"O null-terminated strings; \fIret\fP is set to the number of modules.
指定されたモジュールを使っている全てのモジュール名を返す。これは
\fBQM_DEPS\fP と逆の機能である。出力バッファのフォーマットは、NULL で
終端する文字列を並べたものである。モジュールの数が \fIret\fP にセット
される。
.TP
.B QM_SYMBOLS
.\"O Returns the symbols and values exported by the kernel or the indicated
.\"O module.  The buffer format is an array of:
カーネルまたは指定されているモジュールがエクスポートしているシンボルと
値を返す。バッファのフォーマットは、以下の構造体
.RS
.PP
.nf
struct module_symbol
{
  unsigned long value;
  unsigned long name;
};
.fi
.PP
.\"O followed by null-terminated strings.  The value of \fIname\fP is the
.\"O character offset of the string relative to the start of \fIbuf\fP;
.\"O \fIret\fP is set to the number of symbols.
の配列に NULL で終端する文字列を続けたものである。\fIname\fP の値は
\fIbuf\fP の先頭から文字列までのオフセット文字数である。
\fIret\fP にはシンボルの数がセットされる。
.RE
.TP
.B QM_INFO
.\"O Returns miscellaneous information about the indicated module.  The output
.\"O buffer format is:
指定されたモジュールに関する様々な情報を返す。出力バッファのフォーマット
を以下に示す:
.RS
.PP
.nf
struct module_info
{
  unsigned long address;
  unsigned long size;
  unsigned long flags;
};
.fi
.PP
.\"O where \fIaddress\fP is the kernel address at which the module resides,
.\"O \fIsize\fP is the size of the module in bytes, and \fIflags\fP is
.\"O a mask of \fBMOD_RUNNING\fP, \fBMOD_AUTOCLEAN\fP, et al that indicates
.\"O the current status of the module.  \fIret\fP is set to the size of
.\"O the \fBmodule_info\fP struct.
ここで \fIaddress\fP は、そのモジュールが常駐しているカーネル空間上の
アドレスであり、\fIsize\fP はモジュールの大きさ(単位はバイト)である。
また \fIflags\fP は \fBMOD_RUNNING\fP, \fBMOD_AUTOCLEAN\fP 等のマスク
であり、モジュールの現在の状態を示している。\fIret\fP には
\fBmodule_info\fP 構造体の大きさが返される。
.RE
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned and \fIerrno\fP
.\"O is set appropriately.
成功した場合は 0 が返される。エラーの場合は \-1 が返され、\fIerrno\fP 
に適切な値が設定される。
.\"O .SH ERRORS
.SH エラー
.TP
.B ENOENT
.\"O No module by that \fIname\fP exists.
\fIname\fP という名前のモジュールが存在しない。
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\"O Invalid \fIwhich\fP, or \fIname\fP indicates the kernel for an
.\"O inappropriate sub function.
\fIwhich\fP が不正である。あるいは \fIname\fP が不適切なカーネルの副関数
を指定している。
.TP
.B ENOSPC
.\"O The buffer size provided was too small.  \fIret\fP is set to the
.\"O minimum size needed.
用意されたバッファの大きさが小さすぎる。\fIret\fP には必要最小限のバッ
ファのサイズが設定される。
.TP
.B EFAULT
.\"O At least one of \fIname\fP, \fIbuf\fP, or \fIret\fP was
.\"O outside the program's accessible address space.
\fIname\fP, \fIbuf\fP, \fIret\fP の少なくともいずれかが、プログラムが
アクセスできるアドレス空間の外部であった。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR create_module "(2), " init_module "(2), " delete_module "(2).
.BR create_module "(2), " init_module "(2), " delete_module "(2)

