.\" Copyright (c) 1996,1998-2005, 2007-2008
.\" 	Todd C. Miller <Todd.Miller@courtesan.com>
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\" ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" 
.\" Sponsored in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
.\" Agency (DARPA) and Air Force Research Laboratory, Air Force
.\" Materiel Command, USAF, under agreement number F39502-99-1-0512.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"   and 2009 Yoichi Chonan
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Oct  7 14:39:18 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Dec  6 04:40:44 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\" New Translation (sudo-1.6.9p17) Fri Jan 23 10:31:17 JST 2009
.\"         by Yoichi Chonan <cyoichi@maple.ocn.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified (sudo-1.7.2p1) Sat Nov 14 21:15:16 JST 2009
.\"         by Yoichi Chonan
.\"
.\" $Sudo: visudo.man.in,v 1.34 2009/06/11 20:29:12 millert Exp $
.\" Automatically generated by Pod::Man 2.16 (Pod::Simple 3.05)
.\"
.\" Standard preamble:
.\" ========================================================================
.de Sh \" Subsection heading
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp \" Vertical space (when we can't use .PP)
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Vb \" Begin verbatim text
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve \" End verbatim text
.ft R
.fi
..
.\" Set up some character translations and predefined strings.  \*(-- will
.\" give an unbreakable dash, \*(PI will give pi, \*(L" will give a left
.\" double quote, and \*(R" will give a right double quote.  \*(C+ will
.\" give a nicer C++.  Capital omega is used to do unbreakable dashes and
.\" therefore won't be available.  \*(C` and \*(C' expand to `' in nroff,
.\" nothing in troff, for use with C<>.
.tr \(*W-
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.ie n \{\
.    ds -- \(*W-
.    ds PI pi
.    if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.    if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\"  diablo 12 pitch
.    ds L" ""
.    ds R" ""
.    ds C` 
.    ds C' 
'br\}
.el\{\
.    ds -- \|\(em\|
.    ds PI \(*p
.    ds L" ``
.    ds R" ''
'br\}
.\"
.\" Escape single quotes in literal strings from groff's Unicode transform.
.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el       .ds Aq '
.\"
.\" If the F register is turned on, we'll generate index entries on stderr for
.\" titles (.TH), headers (.SH), subsections (.Sh), items (.Ip), and index
.\" entries marked with X<> in POD.  Of course, you'll have to process the
.\" output yourself in some meaningful fashion.
.ie \nF \{\
.    de IX
.    tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.    nr % 0
.    rr F
.\}
.el \{\
.    de IX
..
.\}
.\"
.\" Accent mark definitions (@(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2).
.\" Fear.  Run.  Save yourself.  No user-serviceable parts.
.    \" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.    ds #H 0
.    ds #V .8m
.    ds #F .3m
.    ds #[ \f1
.    ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.    ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.    ds #V .6m
.    ds #F 0
.    ds #[ \&
.    ds #] \&
.\}
.    \" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.    ds ' \&
.    ds ` \&
.    ds ^ \&
.    ds , \&
.    ds ~ ~
.    ds /
.\}
.if t \{\
.    ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.    ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.    ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.    ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.    ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.    ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.\}
.    \" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.    \" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.    \" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.    ds : e
.    ds 8 ss
.    ds o a
.    ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.    ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.    ds th \o'bp'
.    ds Th \o'LP'
.    ds ae ae
.    ds Ae AE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.\" ========================================================================
.\"
.IX Title "VISUDO 8"
.TH VISUDO 8 "June 11, 2009" "1.7.2p1" "MAINTENANCE COMMANDS"
.\" For nroff, turn off justification.  Always turn off hyphenation; it makes
.\" way too many mistakes in technical documents.
.if n .ad l
.nh
.\"O .SH "NAME"
.SH "名前"
\"O visudo \- edit the sudoers file
visudo \- sudoers ファイルを編集する
.\"O .SH "SYNOPSIS"
.SH "書式"
.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"
\&\fBvisudo\fR [\fB\-c\fR] [\fB\-q\fR] [\fB\-s\fR] [\fB\-V\fR] [\fB\-f\fR \fIsudoers\fR]
.\"O .SH "DESCRIPTION"
.SH "説明"
.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"
.\"O \&\fBvisudo\fR edits the \fIsudoers\fR file in a safe fashion, analogous to
.\"O \&\fIvipw\fR\|(8).  \fBvisudo\fR locks the \fIsudoers\fR file against multiple
.\"O simultaneous edits, provides basic sanity checks, and checks
.\"O for parse errors.  If the \fIsudoers\fR file is currently being
.\"O edited you will receive a message to try again later.
.\"O .PP
\&\fBvisudo\fR は \fIvipw\fR\|(8) によく似た安全なやり方で 
\&\fIsudoers\fR ファイルを編集する。 \fBvisudo\fR は \fIsudoers\fR 
ファイルをロックして、重複した編集が同時に行われないようにするとともに、
整合性をざっと調べ、文法エラーのチェックを行う。 \fIsudoers\fR ファイル
が現在編集中だった場合は、「try again later」というメッセージを端末に
表示する。
.PP
.\"O There is a hard-coded list of editors that \fBvisudo\fR will use set
.\"O at compile-time that may be overridden via the \fIeditor\fR \fIsudoers\fR
.\"O \&\f(CW\*(C`Default\*(C'\fR variable.  This list defaults to the path to \fIvi\fR\|(1) on
.\"O your system, as determined by the \fIconfigure\fR script.  Normally,
.\"O \&\fBvisudo\fR does not honor the \f(CW\*(C`VISUAL\*(C'\fR or \f(CW\*(C`EDITOR\*(C'\fR environment
.\"O variables unless they contain an editor in the aforementioned editors
.\"O list.  However, if \fBvisudo\fR is configured with the \fI\-\-with\-enveditor\fR
.\"O option or the \fIenv_editor\fR \f(CW\*(C`Default\*(C'\fR variable is set in \fIsudoers\fR,
.\"O \&\fBvisudo\fR will use any the editor defines by \f(CW\*(C`VISUAL\*(C'\fR or \f(CW\*(C`EDITOR\*(C'\fR.
.\"O Note that this can be a security hole since it allows the user to
.\"O execute any program they wish simply by setting \f(CW\*(C`VISUAL\*(C'\fR or \f(CW\*(C`EDITOR\*(C'\fR.
.\"O .PP
\&\fBvisudo\fR が使用するエディタについては、コンパイル時に設定された
エディタのリストがプログラムに埋め込まれているが、\fIsudoers\fR ファイルの 
\&\f(CW\*(C`Defaults\*(C'\fR 行で \fIeditor\fR オプションを使えば、
それを変更することができる。このリストはデフォルトでは、
使用しているシステムにおける \fIvi\fR\|(1) のパスであり、
\&\fIconfigure\fR スクリプトによって割り出されたものだ。
通常 \fBvisudo\fR は、環境変数 \f(CW\*(C`VISUAL\*(C'\fR や
\&\f(CW\*(C`EDITOR\*(C'\fR の値が上述のエディタ・リストに含まれる
エディタでないかぎり、そうした環境変数を使用しない。とは言え、\fBvisudo\fR が
\&\fI\-\-with\-env\-editor\fR オプションを付けて configure されている場合や、
\&\fIsudoeres\fR ファイルの \f(CW\*(C`Defaults\*(C'\fR 行で
\&\fIenv_editor\fR オプションがセットされている場合は、\fBvisudo\fR は
\&\f(CW\*(C`VISUAL\*(C'\fR や \f(CW\*(C`EDITOR\*(C'\fR によって指定された
どんなエディタでも使用することになる。これがセキュリティホールに
なりかねないことに注意してほしい。単に \f(CW\*(C`VISUAL\*(C'\fR や
\&\f(CW\*(C`EDITOR\*(C'\fR を設定するだけで、ユーザが任意のプログラムを
実行できるようになってしまうからだ。
.PP
.\"O \&\fBvisudo\fR parses the \fIsudoers\fR file after the edit and will
.\"O not save the changes if there is a syntax error.  Upon finding
.\"O an error, \fBvisudo\fR will print a message stating the line number(s)
.\"O where the error occurred and the user will receive the
.\"O \&\*(L"What now?\*(R" prompt.  At this point the user may enter \*(L"e\*(R"
.\"O to re-edit the \fIsudoers\fR file, \*(L"x\*(R" to exit without
.\"O saving the changes, or \*(L"Q\*(R" to quit and save changes.  The
.\"O \&\*(L"Q\*(R" option should be used with extreme care because if \fBvisudo\fR
.\"O believes there to be a parse error, so will \fBsudo\fR and no one
.\"O will be able to \fBsudo\fR again until the error is fixed.
.\"O If \*(L"e\*(R" is typed to edit the  \fIsudoers\fR file after a parse error
.\"O has been detected, the cursor will be placed on the line where the
.\"O error occurred (if the editor supports this feature).
\&\fBvisudo\fR は編集が終わると、\fIsudoers\fR ファイルの文法解析を行い、
文法エラーがあれば、変更を保存しない。\fBvisudo\fR はエラーを発見すると、
エラーが起きた行番号を知らせるメッセージを表示し、\*(L"What now?\*(R" と
いうプロンプトを出す。このとき、\*(L"e\*(R" を押せば、
\&\fIsudoers\fR ファイルを再編集できる。\*(L"x\*(R" を押せば、
変更を保存せず終了だし、\*(L"Q\*(R" を押せば、変更を保存して終了だ。
\&\*(L"Q\*(R" の選択は、くれぐれも慎重にやってほしい。なぜなら、
\&\fBvisudo\fR が文法エラーがあると考えるのなら、\fBsudo\fR も
同様に考えるはずであり、エラーが訂正されるまで、もう誰にも \fBsudo\fR が
使えなくなってしまうからだ。文法エラーが発見されたとき、\*(L"e\*(R" を
押して \fIsudoers\fR ファイルを編集しようとすると、カーソルがファイルの
エラーが起きた行に飛ぶ (エディタにその機能があればだが)。
.\"O .SH "OPTIONS"
.SH "オプション"
.IX Header "OPTIONS"
.\"O \&\fBvisudo\fR accepts the following command line options:
\&\fBvisudo\fR では以下のコマンドラインオプションが使用できる。
.IP "\-c" 12
.IX Item "-c"
.\"O Enable \fBcheck-only\fR mode.  The existing \fIsudoers\fR file will be
.\"O checked for syntax and a message will be printed to the
.\"O standard output detailing the status of \fIsudoers\fR.
.\"O If the syntax check completes successfully, \fBvisudo\fR will
.\"O exit with a value of 0.  If a syntax error is encountered,
.\"O \&\fBvisudo\fR will exit with a value of 1.
\&\fBcheck-only\fR モードを有効にする。現在の \fIsudoers\fR ファイルの
文法をチェックし、メッセージを標準出力に表示して、
\fIsudoers\fR の状態を詳細に報告する。文法チェックが成功裡に終わった場合、
\&\fBvisudo\fR は返り値 0 で終了する。文法エラーに出会った場合の
返り値は 1 である。
.IP "\-f \fIsudoers\fR" 12
.IX Item "-f sudoers"
.\"O Specify and alternate \fIsudoers\fR file location.  With this option
.\"O \&\fBvisudo\fR will edit (or check) the \fIsudoers\fR file of your choice,
.\"O instead of the default, \fI/etc/sudoers\fR.  The lock file used
.\"O is the specified \fIsudoers\fR file with \*(L".tmp\*(R" appended to it.
\&\fIsudoers\fR ファイルの位置を指定・変更する。このオプションを
付けると、 \fBvisudo\fR はデフォルトの \fI/etc/sudoers\fR ではなく、
ユーザが選んだ \fIsudoers\fR ファイルを編集 (あるいは、チェック) する
ことになる。ロックファイルとしては、指定された \fIsudoers\fR ファイルの
名前の末尾に \*(L".tmp\*(R" を付けたものが使われる。
.IP "\-q" 12
.IX Item "-q"
.\"O Enable \fBquiet\fR mode.  In this mode details about syntax errors
.\"O are not printed.  This option is only useful when combined with
.\"O the \fB\-c\fR option.
\&\fBquiet\fR モードを有効にする。このモードでは、文法エラーの詳細情報は
表示されない。このオプションに意味があるのは、\fB\-c\fR オプションと
組み合わせたときだけである。
.IP "\-s" 12
.IX Item "-s"
.\"O Enable \fBstrict\fR checking of the \fIsudoers\fR file.  If an alias is
.\"O used before it is defined, \fBvisudo\fR will consider this a parse
.\"O error.  Note that it is not possible to differentiate between an
.\"O alias and a hostname or username that consists solely of uppercase
.\"O letters, digits, and the underscore ('_') character.
\&\fIsudoers\fR ファイルの\fB厳密\fR (\fBstrict\fR) チェックを有効にする。
エイリアスを定義する前に使用すると、\fBvisudo\fR がそれを文法エラーと
見なすようになるわけだ。ホスト名やユーザ名がアルファベットの大文字、
数字、アンダースコア ('_') だけから構成されている場合、そうしたものと
エイリアスとの区別は付かないことに注意してほしい。
.IP "\-V" 12
.IX Item "-V"
.\"O The \fB\-V\fR (version) option causes \fBvisudo\fR to print its version number
.\"O and exit.
オプションに \fB\-V\fR (version) を付けると、\fBvisudo\fR は
バージョンナンバーを表示して、終了する。
.\"O .SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.SH "環境変数"
.IX Header "ENVIRONMENT"
.\"O The following environment variables may be consulted depending on
.\"O the value of the \fIeditor\fR and \fIenv_editor\fR \fIsudoers\fR variables:
以下の環境変数が参照されるかどうかは、\fIsudoers\fR の \fIeditor\fR や
\&\fIenv_editor\fR オプションの値次第である。
.ie n .IP "\*(C`VISUAL\*(C'" 16
.el .IP "\f(CW\*(C`VISUAL\*(C'\fR" 16
.IX Item "VISUAL"
.\"O Invoked by visudo as the editor to use
visudo が起動するエディタ
.ie n .IP "\*(C`EDITOR\*(C'" 16
.el .IP "\f(CW\*(C`EDITOR\*(C'\fR" 16
.IX Item "EDITOR"
.\"O Used by visudo if \s-1VISUAL\s0 is not set
\&\s-1VISUAL\s0 が設定されていないとき visudo が使用するエディタ
.\"O .SH "FILES"
.SH "ファイル"
.IX Header "FILES"
.ie n .IP "\fI/etc/sudoers\fR" 24
.el .IP "\fI/etc/sudoers\fR" 24
.IX Item "/etc/sudoers"
.\"O List of who can run what
誰が何を実行できるかのリスト
.ie n .IP "\fI/etc/sudoers.tmp\fR" 24
.el .IP "\fI/etc/sudoers.tmp\fR" 24
.IX Item "/etc/sudoers.tmp"
.\"O Lock file for visudo
visudo が使うロックファイル
.\"O .SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
.SH "メッセージによる診断"
.IX Header "DIAGNOSTICS"
.IP "sudoers file busy, try again later." 4
.IX Item "sudoers file busy, try again later."
.\"O Someone else is currently editing the \fIsudoers\fR file.
現在、ほかの誰かが \fIsudoers\fR ファイルを編集中だ。
.ie n .IP "/etc/sudoers.tmp: Permission denied" 4
.el .IP "\f(CW@sysconfdir\fR@/sudoers.tmp: Permission denied" 4
.\"O .IX Item "/etc/sudoers.tmp: Permission denied"
.\"O You didn't run \fBvisudo\fR as root.
\&\fBvisudo\fR を root として実行しなかった。
.IP "Can't find you in the passwd database" 4
.IX Item "Can't find you in the passwd database"
.\"O Your userid does not appear in the system passwd file.
あなたのユーザ ID はシステムの passwd ファイルに載っていない。
.IP "Warning: {User,Runas,Host,Cmnd}_Alias referenced but not defined" 4
.IX Item "Warning: {User,Runas,Host,Cmnd}_Alias referenced but not defined"
.\"O Either you are trying to use an undeclare {User,Runas,Host,Cmnd}_Alias
.\"O or you have a user or hostname listed that consists solely of
.\"O uppercase letters, digits, and the underscore ('_') character.  In
.\"O the latter case, you can ignore the warnings (\fBsudo\fR will not
.\"O complain).  In \fB\-s\fR (strict) mode these are errors, not warnings.
User_Alias, Runas_Alias, Host_Alias, Cmnd_Alias のどれかを、
定義しないまま使用しようとしている。
あるいは、記載したユーザ名かホスト名の中に、アルファベットの大文字、
数字、アンダースコア ('_') のみからなるものがある。後者の場合は、
この warning を無視して構わない (\fBsudo\fR は警告を出さないないだろう)。
\&\fB\-s\fR (strict) モードでは、warning ではなく、error になる。
.IP "Warning: unused {User,Runas,Host,Cmnd}_Alias" 4
.IX Item "Warning: unused {User,Runas,Host,Cmnd}_Alias"
.\"O The specified {User,Runas,Host,Cmnd}_Alias was defined but never
.\"O used.  You may wish to comment out or remove the unused alias.  In
.\"O \&\fB\-s\fR (strict) mode this is an error, not a warning.
指摘された User_Alias (あるいは、Runas_Alias, Host_Alias, Cmnd_Alias) は
定義されているが、一度も使用されていない。そうした使用しないエイリアスは、
コメントアウトするなり、消去するなりしてもよいだろう。
\&\fB\-s\fR (strict) モードでは、warning ではなく、error になる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
.IX Header "SEE ALSO"
\&\fIvi\fR\|(1), \fIsudoers\fR\|(5), \fIsudo\fR\|(8), \fIvipw\fR\|(8)
.\"O .SH "AUTHOR"
.SH "作者"
.IX Header "AUTHOR"
.\"O Many people have worked on \fIsudo\fR over the years; this version of
.\"O \&\fBvisudo\fR was written by:
.\"O .PP
\&\fIsudo\fR の製作には、多数の人々が長年に渡って取り組んできた。
\fBvisudo\fR の当バージョンを書いたのは、
.PP
.Vb 1
\& Todd Miller
.Ve
.PP
.\"O See the \s-1HISTORY\s0 file in the sudo distribution or visit
.\"O http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/history.html for more details.
である。詳細については、配布物中の \s-1HISTORY\s0 ファイルか、
http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/history.html を御覧になっていただきたい。
.\"O .SH "CAVEATS"
.SH "警告"
.IX Header "CAVEATS"
.\"O There is no easy way to prevent a user from gaining a root shell if 
.\"O the editor used by \fBvisudo\fR allows shell escapes.
\&\fBvisudo\fR が使用するエディタでシェル・エスケープが可能なかぎり、
ユーザがルート・シェルを獲得するのを防止する簡単な方法はない。
.\"O .SH "BUGS"
.SH "バグ"
.IX Header "BUGS"
.\"O If you feel you have found a bug in \fBvisudo\fR, please submit a bug report
.\"O at http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/bugs/
\&\fBvisudo\fR にバクを発見したと思ったら、下記のページにアクセスして、
バグレポートを提出していただきたい。
.br
http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/bugs/
.\"O .SH "SUPPORT"
.SH "サポート"
.IX Header "SUPPORT"
.\"O Limited free support is available via the sudo-users mailing list,
.\"O see http://www.sudo.ws/mailman/listinfo/sudo\-users to subscribe or
.\"O search the archives.
ある程度の無料サポートが sudo-users メーリングリストを通して利用できる。
購読やアーカイブの検索には下記 URL を御覧になること。
.br
http://www.sudo.ws/mailman/listinfo/sudo\-users
.\"O .SH "DISCLAIMER"
.SH "免責"
.IX Header "DISCLAIMER"
.\"O \&\fBvisudo\fR is provided ``\s-1AS\s0 \s-1IS\s0'' and any express or implied warranties,
.\"O including, but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability
.\"O and fitness for a particular purpose are disclaimed.  See the \s-1LICENSE\s0
.\"O file distributed with \fBsudo\fR or http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/license.html
.\"O for complete details.
\&\fBvisudo\fR は「現状のまま」提供される。明示的な、あるいは黙示的な
いかなる保証も、商品性や特定目的への適合性についての黙示的な保証を含め、
またそれのみに止まらず、これを否認する。詳細な全文については、
\&\fBsudo\fR と一緒に配布されている \s-1LICENSE\s0 ファイルや
下記 Web ページを御覧いただきたい。
.br
http://www.sudo.ws/sudo/license.html
