.\"$Id: pw_auth.3,v 1.8 2002/03/08 04:39:11 kloczek Exp $
.\" Copyright 1992 - 1993, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" updated Tue 17 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PWAUTH 3
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O pwauth \- administrator defined password authentication routines
pwauth \- 管理者の設定したパスワード認証ルーチン
.\"O .SH SYNTAX
.SH 書式
.B #include <pwauth.h>
.PP
.B int pw_auth (char
.I *command,
.B char
.I *user,
.B int
.I reason,
.B char
.IB *input) ;
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B pw_auth
.\"O invokes the administrator defined functions for a given user.
.B pw_auth
は、与えられたユーザに対して管理者が設定した関数を呼び出す。
.PP
.\"O \fIcommand\fR is the name of the authentication program.
.\"O It is retrieved from the user's password file information.
.\"O The string contains one or more executable file names, delimited by
.\"O semi-colons.
.\"O Each program will be executed in the order given.
.\"O The command line arguments are given for each of the reasons listed
.\"O below.
\fIcommand\fR は認証プログラムの名前である。
これはパスワードファイルに記されたそのユーザの情報から決定される。
この文字列はセミコロンで区切られた一つ以上の実行ファイル名からなる。
各々のプログラムは記されている順に実行される。
以下に記述するそれぞれの
.I reason
に応じて、コマンドライン引数が与えられる。
.PP
.\"O \fIuser\fR is the name of the user to be authenticated, as given
.\"O in the \fI/etc/passwd\fR file.
.\"O User entries are indexed by username.
.\"O This allows non-unique user IDs to be present and for each different
.\"O username associated with that user ID to have a different
.\"O authentication program and information.
\fIuser\fR は認証されるユーザ名で、
\fI/etc/passwd\fR ファイル中のものに対応する。
ユーザエントリはユーザ名で指定される。
したがってユーザ ID には重なっているものがあっても良く、
そのユーザ ID に結びつけられた異なるユーザ名の各々に対して、
異なる認証プログラムと認証情報とを指定できる。
.PP
.\"O Each of the permissible authentication reasons is handled in a
.\"O potentially differenent manner.
.\"O Unless otherwise mentioned, the standard file descriptors 0, 1, and
.\"O 2 are available for communicating with the user.
.\"O The real user ID may be used to determine the identity of the user
.\"O making the authentication request.
.\"O \fIreason\fR is one of
使用できる各々の認証方法は、異なる方法で取り扱われることがある。
特に記されていない場合は、標準的な
ファイルディスクリプタ 0, 1, 2 を使ってユーザと通信できる。
実ユーザIDを用いて、
認証を要請したユーザの身元 (identity) を決めることもできる。
\fIreason\fR は以下のいずれかである。
.IP \fBPW_SU\fR 1i
.\"O Perform authentication for the current real user ID attempting to
.\"O switch real user ID to the named user.
.\"O The authentication program will be invoked with a \fB-s\fR option, followed
.\"O by the username.
指定されたユーザの実ユーザ ID に切り替えようとしている、
現在の実ユーザ ID に対して認証を行う。
\fB-s\fR オプションの後にユーザ名を指定して認証プログラムが呼び出される。
.IP \fBPW_LOGIN\fR 1i
.\"O Perform authentication for the named user creating a new login session.
.\"O The authentication program will be invoked with a \fB-l\fR option, followed
.\"O by the username.
新たにログインセッションを作り出そうとしている
指定されたユーザを認証する。
\fB-l\fR オプションの後にユーザ名を指定して認証プログラムが呼び出される。
.IP \fBPW_ADD\fR 1i
.\"O Create a new entry for the named user.
.\"O This allows an authentication program to initialize storage for a new
.\"O user.
.\"O The authentication program will be invoked with a \fB-a\fR option, followed
.\"O by the username.
指定されたユーザに対して新たなエントリを作る。
これにより、認証プログラムは新規ユーザ用の記憶領域を準備できる。
\fB-a\fR オプションの後にユーザ名を指定して認証プログラムが呼び出される。
.IP \fBPW_CHANGE\fR 1i
.\"O Alter an existing entry for the named user.
.\"O This allows an authentication program to alter the authentication
.\"O information for an existing user.
.\"O The authentication program will be invoked with a \fB-c\fR option, followed
.\"O by the username.
指定されたユーザの既存のエントリを変更する。
これにより、認証プログラムは既存のユーザの認証情報を変更できる。
\fB-c\fR オプションの後にユーザ名を指定して認証プログラムが呼び出される。
.IP \fBPW_DELETE\fR 1i
.\"O Delete authentication information for the named user.
.\"O This allows an authentication program to reclaim storage for a user which
.\"O is no longer authenticated using the authentication program.
.\"O The authentication program will be invoked with a \fB-d\fR option, followed
.\"O by the username.
指定されたユーザの認証情報を消去する。
これにより、認証プログラムは今後認証することが無くなった
ユーザ用の記憶領域を再利用できる。
\fB-d\fR オプションの後にユーザ名を指定して認証プログラムが呼び出される。
.IP \fBPW_TELNET\fR 1i
.\"O Authenticate a user who is connecting to the system using the 
.\"O fBtelnet\fR command.
.\"O The authentication program will be invoked with a \fB-t\fR option, followed
.\"O by the username.
\fBtelnet\fR コマンドを用いてシステムに接続して来たユーザの認証を行う。
\fB-t\fR オプションの後にユーザ名を指定して認証プログラムが呼び出される。
.IP \fBPW_RLOGIN\fR 1i
.\"O Authenticate a user who is connecting to the system using the \fBrlogin\fR
.\"O command.
.\"O The authentication program will be invoked with a \fB-r\fR option, followed
.\"O by the username.
\fBrlogin\fR コマンドを用いてシステムに接続して来たユーザの認証を行う。
\fB-r\fR オプションの後にユーザ名を指定して認証プログラムが呼び出される。
.IP \fBPW_FTP\fR 1i
.\"O Authenticate a user who is connecting to the system using the \fBftp\fR
.\"O command.
.\"O The authentication program will be invoked with a \fR-f\fR option, followed
.\"O by the username.
.\"O The standard file descriptors are not available for communicating with the
.\"O user.
.\"O The standard input file descriptor will be connected to the parent process,
.\"O while the other two output file descriptors will be connected to
.\"O \fI/dev/null\fR.
.\"O The \fBpw_auth\fR function will pipe a single line of data to the
.\"O authentication program using file descriptor 0.
\fBftp\fR コマンドを用いてシステムに接続して来たユーザの認証を行う。
\fB-f\fR オプションの後にユーザ名を指定して認証プログラムが呼び出される。
標準のファイルディスクリプタを用いてユーザと通信することはできない。
標準の入力ファイルディスクリプタは親プロセスに接続されており、
他の二つの出力ファイルディスクリプタは \fI/dev/null\fR に接続されている。
\fBpw_auth\fR 関数はファイルディスクリプタ 0
を用いて一行のデータを認証プログラムにパイプする。
.IP \fBPW_REXEC\fR 1i
.\"O Authenticate a user who is connecting to the system using the \fIrexec\fR
.\"O command.
.\"O The authentication program will be invoked with a \fB-x\fR option, followed
.\"O by the username.
.\"O The standard file descriptors are not available for communicating with the
.\"O remote user.
.\"O The standard input file descriptor will be connected to the parent process,
.\"O while the other two output file descriptors will be connected to
.\"O \fI/dev/null\fR.
.\"O The \fBpw_auth\fR function will pipe a single line of data to the
.\"O authentication program using file descriptor 0.
\fIrexec\fR コマンドを用いてシステムに接続して来たユーザの認証を行う。
\fB-x\fR オプションの後にユーザ名を指定して認証プログラムが呼び出される。
標準のファイルディスクリプタを用いてユーザと通信することはできない。
標準の入力ファイルディスクリプタは親プロセスに接続されており、
他の二つの出力ファイルディスクリプタは \fI/dev/null\fR に接続されている。
\fBpw_auth\fR 関数はファイルディスクリプタ 0
を用いて一行のデータを認証プログラムにパイプする。
.PP
.\"O The last argument is the authentication data which is used by the
.\"O .B PW_FTP
.\"O and
.\"O .B PW_REXEC
.\"O reasons.
.\"O It is treated as a single line of text which is piped to the authentication
.\"O program.
.\"O When the reason is
.\"O .BR PW_CHANGE,
.\"O the value of \fIinput\fR is the value of
.\"O previous user name if the user name is being changed.
最後の引数は
.B PW_FTP
及び
.B PW_REXEC
の方法で用いられる認証データであり、
一行のテキストとして扱われ、認証プログラムにパイプされる。
.I reason
が
.B PW_CHANGE
のときは、ユーザ名が変更される場合には
\fIinput\fR の内容は以前用いていたユーザ名である。
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O This function does not create the actual session.
.\"O It only indicates if the user should be allowed to create the session.
この関数は実際のセッションを作り出すことはしない。
指定されたユーザのセッションを作り出す事を許可するか否かを答えるだけである。
.PP
.\"O The network options are untested at this time.
まだネットワークオプションはテストしていない。
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O The \fBpw_auth\fR function returns 0 if the authentication program exited
.\"O with a 0 exit code, and a non-zero value otherwise.
\fBpw_auth\fR 関数は、認証プログラムが終了コード 0 で終了した場合は 0 を、
それ以外の場合はゼロ以外の値を返す。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR login (1),
.BR passwd (1),
.BR su (1),
.BR useradd (8),
.BR userdel (8),
.BR usermod (8)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
