.\"$Id: shadow.3,v 1.7 2001/01/25 10:43:51 kloczek Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 - 1993, Julianne Frances Haugh
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of Julianne F. Haugh nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JULIE HAUGH AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JULIE HAUGH OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Kazuyoshi Furutaka
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri Feb 14 23:06:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Kazuyoshi Furutaka <furutaka@Flux.tokai.jaeri.go.jp>
.\" updated Tue 17 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SHADOW 3
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O shadow \- encrypted password file routines
shadow \- 暗号化されたパスワードファイル用ルーチン
.\"O .SH SYNTAX
.SH 書式
.B #include <shadow.h>
.PP
.B struct spwd *getspent();
.PP
.B struct spwd *getspnam(char
.IB *name );
.PP
.B void setspent();
.PP
.B void endspent();
.PP
.B struct spwd *fgetspent(FILE
.IB *fp );
.PP
.B struct spwd *sgetspent(char
.IB *cp );
.PP
.B int putspent(struct spwd
.I *p,
.B FILE
.IB *fp );
.PP
.B int lckpwdf();
.PP
.B int ulckpwdf();
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I shadow
.\"O manipulates the contents of the shadow password file,
.\"O \fI/etc/shadow\fR.
.\"O The structure in the \fI#include\fR file is
.I shadow
は shadow パスワードファイル
\fI/etc/shadow\fR の内容を操作するルーチンである。
\fI#include\fR ファイルに与えられている構造体は以下の通り。
.sp
struct spwd {
.in +.5i
.br
	char	*sp_namp; /* user login name */
.br
	char	*sp_pwdp; /* encrypted password */
.br
	long	sp_lstchg; /* last password change */
.br
	int	sp_min; /* days until change allowed. */
.br
	int	sp_max; /* days before change required */
.br
	int	sp_warn; /* days warning for expiration */
.br
	int	sp_inact; /* days before account inactive */
.br
	int	sp_expire; /* date when account expires */
.br
	int	sp_flag; /* reserved for future use */
.br
.in -.5i
}
.PP
.\"O The meanings of each field are
各フィールドの意味は:
.sp
.\"O sp_namp \- pointer to null-terminated user name.
sp_namp \- ヌル終端されたユーザ名文字列へのポインタ
.br
.\"O sp_pwdp \- pointer to null-terminated password.
sp_pwdp \- ヌル終端されたパスワード文字列へのポインタ
.br
.\"O sp_lstchg \- days since Jan 1, 1970 password was last changed.
sp_lstchg \- 1970年1月1日からパスワード最終変更日時迄の日数
.br
.\"O sp_min \- days before which password may not be changed.
sp_min \- パスワード変更が出来るようになるまでの日数
.br
.\"O sp_max \- days after which password must be changed.
sp_max \- パスワードを変更しなくても良い日数
.br
.\"O sp_warn \- days before password is to expire that user is warned
.\"O of pending password expiration.
sp_warn \- パスワードが期限切れになる前に、
期限切れが近づいている旨の警告をユーザに出す期間の日数
.br
.\"O sp_inact \- days after password expires that account is considered
.\"O inactive and disabled.
sp_inact \- パスワードが期限切れになってから、
アカウントが不能となり使用できなくなるまでの日数
.br
.\"O sp_expire \- days since Jan 1, 1970 when account will be disabled.
sp_expire \- 1970年1月1からアカウントが使用不能となる日迄の日数
.br
.\"O sp_flag \- reserved for future use.
sp_flag \- 将来使うときに向けて予約
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBgetspent\fR, \fBgetspname\fR, \fBfgetspent\fR, and \fBsgetspent\fR
.\"O each return a pointer to a \fBstruct spwd\fR.
.\"O \fBgetspent\fR returns the
.\"O next entry from the file, and \fBfgetspent\fR returns the next
.\"O entry from the given stream, which is assumed to be a file of
.\"O the proper format.
.\"O \fBsgetspent\fR returns a pointer to a \fBstruct spwd\fR using the
.\"O provided string as input.
.\"O \fBgetspnam\fR searches from the current position in the file for
.\"O an entry matching \fBname\fR.
\fBgetspent\fR, \fBgetspname\fR, \fBfgetspent\fR, \fBsgetspent\fR
は、それぞれ \fBstruct spwd\fR へのポインタを返す。
\fBgetspent\fR はファイルから次のエントリを、
\fBfgetspent\fR は指定されたストリーム
(正しい書式のファイルとみなされる)
から次のエントリを返す。
\fBsgetspent\fR は入力として与えられた文字列を用いて
\fBstruct spwd\fR へのポインタを返す。
\fBgetspnam\fR はファイル中の現在の位置から
\fBname\fR にマッチするエントリを探す。
.PP
.\"O \fBsetspent\fR and \fBendspent\fR may be used to begin and end,
.\"O respectively, access to the shadow password file.
\fBsetspent\fR は
shadow パスワードファイルへのアクセスを開始するために、
\fBendspent\fR は終了するために用いられる。
.PP
.\"O The \fBlckpwdf\fR and \fBulckpwdf\fR routines should be used to
.\"O insure exclusive access to the \fI/etc/shadow\fR file.
.\"O \fBlckpwdf\fR attempts to acquire a lock using \fBpw_lock\fR for
.\"O up to 15 seconds.
.\"O It continues by attempting to acquire a second lock using \fBspw_lock\fR
.\"O for the remainder of the initial 15 seconds.
.\"O Should either attempt fail after a total of 15 seconds, \fBlckpwdf\fR
.\"O returns -1.
.\"O When both locks are acquired 0 is returned.
\fB/etc/shadow\fR ファイルに対する排他的なアクセスを保証したい場合には、
\fBlckpwdf\fR ルーチンと \fBulckpwdf\fR ルーチンを用いる。
\fBlckpwdf\fR は \fBpw_lock\fR を用いて最大 15 秒間ロックを取得しようとする。
そして最初の 15 秒の残りの間、
\fBspw_lock\fR によって二度目のロックをしようと試み続ける。
計 15 秒間の間にいずれかの試みが失敗した場合は、
\fBlckpwdf\fR は -1 を返す。
いずれのロックも成功した場合は 0 が返される。
.\"O .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 返り値
.\"O Routines return NULL if no more entries are available or if an
.\"O error occurs during processing.
.\"O Routines which have \fBint\fR as the return value return 0 for
.\"O success and -1 for failure.
これらのルーチンは、エントリが残っていない場合や、
処理の過程でエラーが発生した場合には NULL を返す。
返り値が \fBint\fR であるルーチンは、
成功したら 0 を、失敗したら -1 を返す。
.\"O .SH CAVEATS
.SH 警告
.\"O These routines may only be used by the super user as access to
.\"O the shadow password file is restricted.
shadowされたパスワードファイルへのアクセスは制限されているので、
これらのルーチンはスーパーユーザだけが利用できる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O /etc/shadow \- encrypted user passwords
/etc/shadow \- 暗号化されたユーザパスワード
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR getpwent (3),
.BR shadow (5)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Julianne Frances Haugh (jockgrrl@ix.netcom.com)
