.\"/* Copyright 1988,1990,1993 by Paul Vixie
.\" * All rights reserved
.\" *
.\" * Distribute freely, except: don't remove my name from the source or
.\" * documentation (don't take credit for my work), mark your changes (don't
.\" * get me blamed for your possible bugs), don't alter or remove this
.\" * notice.  May be sold if buildable source is provided to buyer.  No
.\" * warrantee of any kind, express or implied, is included with this
.\" * software; use at your own risk, responsibility for damages (if any) to
.\" * anyone resulting from the use of this software rests entirely with the
.\" * user.
.\" *
.\" * Send bug reports, bug fixes, enhancements, requests, flames, etc., and
.\" * I'll try to keep a version up to date.  I can be reached as follows:
.\" * Paul Vixie          <paul@vix.com>          uunet!decwrl!vixie!paul
.\" */
.\" 
.\" $Id: cron.8,v 2.2 1993/12/28 08:34:43 vixie Exp $
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 SEKINE Tatsuo
.\"         all rights reserved.                                               
.\" Translated Tue May 15 20:09:48 JST 2001
.\"         by SEKINE Tatsuo <tsekine@sdri.co.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD: modtime		最終修正時刻
.TH CRON 8 "20 December 1993"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O cron \- daemon to execute scheduled commands (Vixie Cron)
cron \- 予定されたコマンドを実行するデーモン(Vixie Cron)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
cron
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .I Cron
.\"O should be started from /etc/rc or /etc/rc.local.  It will return immediately,
.\"O so you don't need to start it with '&'.
.I cron
は /etc/rc または /etc/rc.local から起動されるべきである。
すぐに(シェルに)戻るので、'&' を付けて起動する必要はない。
.PP
.\"O .I Cron
.\"O searches /var/cron/tabs for crontab files which are named after accounts in
.\"O /etc/passwd; crontabs found are loaded into memory.
.I cron
は /etc/passwd にあるアカウントをファイル名に持つ crontab ファイルを
/var/cron/tabs
から探し、見つけた crontab ファイルをメモリに読み込む。
.\"O .I Cron
.\"O also searches for /etc/crontab which is in a different format (see
.\"O .IR crontab(5)).
また
.I cron
は /etc/crontab も見る (このファイルのフォーマットは少々異なっている:
.IR crontab (5)
を参照)。
.\"O .I Cron
.\"O then wakes up every minute, examining all stored crontabs, checking each
.\"O command to see if it should be run in the current minute.  When executing
.\"O commands, any output is mailed to the owner of the crontab (or to the user
.\"O named in the MAILTO environment variable in the crontab, if such exists).
.I cron
は 1 分ごとに起きて、読み込まれた crontab ファイルを評価し、
それぞれのコマンドを今起動すべきかどうかチェックする。
コマンドを実行すると、全ての出力を crontab ファイルの所有者にメールする
(または MAILTO 環境変数が crontab ファイルにあれば、
そこで指定されたユーザーに送る)。
.PP
.\"O Additionally,
.\"O .I cron
.\"O checks each minute to see if its spool directory's modtime (or the modtime
.\"O on
.\"O .IR /etc/crontab)
.\"O has changed, and if it has,
.\"O .I cron
.\"O will then examine the modtime on all crontabs and reload those which have
.\"O changed.  Thus
さらに
.I cron
は 1 分ごとにスプールディレクトリ(または
.I /etc/crontab
ファイル)の最終修正時刻(modtime)をチェックし、もし変更されていれば、
すべての crontab ファイルの最終修正時刻をチェックし、
変更された crontab ファイルを読み直す。
.\"O .I cron
.\"O need not be restarted whenever a crontab file is modified.  Note that the
.\"O .IR Crontab (1)
.\"O command updates the modtime of the spool directory whenever it changes a
.\"O crontab.
よって crontab ファイルを修正するたびに
.I cron
を再起動する必要はない。
.IR crontab (1)
コマンドは、crontab ファイルが変更されたかどうかにかかわらず、
スプールディレクトリの最終修正時刻を更新することに注意せよ。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
crontab(1), crontab(5)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.nf
Paul Vixie <paul@vix.com>
