.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999, 2001, 2002 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Jul 27 1999 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH ypset 8 "May 1998" "YP Tools 2.8"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ypset - bind ypbind to a particular NIS server
.SH 名前
ypset \- ypbind を特定の NIS サーバーにバインドさせる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSYS
.SH 書式
.B ypset
[
.BI \-d " domain"
]
[
.BI \-h " hostname"
]
.I server
.LP
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O In  order  to run
.\"O .BR ypset,
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O must be initiated with the
.\"O .B -ypset
.\"O or
.\"O .B -ypsetme
.\"O options.  See
.\"O .BR ypbind (8).
.B ypset
を実行するためには、
.B ypbind
が
.B \-ypset
または
.B \-ypsetme
オプションを付けて起動されていなければならない。
詳細は
.BR ypbind (8)
を見よ。
.\"O .B ypset
.\"O tells
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O to get NIS services for the specified
.\"O .I domain
.\"O from the
.\"O .BR ypserv (8)
.\"O process running on
.\"O .IR server.
.B ypset
は、指定した
.I domain
の NIS サービスを
.I server
で走っている
.BR ypserv (8)
から取得するように
.B ypbind
に伝える。
.LP
.\"O In cases where several hosts on the local net are supplying NIS services,
.\"O it is possible for
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O to rebind to another host even while you attempt to find out if the
.\"O .B ypset
.\"O operation succeeded. For example, you can type:
ローカルなネットに NIS サービスを提供している複数のホストがある場合には、
.B ypset
の実行が成功した場合でも、
.B ypbind
が他のホストにバインドしなおしていることがありうる。
例えば:
.\"O .TP 25
.\"O .PD 0
.\"O .TP
.\"O \f3example% ypset host1
.\"O .TP
.\"O \f3example% ypwhich
.\"O .TP
.\"O \f3host2
.\"O .LP
.LP
.in +2n
.ft B
.nf
example% ypset host1
example% ypwhich
host2
.fi
.ft
.in
.LP
.\"O which can be confusing. This is a function of the NIS subsystem's
.\"O attempt to know always a running NIS server, and occurs when host1
.\"O does not respond to ypbind because it is not running ypserv (or is
.\"O overloaded), and host2, running ypserv, gets the binding.
これはちょっと混乱しやすい。これは NIS サブシステムに、
動作中の NIS サーバーを常に知ろうとする働きがあるからである。
host1 が ypbind に返答しない (ypserv が動作していなかったり、
負荷が高い場合など) と、 host2 で ypserv が動作していれば
そちらがバインドされるのである。
.LP
.\"O .I Server
.\"O indicates the NIS server to bind to,  and must be specified as a name
.\"O or an IP address. This will work only if the node has a current valid
.\"O binding for the domain in question, and
.\"O .B ypbind
.\"O has been set to allow use of
.\"O .BR ypset.
.\"O In most  cases,
.\"O .I server
.\"O should be specified as an IP address.
.I server
にはバインドさせる NIS サーバーを指定する。ホスト名または
IP アドレスでなければならない。これが動作するのは、
.B ypset
を実行したホストで、指定したドメインに対する有効なバインドが
すでになされていた場合に限られる。
多くの場合は
.I server
は IP アドレスで指定する必要があるだろう。
.LP
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.BI \-d " domain"
.\"O Specify a domain other than the default domain as returned by
.\"O .BR domainname (1).
.BR domainname (1)
が返すデフォルトのドメイン以外を指定する。
.TP
.BI \-h " hostname"
.\"O Set the NIS binding on host
.\"O .I hostname
.\"O  instead of the local machine.
ローカルマシンの代わりに、ホスト
.I hostname
に NIS バインドを行う。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR domainname (8),
.BR ypbind (8),
.BR ypcat (8),
.BR ypmatch (1),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR yppoll (8),
.BR ypwhich (1)
.LP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B ypset
.\"O is part of the
.\"O .B yp-tools
.\"O package, which was written by Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>.
.B ypset
は
.B yp-tools
パッケージの一部である。
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
