.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Thorsten Kukuk
.\" This file is part of the yp-tools.
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation,
.\" Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2004 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Feb 24 01:12:40 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH yptest 8 "May 2002" "YP Tools 2.8"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O yptest - test NIS configuration
yptest - NIS の設定をテストする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSYS
.SH 書式
.B yptest [\fB-q\fR] [\fB-d \fIdomain\fR] [\fB-h \fIhost\fR] [\fB-m \fImap\fR] [\fB-u \fIuser\fR]
.LP
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .BR yptest
.\"O calls various NIS functions to check if the NIS configuration is
.\"O correct and works as expected.
.BR yptest
は様々な NIS 機能を呼び出し、
NIS の設定が正しいかと、期待通りに動作しているかをチェックする。
.LP
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Be quiet, don't print messages
寡黙にして、メッセージを表示しない。
.TP
.BI \-d " domainname"
.\"O Specify a domain other than the default domain as returned by
.\"O .BR domainname (1).
.BR domainname (1)
が返すデフォルトのドメイン以外を指定する。
.\"O This option is not supported by all tests.
このオプションは全てのテストでサポートされているわけではない。
.TP
.BI \-h " hostname"
.\"O Query ypserv on
.\"O .I hostname
.\"O instead of the currently used one.
現在使っている ypserv ではなく、
.I hostname
上の ypserv に問い合わせる。
.\"O This option is not supported by all tests.
このオプションは全てのテストでサポートされているわけではない。
.TP
.BI \-m " map"
.\"O Use the map
.\"O .I map
.\"O for the tests instead of
.\"O .I passwd.byname.
マップとして
.I passwd.byname
ではなく
.I map
を用いてテストする。
.\"O This option should be used if the default map does not exist.
このオプションは、デフォルトのマップが存在しない場合に使用すべきである。
.TP
.BI \-u " user"
.\"O Use the account
.\"O .I user
.\"O instead of
.\"O .I nobody.
アカウントとして
.I nobody
ではなく
.I user
を使う。
.\"O This option should be used if the
.\"O .I nobody
.\"O account does not exist in the map used for testing
.\"O .RI ( passwd.byname
.\"O or the one given with the
.\"O .B \-m
.\"O option).
このオプションは、テストに使うマップ
.RI ( passwd.byname
または
.B \-m
オプションで指定されたもの) に
.I nobody
アカウントが存在しない場合に使用すべきである。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR domainname (8),
.BR ypbind (8),
.BR ypcat (8),
.BR ypmatch (1),
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR yppoll (8),
.BR ypwhich (1)
.LP
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B yptest
.\"O is part of the
.\"O .B yp-tools
.\"O package, which was written by Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>.
.B yptest
は
.B yp-tools
パッケージの一部である。
.B yp-tools
パッケージは Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
によって書かれた。
