.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" $Id: netgroup.5,v 1.3 2001/12/01 15:25:22 nakano Exp $
.\" 
.\" This manual page is a part of ypserv archive. 
.\" README states the following
.\"
.\" See the file COPYING for copying restrictions. It is available under
.\" the GNU General Public License.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998, 1999 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 23 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 22 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH netgroup 5 "May 1999" "NIS" "Linux Reference Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O netgroup - specify network groups
.SH 名前
netgroup \- ネットワークグループを指定する
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B netgroup
.\"O file  defines "netgroups", which are sets of (host, user, domain)
.\"O tuples, used for permission checking when doing remote mounts,
.\"O remote logins and remote shells. 
.B netgroup
ファイルは "netgroup" を定義する。これは (host, user, domain)
の組で、リモートマウントやリモートログイン、リモートシェルの
認証に用いられる。

.\"O Each line in the file consists of a netgroup name followed by a
.\"O by a list of members, where a members is either another netgroup name,
.\"O or a triple:
ファイルのそれぞれの行には、 netgroup の名前に
メンバーのリストを続けて記述する。
メンバーは他のネットグループ名であるか、あるいは以下の組合せである。
.IP
.RI ( host ,
.IR user ,
.IR domain )
.LP
.\"O where the
.\"O .IR host ,
.\"O .IR user ,
.\"O and 
.\"O .I domain
.\"O are character strings for the
.\"O corresponding components. Any of the three fields can be empty,
.\"O in which case it specifies a "wildcard", or may consist of the string 
.\"O "-" to specify "no valid value". The
.\"O .I domain
.\"O field must either be the local domain name or empty for the netgroup
.\"O entry to be used. This field does not limit the netgroup or provide
.\"O security. The domain field refers to the domain in which the triple
.\"O is valid, not the domain containing the the trusted host.
ここで
.IR host ", " user ", " domain
はそれぞれに対応する文字列である。それぞれ空文字列にすることもでき、
その場合は「すべて有効」の意味となる。逆に "-" を指定すると
「すべて無効」の意味となる。
.I domein
フィールドはローカルのドメイン名か、空にしなければならない。
このフィールドは netgroup の制限にも、セキュリティの向上にも
用いられない。 domain フィールドはこの組が有効となるドメインを
指定するものであり、信頼できるホストからなるドメインを指定するものではない。

.\"O A gateway machine should be listed under all possible
.\"O hostnames by which it may be recognized:
ゲートウェイマシンでは、その持つすべての名前をリストしておくべきである。
.IP
gateway (server,\|,\|) (server-sn,\|,\|) (server-bb,\|,\|)
.LP

.\"O The getnetgrent functions should normally be used to access the
.\"O netgroup database.
netgroup データーベースへのアクセスには、通常
getnetent 関数が用いられる。

.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/etc/netgroup
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR getnetgrent (3),
.BR exports (5),
.BR makedbm (8),
.BR ypserv (8)
.\"O .SH WARNINGS
.SH 警告
.\"O The triple (,,domain) allows all users and machines trusted
.\"O access, and has the same effect as the triple (,,). Use the
.\"O .I host
.\"O and
.\"O .I user
.\"O fields of the triple to restrict the access
.\"O correctly to a specific set of members.
(,,domein) なる組や (,,) 組を指定すると、
すべてのユーザーとマシンが信頼されることになってしまう。
.IR host " および " user
フィールドを適切に指定して、特定のメンバーにのみ
アクセスを制限すること。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The Linux libc5 does not query the /etc/netgroup file directly,
.\"O it only querys the NIS server for the groups. So the netgroup
.\"O database must be stored in the form of a hashed dbm database
.\"O just like the passwd(5) and group(5) databases.
Linux の libc5 は直接 /etc/netgroup ファイルに問い合わせできず、
NIS サーバーに対してのみ問い合わせを行う。
したがって netgroup データーベースは passwd(5) や group(5) データーベース
のように、ハッシュした dbm データーベースにしておかなければならない。
.PP
."O This manpage mentions getnetgrent(3), but it seems that manpage
."O hasn't been written yet. Since getnetgrent() is part of GNU libc it might
."O also be that it is documented in \fIinfo\fP format.
この man ページでは getnetgrent(3) を紹介しているが、
このページはまだ書かれていないようだ。
getnetgrent() は GNU libc の一部なので、ページも
.I info
形式で記述されているはずだ。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
