.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" $Id: ypserv.conf.5,v 1.8 2004/03/12 15:45:00 ysato Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2002, 2003 Thorsten Kukuk kukuk@suse.de
.\" 
.\" This manual page is a part of ypserv archive. 
.\" README states the following
.\"
.\" See the file COPYING for copying restrictions. It is available under
.\" the GNU General Public License.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998-2002 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 23 Nov 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Fri 22 Oct 1999 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated Sun 29 Sep 2002 by NAKANO Takeo
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Feb 29 17:11:44 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\"
.TH YPSERV.CONF 5 "October 2002" "YP Server" "Reference Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ypserv.conf - configuration file for ypserv and rpc.ypxfrd
.SH 名前
ypserv.conf \- ypserv と rpc.ypxfrd の設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B ypserv.conf
.\"O is an ASCII file which contains some options for ypserv. It also
.\"O contains a list of rules for special host and map access for ypserv
.\"O and rpc.ypxfrd. This file will be read by ypserv and rpc.ypxfrd at
.\"O startup, or when receiveng a SIGHUP signal.
.B ypserv.conf
は ypserv に関するいくつかのオプションが書かれた ASCII ファイルである。
ここには特殊なホストやマップの、 ypserv や rpc.ypxfrd に対する
アクセスルールも記述される。このファイルは ypserv と rpc.ypxfrd
が起動されたときや、SIGHUP シグナルを受け取ったときに読み込まれる。

.\"O There is one entry per line. If the line is a option line,
.\"O the format is:
一行には一つのエントリが記述される。オプションの行は以下のように記述される。
.IP
option: <argument>
.LP
.\"O The line for an access rule has the format:
アクセスルールの行は以下のように記述される。
.IP
host:domain:map:security
.LP
.\"O All rules are tried one by one. If no match is found, access to a
.\"O map is allowed.
すべてのルールが一つ一つ試される。
マッチするものがまったくないと、
マップに対するアクセスは許可される。

.\"O Following
.\"O .I options
.\"O exist:
.I option
には次のものが指定できる。
.TP
.BR "files: " 30
.\"O This option specifies, how many database files should be cached by
.\"O .BR ypserv .
このオプションで
.B ypserv
でいくつのデータベースファイルをキャッシュすべきかを指定する。
.\"O If
.\"O .B 0
.\"O is specified, caching is disabled. Decreasing this number is only
.\"O possible, if
.\"O .B ypserv
.\"O is restarted.
.B 0
が指定された場合、キャッシュを無効化する。
.B ypserv
が再起動された場合、この数を減らすことのみが可能である。
.TP
.BR "trusted_master: " server
.\"O If this option is set on a slave server, new maps from the host
.\"O .I server
.\"O will be accepted as master. The default is, that
.\"O no trusted master is set and new maps will not be accepted.
このオプションがスレーブサーバーで設定されると、
ホスト
.I server
をマスターとみなして新規マップを受け付ける。
デフォルトでは信頼するマスターは設定されておらず、
新規のマップは受信しない。
.br
.\"O Example:
例:
.br
trusted_master: ypmaster.example.org
.TP
.BR "slp: " [yes|domain|<no>]
.\"O If this option is enabled, the NIS server registers itself on a
.\"O SLP server.
このオプションを有効にすると、
NIS サーバーは自分自身を SLP サーバーに登録する。
.TP
.BR "xfr_check_port: " [<yes>|no]
.\"O With this option enabled, the NIS master server have to run on a
.\"O port < 1024. The default is "yes" (enabled).
このオプションを有効にすると、 NIS マスターサーバーは
1024 未満のポートで動作するようになる。
デフォルトは "yes" (有効) である。
.LP
.\"O The field descriptions for the access rule lines are:
アクセスルールの行におけるフィールドの説明を以下に示す。
.TP
.B host
.\"O IP address. Wildcards are allowed.
IP アドレス。ワイルドカードを利用できる。
.br
.\"O Examples:
例:
.br
131.234. = 131.234.0.0/255.255.0.0
.br
131.234.214.0/255.255.254.0
.TP
.B domain
.\"O specifies the domain, for which this rule should be applied. An
.\"O asterix as wildcard is allowed.
このルールが適用されるドメインを指定する。
アスタリスクをワイルドカードの意味で用いることができる。
.TP
.B map
.\"O name of the map, or asterisk for all maps.
マップの名前。アスタリスクを指定するとすべてのマップに対応する。
.TP
.B security
.\"O one of none, port, deny:
none, port, deny のいずれかを指定する。
.TP
.I none
.\"O always allow access.
常にアクセスを許可する。
.TP
.I port
.\"O allow access if from port < 1024. Otherwise do not allow access.
アクセス元のポートが 1024 未満であればアクセスを許可する。
1024 以上の場合はアクセスを許可しない。
.TP
.I deny
.\"O deny access to this map.
このマップへのアクセスを拒否する。
.\"O .LP
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
/etc/ypserv.conf
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR ypserv (8),
.BR rpc.ypxfrd (8)
.\"O .SH WARNINGS
.SH 警告
.\"O The access rules for special maps are no real improvement in security,
.\"O but they make the life a little bit harder for potential hacker.
特殊マップに対するアクセスルールは、
本当の意味ではセキュリティを向上させるものではない。
ただ、クラッカーになりうる人間に対して、
多少その行為を困難にさせることができる。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.\"O Solaris clients don't use privileged ports. All security options,
.\"O which depend on privileged ports causes big problems on Solaris clients.
.SH バグ
Solaris のクライアントは特権ポートを使わない.
全てのセキュリティオプションは特権ポートに依存しているので、
Solaris のクライアントに対しては大きな問題を引き起こしてしまう。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
