.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Mar 10 00:40:50 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH NBP_NAME 3 "12 Jan 1994" "netatalk 1.3"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O nbp_name \- NBP name parsing
nbp_name \- NBP 名を解釈する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
nbp_name( name, obj, type, zone )
char *name, **obj, **type, **zone;
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B nbp_name()
.\"O parses user supplied names into their component object, type, and
.\"O zone.
.B nbp_name()
はユーザーがコンポーネントオブジェクト・
タイプ・ゾーンに与えた名前を解釈する。
.\"O .BR obj ,
.\"O .BR type ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B zone
.\"O should be passed by reference, and should point to the caller's default
.\"O values.
.BR obj ,
.BR type ,
.B zone
は参照として渡すべきであり、
呼び出し側のデフォルトの値を指しているべきである。
.\"O .B nbp_name()
.\"O will change the pointers to the parsed-out values.
.B nbp_name()
は解釈し終った値にポインタを移動する。
.\"O .B name
.\"O is of the form
.\"O .IB object : \c
.\"O .IB type @ \c
.\"O .IR zone ,
.\"O where each of
.\"O .IR object ,
.\"O .BI : type ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BI @ zone
.\"O replace
.\"O .BR obj ,
.\"O .BR type ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR zone,
.\"O respectively.
.B name
は
.IB object : \c
.IB type @ \c
.I zone
という形式である。
ここで、
.IR object ,
.BI : type ,
.BI @ zone
はそれぞれ
.BR obj ,
.BR type ,
.B zone
を置き換える。
.\"O .I type
.\"O must be proceeded by
.\"O .RB ` : ',
.\"O and
.\"O .I zone
.\"O must be preceded by
.\"O .RB ` @ '.
.I type
の前には
.RB ` : '
がなければいけない。
そして、
.I zone
の前には
.RB ` @ '
がなければいけない。
.\"O .SH EXAMPLE
.SH 例
.\"O The argument of
.\"O .BR afpd (8)'s
.\"O .B -n
.\"O option is parsed with
.\"O .BR nbp_name() .
.BR afpd (8)
の
.B -n
オプションの引き数は、
.B nbp_name()
で解釈される。
.\"O The default value of
.\"O .B obj
.\"O is the first component of the machine's hostname (as returned by
.\"O .BR gethostbyname (3)).
.B obj
のデフォルトの値は、
.RB ( gethostbyname (3)
で返される) マシンのホスト名からドメイン部を取ったものである。
.\"O The default value of
.\"O .B type
.\"O is ``AFPServer'', and of
.\"O .B zone
.\"O is ``*'', the default zone.  
.B type
のデフォルトの値は `AFPServer'' であり、
.B zone
のデフォルトの値はデフォルトのゾーン ``*'' である。
.\"O To cause
.\"O .B afpd
.\"O to register itself in some zone other than the default, one would
.\"O invoke it as
.B afpd
をデフォルトのゾーン以外のゾーンに登録させるには、
次のように起動すればよい。
.sp
.RS
.nf
afpd -n @some-other-zone
.fi
.RE
.sp
.\"O .B obj
.\"O and
.\"O .B type
.\"O would retain their default values.
.B obj
と
.B type
はデフォルトの値が取得される。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O .BR obj ,
.\"O .BR type ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B zone
.\"O return pointers into static area which may be over-written on each
.\"O call.
.BR obj ,
.BR type ,
.B zone
は、呼び出しの度に上書きされる静的領域へのポインタを返す。

