.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1996-2004 Hans Reiser.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar  5 22:26:06 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Apr  9 18:43:34 JST 2001 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Apr  7 05:08:50 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Apr 29 13:18:47 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat May  8 12:25:45 JST 2004 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Wed Mar  2 06:11:55 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH DEBUGREISERFS 8 "February 2004" "Reiserfsprogs 3.6.19"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O debugreiserfs \- The debugging tool for the ReiserFS filesystem.
debugreiserfs \- ReiserFS ファイルシステムのデバッグツール
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B debugreiserfs
[
.B -dDJmoqpuSV
] [
.B -j \fIdevice
] [
.B -B \fIfile
] [
.B -1 \fIN
]

.\" ] [
.\" .B -s
.\" ] [
.I device
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBdebugreiserfs\fR sometimes helps to solve problems with reiserfs filesystems. 
.\"O When run without options it prints the super block of the ReiserFS filesystem found
.\"O on the \fIdevice\fR.
\fBdebugreiserfs\fP は ReiserFS ファイルシステムで生じた問題解決の
役に立つ (かもしれない)。
オプションを付けずに実行すると、
\fIdevice\fR 上に見つかった ReiserFS ファイルシステムの
スーパーブロックを表示する。
.TP
.\"O .I device
.\"O is the special file corresponding to the device (e.g /dev/hdXX for
.\"O an IDE disk partition or /dev/sdXX for a SCSI disk partition).
.I device
デバイスに対応するスペシャルファイル。
(例えば、/dev/hdXX は IDE ディスクパーティションで、
/dev/sdXX は SCSI ディスクパーティションである)。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
\fB-j\fR \fIdevice\fR
.\"O prints the contents of the journal. The option -p allows it to pack the journal 
.\"O with other metadata into the archive.
ジャーナルの内容を表示する。
\-p オプションにより、
ジャーナルを他のメタデータと一緒にアーカイブに入れることができる。
.TP
\fB-J\fR
.\"O prints the journal header.
ジャーナルヘッダを表示する。
.TP
.B -d
.\"O prints the formatted nodes of the internal tree of the filesystem.
ファイルシステムにおける内部ツリーのフォーマット済みノードを表示する。
.TP
.B -D
.\"O prints the formatted nodes of all used blocks of the filesystem.
ファイルシステムにおける全ての使用中ブロックの
フォーマット済みノードを表示する。
.TP
.B -m
.\"O prints the contents of the bitmap (slightly useful).
ビットマップの内容を表示する (少しだけ役に立つ)。
.TP
.B -o
.\"O prints the objectid map (slightly useful).
オブジェクト ID マップを表示する (少しだけ役に立つ)。
.TP
\fB-B\fR \fIfile\fR
.\"O takes the list of bad blocks stored in the internal ReiserFS tree and translates it 
.\"O into an ascii list written to the specified file.
内部の ReiserFS ツリーに格納されている不正なブロックのリストを取得し、
ASCII 形式のリストに変換して、指定されたファイルに書き出す。
.TP
\fB-1\fR \fIblocknumber\fR
.\"O prints the specified block of the filesystem.
ファイルシステムの中の指定されたブロックを表示する。
.TP
.\" \fB-s
.\"O .\" scans the partition and prints a line when any kind of reiserfs
.\"O .\" formatted nodes found. Can be used to find specific key in the filesystem.
.\" パーティションをスキャンしている時に、
.\" reiserfs でフォーマットされたノードが見つかったら表示する。
.\" ファイルシステム中の特定のキーを見つけるのに使える。
.\" .TP
.B -p
.\"O extracts the filesystem's metadata with \fBdebugreiserfs\fR -p /dev/xxx | gzip -c > 
.\"O xxx.gz. None of your data are packed unless a filesystem corruption presents when 
.\"O the whole block having this corruption is packed. You send us the output, and we use 
.\"O it to create a filesystem with the same strucure as yours using \fBdebugreiserfs -u\fR.
.\"O When the data file is not too large, this usually allows us to quickly reproduce 
.\"O and debug the problem.
\fBdebugreiserfs\fR -p /dev/xxx | gzip -c > xxx.gz によって
ファイルシステムのメタデータを取り出す。
ファイルシステムが破損している
ブロック全体をアーカイブに入れようとする場合、
破損がない限りは何のデータも入らない。
この出力を我々に送ってもらえれば、
同じ構造を持つファイルシステムを
\fBdebugreiserfs -u\fR によって作成できる。
データファイルがあまり大きくなければ、
これによって大抵の場合は障害を速やかに再現し、
デバッグすることが可能となる。
.TP
.B -u
.\"O builds the ReiserFS filesystem image with gunzip -c xxx.gz | \fBdebugreiserfs\fR 
.\"O -u /dev/image of the previously packed metadata with \fBdebugreiserfs -p\fR. The
.\"O result image is not the same as the original filesystem, because mostly only metadata
.\"O were packed with \fBdebugreiserfs -p\fR, but the filesystem structure is completely 
.\"O recreated.
\fBdebugreiserfs -p\fR によって以前にアーカイブに入れられたメタデータから、
gunzip -c xxx.gz | \fBdebugreiserfs\fR -u /dev/image によって
ReiserFS ファイルシステムのイメージを構築する。
結果のイメージは元のファイルシステムとは同一ではない。
ほとんどの場合は \fBdebugreiserfs -p\fR によって
メタデータしかアーカイブに入れられていないので、
ファイルシステム構造が完全に再作成されるためである。
.TP
.B -S 
.\"O When -S is not specified -p 
.\"O .\" and -s 
.\"O deals with blocks marked used in the filesystem bitmap only. With this option 
.\"O set \fBdebugreiserfs\fR will work with the entire device.
\-S オプションが指定されていない場合、
\-p オプションは
.\" と -s オプションは
ファイルシステムビットマップのみで使われているマークされたブロックを扱う。
このオプションを設定した場合、
\fBdebugreiserfs\fR は全てのデバイスに対して適用される。
.TP
.B -q
.\"O When 
.\"O .\" -s or 
.\"O -p is in use, suppress showing the speed of progress.
.\" -s または
-p オプションが指定されている時に、進捗度を表示させない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This version of \fBdebugreiserfs\fR has been written by Vitaly Fertman 
.\"O <vitaly@namesys.com>.
このバージョンの \fBdebugreiserfs\fR は
Vitaly Fertman <vitaly@namesys.com> によって書かれた。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Please report bugs to the ReiserFS developers <reiserfs-dev@namesys.com>, providing
.\"O as much information as possible--your hardware, kernel, patches, settings, all printed
.\"O messages; check the syslog file for any related information.
バグは、できる限り多くの情報 (ハードウェア・カーネル・パッチ・設定・
表示された全てのメッセージ) とともに、
ReiserFS の開発者 <reiserfs-dev@namesys.com> に報告してほしい。
関連する情報があるかもしれないので syslog を調べてほしい。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR reiserfsck (8),
.BR mkreiserfs (8)
