.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1996-2004 Hans Reiser.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Mar  5 22:26:06 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Apr  9 18:43:34 JST 2001 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Apr 12 02:36:49 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 31 13:55:11 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat May  8 12:40:20 JST 2004 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Thu Mar  3 06:26:55 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" 
.TH MKREISERFS 8 "February 2004" "Reiserfsprogs-3.6.19"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O mkreiserfs \- The create tool for the Linux ReiserFS filesystem.
mkreiserfs \- Linux ReiserFS ファイルシステムの作成ツール
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B mkreiserfs
[ \fB-dfV\fR ]
[ \fB-b\fR | \fB--block-size \fIN\fR ]
[ \fB-h\fR | \fB--hash \fIHASH\fR ]
[ \fB-u\fR | \fB--uuid \fIUUID\fR ] 
[ \fB-l\fR | \fB--label \fILABEL\fR ]
[ \fB--format \fIFORMAT\fR ]
[ \fB-q\fR | \fB--quiet\fR ]
[ \fB-j\fR | \fB--journal-device \fIFILE\fR ]
[ \fB-s\fR | \fB--journal-size \fIN\fR ]
[ \fB-o\fR | \fB--journal-offset \fIN\fR ]
[ \fB-t\fR | \fB--transaction-max-size\fR \fIN\fR ]
[ \fB-B\fR | \fB--badblocks\fR \fIfile\fR ] \fI device\fR
[ \fIfilesystem-size\fR ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBmkreiserfs\fR creates a Linux ReiserFS filesystem on a device (usually a disk
.\"O partition).
\fBmkriserfs\fP はデバイス (普通はディスクパーティション) 上に
Linux ReiserFS ファイルシステムを作成する。
.TP
.I device
.\"O is the special file corresponding to a device or to a partition (e.g 
.\"O /dev/hdXX for an IDE disk partition or /dev/sdXX for a SCSI disk partition).
デバイスまたはパーティションに対応するスペシャルファイル
(例えば、/dev/hdXX は IDE ディスクパーティションで、
/dev/sdXX は SCSI ディスクパーティションである)。
.TP
.I filesystem-size
.\"O is the size in blocks of the filesystem. If omitted, \fBmkreiserfs\fR will
.\"O automatically set it.
ファイルシステムのサイズ (ブロック単位)。
省略された場合、\fBmkreiserfs\fR が自動的に設定する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
\fB-b\fR | \fB--block-size \fIN\fR
.\"O \fIN\fR is block size in bytes. It may only be set to a power of 2 within the
.\"O 512-8192 interval.
\fIN\fR はブロックサイズ (バイト単位) である。
512-8192 の範囲で 2 の累乗の値だけを設定できる。 
.TP
\fB-h\fR | \fB--hash \fIHASH\fR
.\"O \fIHASH\fR specifies which hash function will sort the names in the directories.
.\"O Choose from r5, rupasov, or tea. r5 is the default one.
\fIHASH\fR はどのハッシュ関数で
ディレクトリ内のファイル名をソートするかを指定する。
r5, rupasov, tea から選択すること。
r5 がデフォルトである。
.TP
\fB--format \fIFORMAT\fR
.\"O \fIFORMAT\fR specifies the format for the new filsystem. Choose format 3.5 or
.\"O 3.6. If none is specified \fBmkreiserfs\fR will create format 3.6 if running
.\"O kernel is 2.4 or higher, and format 3.5 if kernel 2.2 is running, and will
.\"O refuse creation under all other kernels.
\fIFORMAT\fR は新規のファイルシステムに使うフォーマットを指定する。
フォーマットは 3.5 または 3.6 を選択すること。
何も指定しない場合、\fBmkreiserfs\fR は
動作しているカーネルが 2.4 以降ならばフォーマット 3.6 で作成する。
カーネルが 2.2 ならばフォーマット 3.5 で作成する。
それ以外のカーネルのときは作成を拒否する。
.TP
\fB-u\fR | \fB--uuid \fIUUID\fR
.\"O Sets  the  Universally  Unique  IDentifier  of  the  filesystem  to  \fIUUID\fR 
.\"O (see  also  \fBuuidgen(8)\fR).  The  format  of  the  \fIUUID\fR  is  a  series 
.\"O of  hex  digits separated by hypthens, e.g.: "c1b9d5a2-f162-11cf-9ece-0020afc76f16".
.\"O If  the option  is skipped,  \fBmkreiserfs\fR  will by default generate a new
.\"O \fIUUID\fR.
ファイルシステムの Universally  Unique  IDentifier
(全世界で重なることのない一意な識別子) に \fIUUID\fR を設定する
(\fBuuidgen(8)\fR を参照)。
\fIUUID\fR のフォーマットはハイフンで区切った 16 進数の文字列である。
たとえば、"c1b9d5a2-f162-11cf-9ece-0020afc76f16"。
このオプションを指定しなかった場合、
\fBmkreiserfs\fR はデフォルトで新しい \fIUUID\fR を生成する。
.TP
\fB-l\fR | \fB--label \fILABEL\fR
.\"O Sets  the  volume  label  of  the filesystem. \fILABEL\fR can at most be 16
.\"O characters long; if it is longer than 16 characters, \fBmkreiserfs\fR will 
.\"O truncate it.
ファイルシステムのボリュームラベルを設定する。
\fILABEL\fR は最大 16 文字である。
17 文字以上の場合、\fBmkreiserfs\fR は文字列を切り詰める。
.TP
\fB-q\fR | \fB--quiet \fR
.\"O Sets \fBmkreiserfs\fR to work quietly without producing messages, progress or
.\"O questions. It is useful, but only for use by end users, if you run \fBmkreiserfs\fR 
.\"O in a script.
メッセージ・進捗状況・質問を表示させず、
\fBmkreiserfs\fR が寡黙に動作するように設定する。
エンドユーザが使うためだけにあり、
スクリプト中で \fBmkreiserfs\fR を動作させるときに役立つ。
.TP
\fB-j\fR | \fB--journal-device \fIFILE\fR
.\"O \fIFILE\fR is the name of the block device on which is to be places the 
.\"O filesystem journal.
\fIFILE\fR はファイルシステムのジャーナルが置かれる
ブロックデバイス名である。
.TP
\fB-o\fR | \fB--journal-offset \fIN\fR
.\"O \fIN\fR is the offset where the journal starts when it is to be on a separate
.\"O device. Default is 0. \fIN\fR has no effect when the journal is to be on the
.\"O host device.
\fIN\fR はジャーナルを別のデバイス上に置く場合の
ジャーナルの開始オフセットである。
デフォルトは 0 である。
ジャーナルをホストデバイスに置く場合、\fIN\fR は何も影響しない。
.TP
\fB-s\fR | \fB--journal-size \fIN
.\"O \fIN\fR is the size of the journal in blocks. When the journal is to be on a
.\"O separate device, its size defaults to the number of blocks that the device has.
.\"O When journal is to be on the host device, its size defaults to 8193 and the
.\"O maximal possible size is 32749 (for blocksize 4k). The minimum size is 513 blocks
.\"O (whether the journal is on the host or on a separate device).
\fIN\fR はジャーナルのサイズ (ブロック数) である。
ジャーナルを別のデバイス上に置く場合、
これがデバイスが持つジャーナルのブロック数のデフォルトサイズになる。
ジャーナルをホストデバイス上に置く場合、
このサイズのデフォルト値は 8193 で、
指定可能な最大値は 32749 である (ブロックサイズが 4k のとき)。
最小値は (ジャーナルをホストデバイス上に置く場合も、
別のデバイス上に置く場合も) 513 ブロックである。
.TP
\fB-t\fR | \fB--transaction-max-size \fIN
.\"O \fIN\fR is the maximum transaction size parameter for the journal. The
.\"O default, and max possible, value is 1024 blocks. It should be less
.\"O than half the size of the journal. If specified incorrectly, it will automatically 
.\"O be adjusted.
\fIN\fR はジャーナルのトランザクションサイズパラメータの最大値である。
デフォルト値と最大値は 1024 ブロックである。
この値はジャーナルの半分以下のサイズにすべきである。
不正な値が指定された場合は自動的に調整される。
.TP
\fB-B\fR | \fB--badblocks \fIfile
.\"O \fIFile\fR is the file name of the file that contains the list of blocks to be 
.\"O marked as bad on the filesystem. This list can be created by
.\"O \fB/sbin/badblocks -b block-size device\fR.
\fIfile\fR はファイルシステム上で不正とマークされたブロックのリストが
書かれるファイルの名前である。
このリストは \fB/sbin/badblocks -b block-size device\fR で作成できる。
.TP
\fB-f\fR
.\"O Forces \fBmkreiserfs\fR to continue even when the device is the whole disk, 
.\"O looks mounted, or is not a block device. If \fB-f\fR is specified more than
.\"O once, it allows the user to avoid asking for confirmation.
デバイスがディスク全体である場合・
デバイスがマウントされていると検出された場合・
デバイスがブロックデバイスでない場合であっても、
\fBmkreiserfs\fR に処理を続行させる。
\fB-f\fR を 2 回以上指定すれば、ユーザに確認させないようにできる。
.TP
\fB-d\fR
.\"O Sets \fBmkreiserfs\fR to print debugging information during \fBmkreiserfs\fR.
\fBmkreiserfs\fR の処理の間にデバッグ情報を表示させるように設定する。
.TP
\fB-V\fR
.\"O Prints the version and then exits.
バージョン情報を表示して、終了する。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This version of
.\"O .B mkreiserfs
.\"O has been written by Edward Shishkin <edward@namesys.com>.
このバージョンの
.B mkreiserfs
は Edward Shishkin <edward@namesys.com> によって書かれた。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Please report bugs to the ReiserFS developers <reiserfs-dev@namesys.com>, providing 
.\"O as much information as possible--your hardware, kernel, patches, settings, all printed
.\"O messages; check the syslog file for any related information.
バグは、できる限り多くの情報 (ハードウェア・カーネル・パッチ・設定・
表示された全てのメッセージ) とともに、
ReiserFS の開発者 <reiserfs-dev@namesys.com> に報告してほしい。
関連する情報があるかもしれないので syslog を調べてほしい。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR reiserfsck (8),
.BR debugreiserfs (8),
.BR reiserfstune (8)
