.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1996-2004 Hans Reiser.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Apr 14 14:45:41 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat May  8 13:37:25 JST 2004
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Mar  5 21:46:42 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" 
.\"WORD:	relocation	再配置
.\" 
.TH REISERFSTUNE 8 "February 2004" "Reiserfsprogs-3.6.19"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O reiserfstune \- The tunning tool for the ReiserFS filesystem.
reiserfstune \- ReiserFS ファイルシステムのチューニングツール
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B reiserfstune
[ \fB-f\fR ]
[ \fB-j\fR | \fB--journal-device\fR \fIFILE\fR ]
[ \fB--no-journal-available\fR ]
[ \fB--journal-new-device\fR \fIFILE\fR ] [ \fB--make-journal-standard\fR ]
[ \fB-s\fR | \fB--journal-new-size\fR \fIN\fR ]
[ \fB-o\fR | \fB--journal-new-offset\fR \fIN\fR ]
[ \fB-t\fR | \fB--max-transaction-size\fR \fIN\fR ]
[ \fB-b\fR | \fB--add-badblocks\fR \fIfile\fR ]
[ \fB-B\fR | \fB--badblocks\fR \fIfile\fR ]
[ \fB-u\fR | \fB--uuid \fIUUID\fR ]
[ \fB-l\fR | \fB--label \fILABEL\fR ]
.I device
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBreiserfstune\fR is used for tuning the ReiserFS. It can change two journal 
.\"O parameters (the journal size and the maximum transaction size), and it can move 
.\"O the journal's location to a new specified block device. (The old ReiserFS's 
.\"O journal may be kept unused, or discarded at the user's option.) Besides that
.\"O \fBreiserfstune\fR can store the bad block list to the ReiserFS and set UUID
.\"O and LABEL.
\fBreiserfstune\fR は ReiserFS を調整するために使われる。
このプログラムは (ジャーナルサイズと最大トランザクションサイズという)
2 つのジャーナルパラメータを変更可能で、
ジャーナルの場所を指定された新しいブロックデバイスに移動できる
(以前の ReiserFS ジャーナルを使用しないままにすることもできるし、
ユーザーオプションにより破棄することもできる)。
それに加え、\fBreiserfstune\fR は不正ブロックのリストを
ReiserFS に格納したり、UUID や LABEL を設定できる。
.\"O Note: At the time of writing the relocated journal was implemented for a special 
.\"O release of ReiserFS, and was not expected to be put into the mainstream kernel
.\"O until approximately Linux 2.5.  
注意: これを書いている時点では、ジャーナルの再配置は
ReiserFS の特別リリース用に実装されており、
Linux 2.5 あたりまでは、
メインストリームのカーネルに入れる予定はない。
.\"O This means that if you have the stock kernel you 
.\"O must apply a special patch. Without this patch the kernel will refuse to mount 
.\"O the newly modified file system.  We will charge $25 to explain this to you if 
.\"O you ask us why it doesn't work.
つまり現在持っているカーネルに特別なパッチを適用する必要がある。
このパッチを適用しない場合、
カーネルは新しく修正されたファイルシステムのマウントを拒否する。
なぜこれが動作しないかを説明してほしければ、$25 いただきたい。
.PP
.\"O Perhaps the most interesting application of this code is to put the
.\"O journal on a solid state disk.
このコードのもっとも重要な応用としては、
ソリッドステートディスクにジャーナルを置くことが考えられる。
.TP
\fIdevice
.\"O is the special file corresponding to the newly specified block device (e.g
.\"O /dev/hdXX for IDE disk partition or /dev/sdXX for the SCSI disk partition).
デバイスに対応するスペシャルファイル
(例えば、/dev/hdXX は IDE ディスクパーティションで、 
/dev/sdXX は SCSI ディスクパーティションである)。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
\fB-j\fR | \fB--journal-device\fR \fIFILE
.\"O \fIFILE\fR is the file name of the block device the file system has
.\"O the current journal (the one prior to running reiserfstune) on. This option is required when the journal is
.\"O already on a separate device from the main data device (although it
.\"O can be avoided with \fB--no-journal-available\fR). If you don't
.\"O specify journal device by this option, reiserfstune suppose that
.\"O journal is on main device.
\fIFILE\fR はファイルシステムが現在 (reiserfstune を実行する前に)
ジャーナルを置いているブロックデバイスのファイル名である。
このオプションは、メインデータデバイスとは別のデバイスに
既にジャーナルが置かれている場合に必要になる
(\fB--no-journal-available\fR を指定すれば、使わないこともできる)。
このオプションでジャーナルデバイスを指定しない場合、
reiserfstune はジャーナルがメインデバイスにあると仮定する。
.TP
\fB--no-journal-available
.\"O allows \fBreiserfstune\fR to continue when the current journal's block
.\"O device is no longer available.  This might happen if a disk goes bad
.\"O and you remove it (and run fsck).
現在のジャーナルのブロックデバイスが既に使用不能な場合でも、
\fBreiserfstune\fR に処理を実行させる。
このようなケースは、ディスクが故障してジャーナルを削除し
(その後に fsck をしている) といった場合に起る。
.TP
\fB--journal-new-device \fIFILE
.\"O \fIFILE\fR is the file name of the block device which will contain the
.\"O new journal for the file system. If you don't specify this,
.\"O reiserfstune supposes that journal device remains the same.
\fIFILE\fR はファイルシステムの新しいジャーナルを入れる
ブロックデバイスのファイル名である。
このオプションを指定しない場合、
reiserfstune はジャーナルデバイスが以前と同じものであると仮定する。
.TP	
\fB \-s\fR | \fB\--journal-new-size \fIN
.\"O \fIN\fR is the size parameter for the new journal. When journal is to
.\"O be on a separate device - its size defaults to number of blocks that
.\"O device has. When journal is to be on the same device as the filesytem - its size defaults
.\"O to amount of blocks allocated for journal by \fImkreiserfs\fR when it
.\"O created the filesystem. Minimum is 513 for
.\"O both cases.
\fIN\fR は新しいジャーナルのサイズパラメータである。
ジャーナルが別のデバイスにある場合、
ジャーナルデバイスのブロック数がデフォルトサイズになる。
ジャーナルがファイルシステムと同じデバイスにある場合、
\fImkreiserfs\fR で作成されたジャーナルの総ブロック数がデフォルトになる。
どちらの場合でも最小値は 513 である。
.TP
\fB \-o\fR | \fB\--journal-new-offset \fIN
.\"O \fIN\fR is an offset in blocks where journal will starts from when journal is to
.\"O be on a separate device. Default is 0. Has no effect when journal is
.\"O to be on the same device as the filesystem.  Most users have no need
.\"O to use this feature.  It can be used when you want the journals from
.\"O multiple filesystems to reside on the same device, and you don't want
.\"O to or cannot partition that device.
\fIN\fR は、ジャーナルが別のデバイスにある場合の
ジャーナルの開始オフセット (バイト単位) である。
デフォルトは 0 である。
ジャーナルがファイルシステムと同じデバイスにある場合は何も影響しない。
ほとんどのユーザーには、この機能は必要ない。
このオプションは、
複数のファイルシステムのジャーナルを同じデバイス上に置きたいが、
そのデバイスをパーティション分割したくない、
または分割できないといった場合に使える。
.TP
\fB \-t\fR | \fB\--maximal-transaction-size \fIN
.\"O \fIN\fR is the maximum transaction size parameter for the new
.\"O journal. The default, and max possible, value is 1024 blocks. It
.\"O should be less than half the size of the journal. If specifed
.\"O incorrectly, it will be adjusted.
\fIN\fR は新しいジャーナルのトランザクションサイズパラメータの最大値である。
デフォルト値と指定可能な最大値は 1024 ブロックである。
ジャーナルサイズの半分以下にすべきである。
不正な値が指定された場合は調整される。
.TP
\fB \-b\fR | \fB\--add-badblocks\fR \fIfile\fR
.\"O \fIFile\fR is the file name of the file that contains the list of blocks to be marked 
.\"O as bad on the fs. The list is added to the fs list of bad blocks.
\fIfile\fR は、ファイルシステム上で不正とマークされる予定の
ブロックのリストが書かれたファイルの名前である。
このリストはファイルシステムの不正ブロックのリストに追加される。
.TP
\fB \-B\fR | \fB\--badblocks\fR \fIfile\fR
.\"O \fIFile\fR is the file name of the file that contains the list of blocks to be marked 
.\"O as bad on the fs. The bad block list on the fs is cleared before the list specified 
.\"O in the \fIFile\fR is added to the fs.
\fIfile\fR は、ファイルシステム上で不正とマークされる予定の
ブロックのリストが書かれたファイルの名前である。
ファイルシステム上の不正ブロックのリストは、
\fIfile\fR で指定されたリストがファイルシステムに追加される前に削除される。
.TP
\fB\-f\fR | \fB--force\fR 
.\"O Normally \fBreiserfstune\fR will refuse to change a journal of a
.\"O file system that was created before this journal relocation code. This
.\"O is because if you change the journal, you cannot go back (without special
.\"O option \fB--make-journal-standard\fR) to an old kernel that lacks this feature and be able to use your filesytem.  This option forces it to do that. Specified more
.\"O than once it allows to avoid asking for confirmation.
.\"Osato:
.\"Osato: 第一文の訳がうまくない。
.\"Osato:
通常 \fBreiserfstune\fR は、ジャーナルの再配置コードより以前に作成された
ファイルシステムのジャーナルの変更はしない。
これはジャーナルを変更すると、
(特別なオプション \fB--make-journal-standard\fR を使わずに)
以前のカーネルに戻すことが出来なくなるためである。
以前のカーネルでは今ある機能が存在せず、
ファイルシステムが使うことができなくなる。
このオプションは強制的にジャーナルの変更を行う。
このオプションを 2 つ以上指定すると、
確認を行わないようにすることができる。
.TP
\fB--make-journal-standard\fR 
.\"O As it was mentioned above, if your file system has non-standard journal, 
.\"O it can not be mounted on the kernel without journal relocation
.\"O code. The thing can be changed, the only condition is that there is reserved
.\"O area on main device of the standard journal size 8193 blocks  (it will be so for
.\"O instance if you convert standard journal to non-standard). Just 
.\"O specify this option when you relocate journal back, or without relocation
.\"O if you already have it on main device.
.\"Osato:
.\"Osato: 最後の一文の訳は自信なし。
.\"Osato:
上で述べたように、ファイルシステムに標準的なジャーナルがない場合、
ジャーナルの再配置コードがないカーネルではマウントできない。
このような問題を解決することもできるが、
標準ジャーナルのメインデバイスの予約領域が
8193 ブロックがなければいけないという唯一の条件がある
(標準ジャーナルを非標準ジャーナルに変換する場合などに必要である)。
ジャーナルを以前のものに再配置し直す場合は、
単にこのオプションを指定すれば良い。
メインデバイスに既にジャーナルが存在する場合、再配置はしない。
.TP
\fB-u\fR | \fB--uuid \fIUUID\fR
.\"O Set  the  universally  unique  identifier (\fB UUID \fR) of the filesystem to
.\"O \fIUUID\fR (see also \fBuuidgen(8)\fR). The  format  of  the  UUID  is  a
.\"O series  of  hex  digits  separated  by  hypthens,  like  this:
.\"O "c1b9d5a2-f162-11cf-9ece-0020afc76f16".
ファイルシステムの universally unique identifier (\fBUUID\fR)
(汎システム的に他とは重ならない識別子) を \fIUUID\fR に設定する。
(\fBuuidgen(8)\fR を参照)。
UUID のフォーマットはハイフンで区切った 16 進数の文字列であり、
"c1b9d5a2-f162-11cf-9ece-0020afc76f16" のようなフォーマットである。
.TP
\fB-l\fR | \fB--label \fILABEL\fR
.\"O Set  the  volume  label  of  the filesystem. \fILABEL\fR can be at most 16
.\"O characters long; if it is longer than 16 characters, reiserfstune will truncate it.
ファイルシステムのボリュームラベルを設定する。
\fILABEL\fR は最大 16 文字である。
17 文字以上の場合、mkreiserfs は文字列を切り詰める。
.\"O .SH POSSIBLE SCENARIOS OF USING REISERFSTUNE:
.SH REISERFSTUNE を使用する可能性のあるシナリオ:
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: .SH の訳が日本語っぽくない。「〜を使うケース」とかでもよいかな。
.\"Osato: 
.\"O 1. You have ReiserFS on /dev/hda1, and you wish to have
.\"O it working with its journal on the device /dev/journal
1. ReiserFS が /dev/hda1 にあり、
デバイス /dev/journal にジャーナルを置いて動作させたい場合。
.nf
.IP
.\"O boot kernel patched with special "relocatable journal support" patch
特別な「ジャーナル再配置のサポート」パッチを適用した
カーネルでブートし、
reiserfstune /dev/hda1 --journal-new-device /dev/journal -f
.\"O mount /dev/hda1 and use.
mount /dev/hda1
として使用すること。

.\"O You would like to change max transaction size to 512 blocks
トランザクションサイズの最大値を 512 ブロックに変更する場合は、
以下のようにすること。
reiserfstune -t 512 /dev/hda1

.\"O You would like to use your file system on another kernel that doesn't 
.\"O contain relocatable journal support.
再配置可能ジャーナルをサポートしていない別のカーネルで
ファイルシステムを使おうとする場合は、
umount /dev/hda1
.\"O reiserfstune /dev/hda1 -j /dev/journal --journal-new-device /dev/hda1 --make-journal-standard
reiserfstune /dev/hda1 -j /dev/journal \\
  --journal-new-device /dev/hda1 --make-journal-standard
.\"O mount /dev/hda1 and use.
mount /dev/hda1
として使用すること。
.LP
.\"O 2. You would like to have ReiserFS on /dev/hda1 and to be able to
.\"O switch between different journals including journal located on the
.\"O device containing the filesystem.
2. /dev/hda1 を ReiserFS にして、別のジャーナルに切り替えたい場合
(ファイルシステムがあるデバイスにジャーナルを置くことも含む)。
.nf
.IP
.\"O boot kernel patched with special "relocatable journal support" patch
特別な「ジャーナル再配置のサポート」パッチを適用した
カーネルでブートし、
mkreiserfs /dev/hda1
を行う。

.\"O you got solid state disk (perhaps /dev/sda, they typically look like scsi disks)
ソリッドステートディスクを使う
(SCSI ディスクと見なされるので、多分 /dev/sda などになる)。
reiserfstune --journal-new-device /dev/sda1 -f /dev/hda1

.\"O Your scsi device dies, it is three in the morning, you have an extra IDE device
.\"O lying around
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: 文章とコマンドが合っていないような気がする。
.\"Osato: 余っているなら /dev/hdb1 とかを使わないのかな？
.\"Osato: 
早朝 3 時に SCSI デバイスが死んで、
IDE デバイスが余っている場合は、
reiserfsck --no-journal-available /dev/hda1
.\"O or
または
reiserfsck --rebuild-tree --no-journal-available /dev/hda1
.\"O reiserfstune --no-journal-available --journal-new-device /dev/hda1 /dev/hda1
reiserfstune --no-journal-available \\
  --journal-new-device /dev/hda1 /dev/hda1
.\"O using /dev/hda1 under patched kernel
を実行して、パッチを適用したカーネルで /dev/hda1 を使用する。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This version of \fBreiserfstune\fR has been written by Vladimir
.\"O Demidov <vova@namesys.com> and Edward Shishkin <edward@namesys.com>.
このバージョンの \fBreiserfstune\fR は、
Vladimir Demidov <vova@namesys.com> と
Edward Shishkin <edward@namesys.com> によって書かれた。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Please report bugs to the ReiserFS developers <reiserfs-dev@namesys.com>, providing
.\"O as much information as possible--your hardware, kernel, patches, settings, all printed
.\"O messages; check the syslog file for any related information.
バグは、できる限り多くの情報 (ハードウェア・カーネル・パッチ・設定・
表示された全てのメッセージ) とともに、
ReiserFS の開発者 <reiserfs-dev@namesys.com> に報告してほしい。
関連する情報があるかもしれないので syslog を調べてほしい。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR reiserfsck (8),
.BR debugreiserfs (8),
.BR mkreiserfs (8)
