.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1996-2004 Hans Reiser.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2005 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Mar 15 19:18:20 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Mon Apr  9 19:07:07 JST 2001 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Fri Apr 12 02:39:54 JST 2002 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Tue Apr 29 19:00:43 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Jan 31 14:52:17 JST 2004 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sat May  8 13:15:25 JST 2004 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sat Mar  5 04:21:34 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\" 
.\"WORD:	recover		復旧
.\"WORD:	consistency	整合性
.\" 
.TH REISERFSCK 8 "February 2004" "Reiserfsprogs-3.6.19"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O reiserfsck \- The checking tool for the ReiserFS filesystem.
reiserfsck \- ReiserFS ファイルシステムのチェックツール
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B reiserfsck 
[ \fB-afprVy\fR ]
[ \fB--rebuild-sb\fR | \fB--check\fR | \fB--fix-fixable\fR
| \fB--rebuild-tree\fR | \fB--clean-attributes\fR ]
.\" [ \fB-i\fR | \fB--interactive\fR ]
[ \fB-j\fR | \fB--journal\fR \fIdevice\fR ]
[ \fB-z\fR | \fB--adjust-size\fR ]
[ \fB-n\fR | \fB--nolog\fR ]
[ \fB-B\fR | \fB--badblocks \fIfile\fR ]
[ \fB-l\fR | \fB--logfile \fIfile\fR ]
[ \fB-q\fR | \fB--quiet\fR ]
[ \fB-y\fR | \fB--yes\fR ]
.\" [ \fB-b\fR | \fB--scan-marked-in-bitmap \fIbitmap-filename\fR ]
.\" [ \fB-h\fR | \fB--hash \fIhash-name\fR ]
.\" [ \fB-g\fR | \fB--background\fR ]
[ \fB-S\fR | \fB--scan-whole-partition\fR ]
[ \fB--no-journal-available\fR ]
.I device
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBReiserfsck\fR searches for a Reiserfs filesystem on a device, replays 
.\"O any necessary transactions, and either checks or repairs the file system.
\fBreiserfsck\fP はデバイス上の ReiserFS ファイルシステムを捜して、
必要なトランザクションを再現する。
さらに、ファイルシステムをチェックまたは修復する。
.TP
.I device
.\"O is the special file corresponding to a device or to a partition (e.g 
.\"O /dev/hdXX for an IDE disk partition or /dev/sdXX for a SCSI disk partition).
デバイスまたはパーティションに対応するスペシャルファイル
(例えば、/dev/hdXX は IDE ディスクパーティションで、
/dev/sdXX は SCSI ディスクパーティションである)。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B --rebuild-sb
.\"O This option recovers the superblock on a Reiserfs partition.  Normally you 
.\"O only need this option if mount reports "read_super_block: can't find 
.\"O a reiserfs file system" and you are sure that a Reiserfs file system is 
.\"O there. But remember that if you have used some partition editor program and 
.\"O now you cannot find a filesystem, probably something has gone wrong while 
.\"O repartitioning and the start of the partition has been changed. If so, 
.\"O instead of rebuilding the super block on a wrong place you should find the 
.\"O correct start of the partition first.
このオプションは ReiserFS パーティションのスーパーブロックを復旧する。
このオプションが必要なのは、
ReiserFS ファイルシステムがあるにも関わらず、mount が
「read_super_block: reiserfs ファイルシステムが見つかりません
(can't find a reiserfs file system)」と表示したときのみである。
しかし、何らかのパーティション編集プログラムを使用した後で
ファイルシステムが見つからなくなった場合は、
再分割のときに何か不具合が起こって
パーティションの開始位置が変更されたかも知れない
ということを思い出してほしい。
もしそうならば、間違った場所にスーパーブロックを再構築するのではなく、
始めにパーティションの正しい開始位置を見つけるべきである。
.TP
.B --check
.\"O This default action checks filesystem consistency and reports, but 
.\"O does not repair any corruption that it finds. This option may be 
.\"O used on a read-only file system mount.
デフォルトの動作であるこのオプションでは、
ファイルシステムの整合性をチェックするが、
壊れたデータが発見されても修正は行わない。
読み込みのみでマウントされたファイルシステムに対しても使うことができる。
.TP
.B --fix-fixable
.\"O This option recovers certain kinds of corruption that do not require 
.\"O rebuilding the entire file system tree (\fB--rebuild-tree\fR). Normally 
.\"O you only need this option if the \fB--check\fR option reports 
.\"O "corruption that can be fixed with \fB--fix-fixable\fR". This includes: 
.\"O zeroing invalid data-block pointers, correcting st_size and st_blocks 
.\"O for directories, and deleting invalid directory entries.
このオプションは --rebuild-tree オプションなしで修正できる
壊れたデータを復旧する。
通常このオプションが必要なのは、
\fB--check\fR オプションで「\fB--fix-fixable\fR で
修復可能な壊れたデータが見つかった
(corruption that can be fixed with \fB--fix-fixable\fR)」
と表示されたときのみである。
このオプションで行われるのは、
データブロックへの誤ったポインタのゼロ化・
ディレクトリの st_size と st_blocksの修正・
不正なディレクトリエントリの削除などである。
.TP
.B --rebuild-tree
.\"O This option rebuilds the entire filesystem tree using leaf nodes 
.\"O found on the device.  Normally you only need this option if the 
.\"O \fBreiserfsck --check\fR reports "Running with \fB--rebuild-tree\fR
.\"O is required". You are strongly encouraged to make a backup copy 
.\"O of the whole partition before attempting the \fB--rebuild-tree\fR 
.\"O option. Once \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR is started it must
.\"O finish its work (and you should not interrupt it), otherwise the
.\"O filesystem will be left in the unmountable state to avoid subsequent
.\"O data corruptions.
このオプションは、デバイス上に見つかったリーフノード (leaf node) を使って、
ファイルシステムツリー全体を再構築する。
通常このオプションが必要なのは、
\fBreiserfsck --check\fR で
「\fB--rebuild-tree\fR を付けて実行する必要がある
(Running with \fB--rebuild-tree\fR is required)」
と表示されたときのみである。
\fB--rebuild-tree\fR オプションを付けて実行する場合は、
パーティション全体のバックアップコピーを取っておくことを強く推奨する。
いったん \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR を開始したら、
動作を完了させなければならない (中断すべきではない)。
完了しないと、ファイルシステムはマウントできない状態のままにされる。
これはその後のデータの破壊を防ぐためである。
.TP
.B --clean-attributes
.\"O This option cleans reserved fields of Stat-Data items. There were days when 
.\"O there were no extended attributes in reiserfs. When they were implemented old 
.\"O partitions needed to be cleaned first -- reiserfs code in the kernel did not 
.\"O care about not used fields in its strutures. Thus if you have used one of the 
.\"O old (pre-attrbutes) kernels with a ReiserFS filesystem and you want to use 
.\"O extented attribues there, you should clean the filesystem first.
このオプションは Stat-Data アイテムの予約フィールドをクリアする。
かつては ReiserFS に拡張属性がなかった。
拡張属性が実装されたとき、最初に古いパーティションを
何も書かれていない状態にする必要があった -- カーネルの ReiserFS のコードは
構造体の使われていないフィールドを考慮していなかった。
そのため、古い (属性が実装される前の) カーネルを
ReiserFS ファイルシステムとともに使っていて、
拡張属性を使いたい場合は、最初にファイルシステムを
何も書かれていない状態にするべきである。
.TP
.B \fB--journal \fIdevice \fR, \fB-j \fIdevice \fR
.\"O This option supplies the device name of the current file system journal.  
.\"O This option is required when the journal resides on a separate device 
.\"O from the main data device (although it can be avoided with the expert
.\"O option \fB--no-journal-available\fR).
このオプションは、現在のファイルシステムジャーナルのデバイス名を指定する。
このオプションは、メインデータのデバイスとは
別のデバイスにジャーナルが存在する場合に必要である
(エキスパートオプション \fB--no-journal-available\fR を使用すれば、
このオプションを使わないこともできる)。
.TP 
.\" .B --interactive, -i
.\"O .\" This makes \fBreiserfsck\fR to stop after each pass completed.
.\" 各処理が完了する毎に \fBreiserfsck\fR を停止する。
.\" .TP
.B --adjust-size, -z
.\"O This option causes \fBreiserfsck\fR to correct file sizes that
.\"O are larger than the offset of the last discovered byte.  This
.\"O implies that holes at the end of a file will be removed.  File
.\"O sizes that are smaller than the offset of the last discovered
.\"O byte are corrected by \fB--fix-fixable\fR.
このオプションは、
最後に見つかるバイトのオフセットよりもファイルサイズが大きい場合に、
\fBreiserfsck\fR にファイルサイズを修正させる。
つまりファイルの末尾のホール (穴) が削除される。
最後に見つかるバイトのオフセットよりもファイルサイズが小さい場合は、
\fB--fix-fixable\fR で修正される。
.TP
\fB--badblocks \fIfile\fR, \fB-B \fI file\fR
.\"O This option sets the badblock list to be the list of blocks specified in 
.\"O the given `file`. The filesystem badblock list is cleared before the new 
.\"O list is added. It can be used with \fB--fix-fixable\fR to fix the list of 
.\"O badblocks (see \fBdebugreiserfs -B\fR). If the device has bad blocks, every
.\"O time it must be given with the \fB--rebuild-tree\fR option.
このオプションは不正ブロックのリストを、
指定された `file` で与えられたブロックのリストに設定する。
ファイルシステムの不正ブロックのリストは、
新しいリストが追加される前に削除される。
\fB--fix-fixable\fR を指定することで不正ブロックを修復できる
(debugreiserfs -B を参照)。
またブロックデバイスに不正なブロックがある場合は、
毎回 \fB--rebuild-tree\fR オプションを付けなければならない。
.TP
\fB--logfile \fIfile\fR, \fB-l \fI file\fR
.\"O This option causes \fBreiserfsck\fR to report any corruption it finds 
.\"O to the specified log file rather than to stderr.
このオプションは、\fBreiserfsck\fR に対して
壊れたデータに関する情報を標準エラー出力ではなく
指定したログファイルに書き出すようにさせる。
.TP
.B --nolog, -n
.\"O This option prevents \fBreiserfsck\fR from reporting any kinds of corruption.
このオプションは、\fBreiserfsck\fR に対して
壊れたデータについて報告しないようにさせる。
.TP
.B --quiet, -q
.\"O This option prevents \fBreiserfsck\fR from reporting its rate of progress.
このオプションは、\fBreiserfsck\fR に対して
進捗状況を表示しないようにさせる。
.TP
.B --yes, -y
.\"O This option inhibits \fBreiserfsck\fR from asking you for confirmation after
.\"O telling you what it is going to do. It will assuem you confirm. For safety, 
.\"O it does not work with the \fB--rebuild-tree\fR option.
このオプションは \fBreiserfsck\fR に対して、
「これから実行することをユーザに提示した後で、
ユーザの了承を得る」という動作をさせないようにする。
\fBreiserfsck\fR はユーザが了承すると仮定する。
安全のため、\fB--rebuild-tree\fR オプションと一緒に指定すると、
このオプションは動作しない。
.TP
\fB-a\fR, \fB-p\fR
.\"O These options are usually passed by fsck -A during the automatic checking 
.\"O of those partitions listed in /etc/fstab. 
通常このオプションは、fsck -A により
/etc/fstab にリストされているパーティションを
自動チェックするときに受け渡される。
.\"O These options cause \fBreiserfsck\fR 
.\"O to print some information about the specified filesystem, to check if error 
.\"O flags in the superblock are set and to do some light-weight checks. If these 
これらのオプションを使うと、
\fBreiserfsck\fR は指定されたファイルシステムの情報を表示し、
スーパーブロックにあるエラーフラグが設定されているかをチェックし、
簡単なチェックをいくつか行う。
.\"O If these 
.\"O checks reveal a corruption or the flag indicating a (possibly fixable) 
.\"O corruption is found set in the superblock, then \fBreiserfsck\fR switches 
.\"O to the fix-fixable mode. 
これらのチェックにより、壊れたデータが明らかになったり、
(修正可能な) 壊れたデータを指し示すフラグが
スーパーブロックに設定されているのが見つかった場合は、
\fBreiserfsck\fR は修正可能データの修正モードに移行する。
.\"O If the flag indicating a fatal corruption is found 
.\"O set in the superblock, then \fBreiserfsck\fR finishes with an error.
修正不能な壊れたデータを示すフラグが、
スーパブロックに設定されているのが見つかった場合、
\fBreiserfsck\fR はエラーを出して終了する。
.TP
.B -V
.\"O This option prints the reiserfsprogs version and then exit.
このオプションは reiserfsprogs のバージョンを表示して終了する。
.TP
\fB-r\fR, \fB-f\fR
.\"O These options are ignored.
これらのオプションは無視される。
.TP
.\"O .SH EXPERT OPTIONS
.SH エキスパートオプション
.\"O DO NOT USE THESE OPTIONS UNLESS YOU KNOW WHAT YOU ARE DOING. 
.\"O WE ARE NOT RESPONSIBLE IF YOU LOSE DATA AS A RESULT OF THESE
.\"O OPTIONS.
\fB自分がやっていることが分からない場合は、
これらのオプションを使ってはならない。
これらのオプションを使った結果、
データが失われたとしても我々は責任はとらない。\fR
.TP
.\"O .B \fB\--no-journal-available\fR
.B --no-journal-available
.\"O This option allows \fBreiserfsck\fR to proceed when the journal device is 
.\"O not available. This option has no effect when the journal is located on 
.\"O the main data device. NOTE: after this operation you must use \fBreiserfstune\fR 
.\"O to specify a new journal device.
このオプションを指定すると、ジャーナルデバイスが使用できない場合でも
\fBreiserfsck\fR を続行することができる。
このオプションはジャーナルがメインデータデバイスにある場合は影響しない。
注意: この操作の後には、\fBreiserfstune\fR により
新しいジャーナルデバイスを指定しなければならない。
.TP
.B --scan-whole-partition, -S
.\"O This option causes \fB--rebuild-tree\fR to scan the whole partition but not only 
.\"O the used space on the partition.
このオプションは \fB--rebuild-tree\fR のときに、
パーティションの使用されている領域だけでなく、
パーティション全体をスキャンさせる。
.\"O .SH AN EXAMPLE OF USING reiserfsck
.SH "reiserfsck の使用例"
.\"O 1. You think something may be wrong with a reiserfs partition on /dev/hda1 
.\"O or you would just like to perform a periodic disk check.
1. reiserfs パーティション /dev/hda1 に何か不具合があると思った場合、
または単に定期的なディスクチェックを行おうとした場合に
\fBreiserfsck\fR を使用する。

.\"O 2. Run \fBreiserfsck --check --logfile check.log /dev/hda1\fR. If \fBreiserfsck 
.\"O --check\fR exits with status 0 it means no errors were discovered. 
2. \fBreiserfsck --check --logfile check.log /dev/hda1\fR を実行する。
\fBreiserfsck --check\fR がステータス 0 で終了した場合は、
エラーがなかったことを示している。

.\"O 3. If \fBreiserfsck --check\fR exits with status 1 (and reports about fixable 
.\"O corruptions) it means that you should run \fBreiserfsck --fix-fixable --logfile 
.\"O fixable.log /dev/hda1\fR.
3. \fBreiserfsck --check\fR がステータス 1 で終了して
(かつ修正可能な壊れたデータがあることが報告された) 場合は、
\fBreiserfsck --fix-fixable --logfile fixable.log /dev/hda1\fR を
実行すべきである。

.\"O 4. If \fBreiserfsck --check\fR exits with status 2 (and reports about fatal 
.\"O corruptions) it means that you need to run \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR.  
.\"O If \fBreiserfsck --check\fR fails in some way you should also run \fBreiserfsck 
.\"O --rebuild-tree\fR, but we also encourage you to submit this as a bug report.
4. \fBreiserfsck --check\fR がステータス 2 で終了して
(かつ致命的な壊れたデータがあることが報告された) 場合は、
\fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR を実行する必要がある。
\fBreiserfsck --check\fR が何らかの理由で失敗した場合も、
\fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR を実行すべきである。
ただしこの場合はバグレポートとして報告してほしい。

.\"O 5. Before running \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR, please make a backup of 
.\"O the whole partition before proceeding. Then run \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree 
.\"O --logfile rebuild.log /dev/hda1\fR.
5. \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR を実行する前に、
パーティション全体のバックアップを取っておくこと。
その後に \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree --logfile rebuild.log /dev/hda1\fR を
実行すること。

.\"O 6. If the \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR step fails or does not recover what 
.\"O you expected, please submit this as a bug report. Try to provide as much 
.\"O information as possible including your platform and Linux kernel version. We 
.\"O will try to help solve the problem.
6. \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR のステップが失敗した場合、
または期待していた復旧が出来なかった場合は、
バグレポートとして報告してほしい。
プラットフォームや Linux カーネルのバージョンを含む
できる限りの情報を提供してほしい。
我々は問題を解決する手助けをしようと思う。
.\"O .SH EXIT CODES
.SH 終了コード
.\"O \fBreiserfsck\fR uses the following exit codes:
\fBreiserfsck\fR は以下の終了コードを使う:
.br
.\"O \   \fI0\fR \-\ No errors.
\   \fI0\fR \-\ エラーなし。
.br
.\"O \   \fI1\fR \-\ File system errors corrected.
\   \fI1\fR \-\ ファイルシステムのエラーが修正された。
.br
.\"O \   \fI2\fR \-\ Reboot is needed.
\   \fI2\fR \-\ 再起動が必要である。
.br
.\"O \   \fI4\fR \-\ File system fatal errors left uncorrected,
.\"O .br
.\"O \	  \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR needs to be launched.
\   \fI4\fR \-\ ファイルシステムの致命的なエラーが
.br
\	  修正されないまま残されており、
.br
\	  \fBreiserfsck --rebuild-tree\fR を実行する必要がある。
.br
.\"O \   \fI6\fR \-\ File system fixable errors left uncorrected,
.\"O .br
.\"O \	  \fBreiserfsck --fix-fixable\fR needs to be launched.
\   \fI6\fR \-\ ファイルシステムの修復可能なエラーが
.br
\	  修正されないまま残されており、
.br
\	  \fBreiserfsck --fix-fixable\fR を実行する必要がある。
.br
.\"O \   \fI8\fR \-\ Operational error.
\   \fI8\fR \-\ 操作エラー。
.br
.\"O \   \fI16\fR \-\ Usage or syntax error.
\   \fI16\fR \-\ 使用法エラーまたは書式エラー。
.br
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This version of \fBreiserfsck\fR has been written by Vitaly Fertman <vitaly@namesys.com>.
このバージョンの \fBreiserfsck\fR は
Vitaly Fertman <vitaly@namesys.com> によって書かれた。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Please report bugs to the ReiserFS developers <reiserfs-dev@namesys.com>, providing 
.\"O as much information as possible--your hardware, kernel, patches, settings, all printed 
.\"O messages, the logfile; check the syslog file for any related information.
バグは、できる限り多くの情報 (ハードウェア・カーネル・パッチ・設定・
表示された全てのメッセージ・ログファイル) とともに、
ReiserFS の開発者 <reiserfs-dev@namesys.com> に報告してほしい。
関連する情報があるかもしれないので syslog を調べてほしい。
.\"O .SH TODO
.SH 今後の予定
.\"O Faster recovering, signal handling.
修復の高速化とシグナル処理。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR mkreiserfs (8),
.BR reiserfstune (8)
.BR resize_reiserfs (8),
.BR debugreiserfs (8),
