.\"   Copyright (C) 1994, 95, 96 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
.\"this
.\"manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\"preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\"this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\"the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\"permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\"manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\"versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\"translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 II Ryouta
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Dec 16 midnight 1997  by II Ryouta <pessi@eiehost.gee.kyoto-u.ac.jp> 
.\"
.TH DATE 1 "GNU Shell Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
.\" date \- print or set the system date and time
date \- システムの日付と時刻を表示あるいは設定する
.SH 書式
.B date
[\-u] [\-d datestr] [\-s datestr] [\-\-utc] [\-\-universal]
[\-\-date=datestr] [\-\-set=datestr] [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
[+形式] [MMDDhhmm[[CC]YY][.ss]]

.SH 説明
.\" This documentation is no longer being maintained and may be inaccurate
.\" or incomplete.  The Texinfo documentation is now the authoritative source.
この文書はもうメンテナンスされていないので、不正確・不完全な可能性がある。
現在は texinfo 文書が正式な情報となっている。

.PP
.\" This manual page
.\" documents the GNU version of
このマニュアルページは GNU 版
.BR date
の使用法を説明したものである。
引数なしに
.B date
.\" with no arguments prints the current time and date (in the format
.\" of the `%c' directive described below).
を実行すると、( 後述する `%c' 指令の形式でもって )現在の時刻と日付を表示する。
.\" If given an argument that starts with a `+', it prints the current
.\" time and date in a format controlled by that argument, which has the
.\" same format as the format string passed to the `strftime' function.
.\" Except for directives that start with `%', characters in that string
.\" are printed unchanged.
`+'で始まる一つの引数が与えられた場合は、現在の時刻と日付をその引数で制御
された形式でもって表示する。この引数は `strftime' 関数に渡される文字列の形式
と同一の形式を持つ。 `%' で始まる指令を除いて、この文字列内の文字はそのまま
変更されずに表示される。
.PP
.\" The directives are:
それらの指令とは:
.IP %
.\" a literal %
文字としての %
.IP n
.\" a newline
改行
.IP t
.\" a horizontal tab
水平タブ
.PP
.\" Time fields:
時刻の欄:
.IP %H
.\" hour (00..23)
時 (00..23)
.IP %I
.\" hour (01..12)
時 (01..12)
.IP %k
.\" hour ( 0..23)
時 ( 0..23)
.IP %l
.\" hour ( 1..12)
時 ( 1..12)
.IP %M
.\" minute (00..59)
分 (00..59)
.IP %p
.\" locale's AM or PM
AM あるいは PM のロケール
.IP %r
.\" time, 12-hour (hh:mm:ss [AP]M)
時刻、12時間 (hh:mm:ss [AP]M)
.IP %s
.\" seconds since 1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC (a nonstandard extension)
1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC からの秒数 (標準外の拡張)
.IP %S
.\" second (00..61)
秒 (00..61)
.IP %T
.\" time, 24-hour (hh:mm:ss)
時刻、24時間 (hh:mm:ss)
.IP %X
.\" locale's time representation (%H:%M:%S)
ロケールによる時刻の表現 (%H:%M:%S)
.IP %Z
.\" time zone (e.g., EDT), or nothing if no time zone is determinable
タイムゾーン (例 EDT)、もしタイムゾーンが決定できないならば無
.PP
.\" Date fields:
日付の欄:
.IP %a
.\" locale's abbreviated weekday name (Sun..Sat)
ロケールによる省略形の曜日の名前 (Sun..Sat)
.IP %A
.\" locale's full weekday name, variable length (Sunday..Saturday)
ロケールによる完全に表記した曜日の名前、可変長 (Sunday..Saturday)
.IP %b
.\" locale's abbreviated month name (Jan..Dec)
ロケールによる省略形の月の名前 (Jan..Dec)
.IP %B
.\" locale's full month name, variable length (January..December)
ロケールによる完全に表記した月の名前、可変長 (January..December)
.IP %c
.\" locale's date and time (Sat Nov 04 12:02:33 EST 1989)
ロケールによる日付と時刻 (Sat Nov 04 12:02:33 EST 1989)
.IP %d
.\" day of month (01..31)
日(月内通算日数) (01..31)
.IP %D
.\" date (mm/dd/yy)
日付 (mm/dd/yy)
.IP %h
.\" same as %b
%b と同じ.
.IP %j
.\" day of year (001..366)
年内通算日数 (001..366)
.IP %m
.\" month (01..12)
月 (01..12)
.IP %U
.\" week number of year with Sunday as first day of week (00..53)
日曜日を週の最初の日としたときの年内通算の週の番号 (00..53)
.IP %w
.\" day of week (0..6) with 0 corresponding to Sunday
週のうちの曜日 (0..6) で 0 が日曜日に対応
.IP %W
.\" week number of year with Monday as first day of week (00..53)
月曜日を週の最初の日としたときの年内通算の週の番号 (00..53)
.IP %x
.\" locale's date representation (mm/dd/yy)
ロケールによる日付の表現 (mm/dd/yy)
.IP %y
.\" last two digits of year (00..99)
年の最後の二つの数字 (00.99)
.IP %Y
.\" year (1970...)
年 (1970...)
.PP
.\" By default, 
デフォルトでは
.BR date
.\" pads numeric fields with zeroes.
数値の欄をゼロで詰める。
GNU
.BR date
.\" recognizes the following nonstandard numeric modifiers:
は以下の標準外の数値の修飾指定子を受け付ける:
.IP \-
.\" (hyphen) do not pad the field
(ハイフン) フィールドを詰めない
.IP _
.\" (underscore) pad the field with spaces
(アンダースコア) スペースでフィールドを詰める
.PP
.\" If given an argument that does not start with `+',
与えられた引数が `+' で始まらない場合、
.B date
.\" sets the system clock to the time and date specified by that argument.
.\" The argument must consist entirely of digits, which have the following
.\" meaning:
はシステム時計をその引数として指定された時刻と日付でもって設定する。
引数はもっぱら数字で構成されねばならない。これは以下の意味を持つ:
.IP MM
.\" month
月
.IP DD
.\" day within month
日(月内通算)
.IP hh
.\" hour
時
.IP mm
.\" minute
分
.IP CC
.\" first two digits of year (optional)
年の最初の二つの数字 (任意)
.IP YY
.\" last two digits of year (optional)
年の最後の二つの数字 (任意)
.IP ss
.\" second (optional)
秒 (任意)
.PP
.\" Only the superuser can set the system clock.
スーパーユーザだけがシステム時計を設定することができる。
.SS オプション
.TP
.I "\-d datestr, \-\-date datestr"
.\" Display the time and date specified in
.IR datestr ,
において指定された時刻と日付を表示。
.\" which can be in almost any common format.
これはほとんどのいかなる共通の形式でも構わない。
.\"  The display is in
.\" the default output format, or if an argument starting with `+' is
.\" given to
この表示はデフォルトの出力形式だが、
.BR date ,
に与えられる引数が `+' で始まる場合は
.\" in the format specified by that argument.
その引数によって指定された形式である。
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
.\" Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
標準出力に使用方法をことづて、コマンドは成功したとして終了する。
.TP
.I "\-s datestr, \-\-set datestr"
.\" Set the time and date to
時刻と日付を
.IR datestr ,
に設定する。
.\" which can be in almost any common format.
.\" It can contain month names, timezones, `am' and `pm', etc.
これはほとんどのいかなる共通形式で構わない。
月の名前、タイムゾーン、 `am' および `pm' などを含みうる。
.TP
.I "\-u, \-\-universal"
.\" Print or set the time and date in Coordinated Universal Time (also
.\" known as Greenwich Mean Time) instead of in local (wall clock) time.
時刻と日付を地方時(壁時計の時刻)ではなくて協定世界時 (UTC)
(グリニッジ標準時としても知られている) によって表示あるいは設定する
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
.\" Print version information on standard output then exit successfully.
標準出力にバージョン情報を表示してからコマンドは成功したとして終了する。
.SH 例
.PP
.\" To print the date of the day before yesterday
一昨日の日付を表示するには
.IP
date \-\-date \'2 days ago\'
.PP
.\" To print the date of the day three months and one day hence
今から三ヶ月と一日の日付を表示するには、
.IP
date \-\-date \'3 months 1 day\'
.PP
.\" To print the day of year of Christmas in the current year
今年のクリスマスの年内通算日数を表示するには
.IP
date --date \'25 Dec\' +%j
.PP
.\" To print the current date in a format including the full month name and
.\" the day of the month
現在の日付を完全な表記による月の名前と(月内通算)日を含んだ形式で表示するには
.IP
date \'+%B %d\'
.PP
.\" But this may not be what you want because for the first nine days
.\" of the month, the \`%d\' expands to a zero-padded two-digit field,
.\" for example \`date \-d 1-may \'+%B %d\'\' will print
.\" \`May 01\'.
しかしこれは望んでいるものと異なるかもしれない。というのは月の最初の
九日に対して\`%d\' はゼロで詰められた二個の数字の欄に拡張するからである。
例えば \`date \-d 1-may \'+%B %d\'\' は \`May 01\' を表示するであろう。
.PP
.\" To print the same date but without the leading zero for one-digit
.\" days of month, you can use the nonstandard \`\-\' modifier to suppress
.\" the padding altogether.
同じ日付ではあるが数字一個に対して頭につくゼロをのぞいた(月内通算)日を
表示するには、標準外の \`\-\' 修飾指定子を詰め物全体を抑制するために用い
ることができる。
.IP
date \-d 1-may \'+%B %-d\'
.\" .SH バグ
.\" 本マニュアルの翻訳過程でこのマニュアル自体にバグが紛れ込んだ可能性があるので注意されたい。
.\" 訳者は多くのオプションを試してはみたが、全てを確認してはいない。
.\" 訳者 井伊 亮太 pessi@eiehost.gee.kyoto-u.ac.jp
.\" 1997/12/16深夜 作業開始、17未明 jman投稿
.\" 元バージョンは GNU sh-utils-1.16/man/date.1
