.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Omo Kazuki
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Oct 24 13:22:39 JST 2000
.\"         by Omo Kazuki
.TH HOSTID "1" "August 1999" "GNU sh-utils 2.0" FSF
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O hostid \- print the numeric identifier for the current host
hostid \- 現在のホストの、数値で表される識別子を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B hostid
[\fI-v\fR]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.PP
.\" Add any additional description here
.\" その他の説明はここに付け加えなさい
.PP
.\"O Print the numeric identifier (in hexadecimal) for the current host.
.B hostid
は
現在のホストの、数値 (16進数) で表される識別子を表示する。
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
.\"O display this help and exit
 ヘルプを表示して正常終了する
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
.\"O output version information and exit
バージョン情報を出力して正常終了する
.\"O .SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.SH "バグのレポート"
.\"O Report bugs to <bug-sh-utils@gnu.org>.
バグは <bug-sh-utils@gnu.org> まで報告してください。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH "関連項目"
.\"O The full documentation for
.\"O .B hostid
.\"O is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.\"O .B info
.\"O and
.\"O .B hostid
.\"O programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.\"O .IP
.\"O .B info hostid
.\"O .PP
.\"O should give you access to the complete manual.
.B hostid
に関する完全なドキュメントは Texinfo マニュアルの形式で管理されている。
.B info
プログラムと
.B hostid
のプログラムが正しくインストールされていれば、
.IP
.B info hostid
.PP
とすることによって完全なマニュアルにアクセスすることが出来る。
.\"O .SH COPYRIGHT
.SH 著作権
Copyright \(co 1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


