.\" apm.1 -- 
.\" Created: Wed Jan 10 14:54:03 1996 by r.faith@ieee.org
.\" Revised: Sun Apr 21 16:37:43 1996 by r.faith@ieee.org
.\" Copyright 1996 Rickard E. Faith (r.faith@ieee.org)
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-2000 Nozomi Ytoh,
.\"   Tanoshima Hidetoshi, NAKANO Takeo and JM Project,
.\"   all rights reserved.
.\" Translated July 1 1997 by Nozomi Ytoh
.\" Updated Feb 18 1998 by Tanoshima Hidetoshi <tano@sainet.or.jp>
.\" Updated Mon 29 May 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH APM 1 "10 Jan 1996" "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O apm \- query Advanced Power Management (APM) BIOS
apm \- Advanced Power Management (APM) BIOS に問い合わせる
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B apm [ \-vVmsS ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B apm
.\"O reads
.\"O .I /proc/apm
.\"O and presents the output in a human-readable format.  Since primarily
.\"O battery status information is provided, this command is most useful on
.\"O laptops with a compliant APM BIOS.
.\"O .B apm
.\"O also allows the machine to be put into standby or suspend mode.
.B apm
は
.I /proc/apm
から情報を読み出して人間にわかる書式で出力する。
基本的には電池の状態が表示されるので、
APM BIOS 準拠のラップトップマシンで大変便利である。
また
.B apm
コマンドを使って、
スタンバイモードやサスペンドモードへ移行することもできる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
.\"O Print the
.\"O .B apm
.\"O program version and exit immediately.
.B apm
プログラムのバージョンを表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
.\"O Print information about the APM BIOS version and Linux APM driver version.
APM BIOS と Linux APM ドライバのバージョン情報を表示する。
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-minutes
.\"O Print total minutes remaining instead of using an hh:mm format.
残り時間を hh:mm 書式ではなく分単位で表す。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-suspend
.\"O Put the machine into suspend mode if possible.
可能であればサスペンドモードに移行する。
.TP
.B \-S, \-\-standby
.\"O Put the machine into standby mode if possible.
可能であればスタンバイモードに移行する。
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-ignore
.\"O Tell the system to ignore system-generated APM suspend and standby events
.\"O when on AC power.  This may be useful to users who have laptops and want
.\"O APM events when on battery power, but not when on AC power.
システムが生成する APM サスペンドイベント・スタンバイイベントを、
AC 電源がオンの時は無視するようにする。
電池駆動のときは APM イベントを有効にしたいが、
AC 電源駆動のときは無効にしたいラップトップユーザーに便利。
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-noignore
.\"O Tell the system 
.\"O .B not 
.\"O to ignore system-generated APM suspend and standby events
.\"O when on AC power.  This is the default mode; this option is provided as a
.\"O way to undo a proir "apm -i" call.
システムが生成する APM サスペンドイベント・スタンバイイベントを、
AC 電源がオンの時も\fB無視しない\fPようにする。
これはデフォルトのモードである。このオプションは、
以前に行った "apm -i" を取り消せるように用意された。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O This program requires a post-1.3.57 kernel.  This program will not work
.\"O with older kernels or with the APM patches, since the format for
.\"O .I /proc/apm
.\"O has changed radically.
このプログラムの動作にはバージョン 1.3.57 以降のカーネルが必要である。
.I /proc/apm
の書式が大幅に変更されているので、
これよりも古いカーネルや APM パッチでは動作しないだろう。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /proc/apm
.br
.I linux/drivers/char/apm_bios.c
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This program was written by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) and may be freely
.\"O distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License.  There is
.\"O ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY for this program.  The current maintainer is Avery
.\"O Pennarun (apenwarr@worldvisions.ca).
このプログラムは Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) によって書かれ、
GNU 一般公共使用許諾のもとで自由に再配布できる。
このプログラムは「完全に無保証」である。現在の管理者は
Avery Pennarun (apenwarr@worldvisions.ca) である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR xapm "(1), "apmd (8)
.BR xapm (1),
.BR apmd (8)
