.\" apmsleep.1
.\" 
.\" This page is a part of apmd-3.0 distribution.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 29 May 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH RTCSLEEP 1 "sleep in APM suspend/standby mode" "APM" \" -*- nroff -*-
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O apmsleep \- go into suspend or standby mode and wake-up later
apmsleep \- サスペンド/スタンバイモードに入り、後で復帰する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B apmsleep
[\-sSnwhVd] [\-\-suspend] [\-\-standby] [\-\-noapm]
[\-\-wait] [\-\-help]  [\-\-version] [\-\-debug]
[+]hh:mm
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Some computers, especially laptops, can wake-up from a low-power suspend
.\"O to DRAM mode using the Real-time-clock (RTC) chip. 
.\"O .B Apmsleep
.\"O can be used to set the alarm time in the RTC and to go into suspend or
.\"O standby mode. An interrupt from the RTC causes the computer to wake-up.
.\"O The program detects this event, by waiting for a leap in the kernel time
.\"O and terminates successfully. If no time leap occurs within one minute, or 
.\"O something goes wrong, the exit value will be non-zero. 
コンピュータの中には (特にラップトップには)、
リアルタイムクロック (RTC) を用いて
低電力サスペンドモードから DRAM モードに復帰できるタイプのものがある。
.B apmsleep
を使うと、RTC の「目覚まし時刻」を設定してから
システムをサスペンドモード・スタンバイモードにすることができる。
RTC からの割り込みがあると、コンピュータは目を覚ます。
このプログラムは、カーネル時刻の不連続な変化 (leap)
を待つことによってこのイベントを検知し、成功を返して終了する。
一分以内に時刻の leap がなかったり、何かまずいことがおこったら、
0 以外の値を返して終了する。
.PP
.\"O The wake-up time can be specified in two formats:
復帰時刻の指定には 2 つの形式がある。
.PP
.B +hh:mm
.\"O specifies a relative offset to the current time. The computer
.\"O will suspend for exactly hh hours and mm minutes plus a few seconds
.\"O to wake up. 
は現在の時刻からの相対的なオフセットを指定する。
コンピュータが復帰するまでには、
hh 時間と mm 分に加えて何秒かが必要となる。
.PP
.B hh:mm
.\"O specifies absolute 
.\"O .B local 
.\"O time in 24-hour format. The time stored in the RTC is not important.
.\"O You may change the time zone used, with
.\"O the TZ environment variable as usual. Daylight saving time is
.\"O not obeyed in this version, but might be in a future release.
は復帰時刻を 24 時間フォーマットの\fBローカル\fP時刻で指定する。
RTC に保存されているのが GMT かそうでないかは気にしなくてよい。
TZ 環境変数でタイムゾーンを変更していても良い。
夏時間はこのバージョンでは考慮していないが、将来は対応する予定である。
.\"nakano: 追加 :-)
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
.\"O Print the
.\"O .B apmsleep
.\"O program version and exit immediately.
.B ampsleep
プログラムのバージョンを表示してただちに終了する。
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-suspend
.\"O Put the machine into suspend mode if possible (default). On my laptop,
.\"O suspend mode turns off everything except the memory. 
可能ならマシンをサスペンドモードにする (デフォルト)。
作者のラップトップでは、サスペンドモードはメモリ以外のすべての電源を遮断する。
.TP
.B \-S, \-\-standby
.\"O Put the machine into standby mode if possible. On my laptop, standby mode
.\"O turns off screen, hard disk, and CPU.
可能ならマシンをスタンバイモードにする。
作者のラップトップでは、スタンバイモードは
スクリーン・ハードディスク・CPU の電源を遮断する。
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-wait
.\"O Wait indefinitely for the time leap.
時刻の leap をいつまでも待ち続ける。
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-noapm
.\"O Do not call /usr/bin/apm to suspend computer, just set the alarm clock
.\"O and wait for time leap. 
コンピュータをサスペンドさせるときに /usr/bin/apm を呼ばない。
アラームクロックを有効にして時刻の leap を待つだけ。
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-debug
.\"O Print some information about what is going on.
何が起こっているのか、情報を表示する。
.\"O .SH REQUIRED SYSTEM CONFIGURATION
.SH 必要となるシステム設定
.TP
.\"O .B Kernel
.B カーネル
.\"O The special character device /dev/rtc must exist and the Linux kernel needs
.\"O to be compiled with APM and RTC support (CONFIG_RTC, and 
.\"O relevant CONFIG_APM* options). 
スペシャル・キャラクタ・デバイス /dev/rtc が存在し、
Linux カーネルを APM と RTC をサポートするように
コンパイルしておかなければならない
(CONFIG_RTC と、適切な CONFIG_APM* オプション)。
.TP
.B BIOS
.\"O The computer must have the 'suspend to RAM'
.\"O feature enabled in the BIOS; 'suspend to Disk' will not work, because the
.\"O computer is turned off completely. You do not need to enable the ALARM
.\"O timer, it will be activated by apmsleep. On some boards, you can configure
.\"O which interrupts can be used to awake from suspend mode. If you have such
.\"O a board, you might want to make sure that keyboard (IRQ 1) and RTC (IRQ 8) 
.\"O are among those interrupts.
BIOS 設定で、コンピュータの "suspend to RAM" 機能を
有効にしておかなければならない。
"suspend to Disk" は動作しない。
これはコンピュータの電源を完全に遮断してしまうからである。
ALARM タイマーは有効にしなくてもよい。これは
.B apmsleep
によって有効にされる。ボードによっては、
サスペンドモードから復帰させる割り込みを選べることもある。
このようなボードを使っている場合は、キーボード (IRQ 1) と
RTC (IRQ 8) がその中に含まれているかを確かめておくと良いだろう。
.TP
.\"O .B Privileges
.B 権限
.\"O The program must be run as root or have the SUID attribute set 
.\"O (see chmod(1)).
このプログラムは root 権限で実行するか、 SUID 属性を設定する必要がある
.RB ( chmod (1)
を見よ)。
.\"O .PP
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Apmsleep cannot detect which event terminated the suspension. Possible
.\"O events are: keyboard or mouse activity, modem ring, alarm from RTC, any
.\"O other interrupt.
.B apmsleep
はどのイベントがサスペンド状態を終了させたかを検知できない。
可能性のあるものは、キーボード・マウスへの入力、モデムへの着信、
RTC からのアラーム、その他あらゆる割り込み、など。

.\"O This program was tested on a Winbook XL laptop (Pentium) only. 
.\"O It may not function on your hardware.
このプログラムは Winbook XL ラップトップ (Pentium) でしかテストされていない。
あなたのハードウェアでは動作しないかもしれない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O Written by Peter Englmaier (ppe@pa.uky.edu) and may be freely
.\"O distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License.  The
.\"O code is based on Paul Gortmacher's RTC test/example program.  There is
.\"O ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY for this program.  The current maintainer is
.\"O Peter Englmaier.
このプログラムは Peter Englmaier (ppe@pa.uky.edu) によって書かれ、
GNU 一般公共使用許諾のもとで自由に再配布できる。
このコードは Paul Gortmacher の RTC テスト/例示プログラムを元にしている。
このプログラムは「完全に無保証」である。現在の管理者は
Peter Englmaier である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR xapm "(1), "apmd (8), rtc.txt "(Linux Kernel Documentation)"
.BR xapm (1),
.BR apmd (8),
.BR rtc.txt " (Linux Kernel Documentation)"
