.\" tailf.1 -- 
.\" Created: Thu Jan 11 16:43:10 1996 by r.faith@ieee.org
.\" Revised: Thu Jan 11 16:47:21 1996 by r.faith@ieee.org
.\" Copyright 1996 Rickard E. Faith (r.faith@ieee.org)
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 29 May 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH TAILF 1 "11 Jan 1996" "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O tailf \- follow the growth of a log file
tailf \- ログファイルの追加分を追跡する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.BI tailf " file"
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B tailf
.\"O will print out the last 10 lines of a file and then wait for the file to
.\"O grow.  It is similar to
.\"O .B tail -f
.\"O but does not access the file when it is not growing.  This has the side
.\"O effect of not updating the access time for the file, so a filesystem flush
.\"O does not occur periodically when no log activity is happening.
.B tailf
はファイルの末尾 10 行を表示し、その後ファイルに追加される行を待ち続ける。
.B tailf
は
.B tail -f
と似ているが、ファイルへの追加書き込みがないとファイルへアクセスを行わない。
したがってファイルのアクセス時間は更新されないので、
ログに関る動作が起らない間は、定期的なファイルシステムのフラッシュも生じない。
.PP
.\"O .B tailf
.\"O is extremely useful for monitoring log files on a laptop when logging is
.\"O infrequent and the user desires that the hard disk spin down to conserve
.\"O battery life.
.B tailf
は、ラップトップで、あまり頻繁に書き込まれない状態のログファイルを
監視にする場合に大変便利である。
ハードディスクをスピンダウンさせ、電池を長持ちさせることができる。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O An option could be provided to print out the last
.\"O .I n
.\"O lines instead of the last 10.
末尾の行を 10 行でなく
.I n
行表示したい場合のオプションが必要である。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This program was written by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) and may be freely
.\"O distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License.  There is
.\"O ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY for this program.  The current maintainer is Avery
.\"O Pennarun (apenwarr@worldvisions.ca).
このプログラムは Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) によって書かれ、
GNU 一般公共使用許諾のもとで自由に再配布できる。
このプログラムは「完全に無保証」である。現在の管理者は
Avery Pennarun (apenwarr@worldvisions.ca) である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR syslogd "(8), " apmd (8)
.BR syslogd (1),
.BR apmd (8)

