.\" xapm.1 -- 
.\" Created: Thu Jan 11 16:29:49 1996 by r.faith@ieee.org
.\" Revised: Sun Apr 21 16:37:42 1996 by r.faith@ieee.org
.\" Copyright 1996 Rickard E. Faith (r.faith@ieee.org)
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-2000 Nozomi Ytoh,
.\"   Tanoshima Hidetoshi, NAKANO Takeo and JM Project,
.\"   all rights reserved.
.\" Translated July 1 1997 by Nozomi Ytoh
.\" Updated Feb 18 1998 by Tanoshima Hidetoshi <tano@sainet.or.jp>
.\" Updated Mon 29 May 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH XAPM 1 "11 Jan 1996" "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O xapm \- display Advanced Power Management (APM) BIOS information
xapm \- Advanced Power Management (APM) BIOS の情報を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B xapm [ ... ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B xapm
.\"O puts up an X window that displays the remaining battery life.  The left
.\"O side of the window contains a printed time or percentage, and the right
.\"O side of the window contains a bar indicating the percentage.  Clicking on
.\"O the left side of the window will toggle the display between time and
.\"O percent.
.B xapm
はバッテリーの残量を表示するウィンドウを X 上に開く。
ウィンドウの左側に残り時間または残り容量のパーセンテージが、
右側にパーセンテージを示す棒グラフが表示される。
ウィンドウの左側をクリックすると残り時間と残り容量の表示が切り替わる。
.\"O .SH "OPTIONS AND RESOURCES"
.SH オプションとリソース
.\"O In addition to standard Xt options, the following options are available:
Xt (X ツールキット) の標準的オプションの他に以下のオプションがある。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Print version and exit.
バージョンを表示して終了する。
.TP
.BI \-highcolor " color"
.\"O The color of the bar when the battery percentage is above
.\"O .IR highvalue .
.\"O Defaults to "green". (*highColor)
バッテリーの残り容量が
.IR highvalue 
よりも多いときの棒グラフの色。デフォルトは緑。 (*highColor)
.TP
.BI \-lowcolor " color"
.\"O The color of the bar when the battery percentage is between
.\"O .I lowvalue
.\"O and
.\"O .IR highvalue .
.\"O Defaults to "yellow". (*lowColor)
バッテリーの残り容量が
.I lowvalue
と
.IR highvalue 
の間にあるときの棒グラフの色。デフォルトは黄色。(*lowColor)
.TP
.BI \-criticalcolor " color"
.\"O The color of the bar when the battery percentage is below
.\"O .IR lowvalue .
.\"O Defaults to "red".  This color is also used to flash the alphanumeric part
.\"O of the display when the power status is critical. (*criticalCOlor)
バッテリーの残り容量が
.IR lowvalue 
よりも少ないときの棒グラフの色。デフォルトは赤。
この色は電力状態が臨界になったときに数字部分を点滅させるのにも使われる。
(*criticalCOlor)
.TP
.BI \-highvalue " highvalue"
.\"O Set
.\"O .IR highvalue .
.\"O The default is 50. (*highValue)
.IR highvalue 
の値を指定する。デフォルトは 50。(*highValue)
.TP
.BI \-lowvalue " lowvalue"
.\"O Set
.\"O .IR lowvalue .
.\"O The default is 10. (*lowValue)
.IR lowvalue .
の値を指定する。デフォルトは 10。(*lowValue)
.TP
.BI \-chargingcolor " color"
.\"O The color of the printed display when charging.  The default is
.\"O "blue".  Use
.\"O .B \-foreground
.\"O to change the color used when on battery power. (*chargingColor)
充電中に表示される数字の色。デフォルトは青。
色を変えるには
.B \-foreground
を使う。 (*chargingColor)
.TP
.BI \-delay " delay"
.\"O Sets the number of seconds delay between each update.  The default is
.\"O 1. (*delay)
表示を更新する時間間隔を秒単位で与える。デフォルトは 1 秒。
(*delay)
.TP
.B \-percent
.\"O Display percentage on startup, instead of time remaining. (*percent, boolean)
起動時から、残り時間でなくパーセント表示する。(*percent, boolean)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O There is no way to inhibit the alphanumeric display or the bar display.
.\"O When the battery percentage is low, using a bright color to warn you of
.\"O impending doom may be futile because the bar is too short.  Because of the
.\"O form widget's desire to maintain proportions, dynamic resizing of the
.\"O window may not do what you want it to do.
数字表示あるいは棒グラフのいずれかを抑止する方法はない。
バッテリー残量が少なくなると棒グラフが短くなるので、
明るい色を使って死にそうだと告げても無駄かもしれない。
form ウィジットは縦横の比率を保存しようとするので、
ウィンドウのサイズを変更しても望むようにはならないかもしれない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /proc/apm
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O This program was written by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) and may be freely
.\"O distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License.  There is
.\"O ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY for this program.  The current maintainer is Avery
.\"O Pennarun (apenwarr@worldvisions.ca).
このプログラムは Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) によって書かれ、
GNU 一般公共使用許諾のもとで自由に再配布できる。
このプログラムは「完全に無保証」である。現在の管理者は
Avery Pennarun (apenwarr@worldvisions.ca) である。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O .BR apm "(1), "apmd (8)
.BR apm (1),
.BR apmd (8)
