.\" Mark Lord (C) 1994-2004 -- freely distributable
.\"
.\" Japanese version copyright (c) 2005 Tatsuo Sekine
.\"     All rights reserved
.\" 
.\" Translated on Fri May  4 22:14:24 AEDT 2005
.\"     by Tatsuo Sekine <tsekine@sdri.co.jp>
.\"WORD: defect management 不良セクタ管理
.TH HDPARM 8 "February 2005" "Version 5.9"
.\"O 
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O hdparm \- get/set hard disk parameters
hdparm \- ハードディスクのパラメータを設定・取得する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B hdparm
[ flags ] [device] ..
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
[訳注: 原文はオプションが増えるたびにその部分だけ加筆されているらしく、
「現代の」という語の起点となる『現在』が古かったり新しかったりするが、
基本的にはすべてやや古い話である。hdparm による操作は多大な影響を及ぼ
すので、他の情報源も参照して慎重に利用すること(2005年3月)]

.\"O .BI hdparm
.\"O provides a command line interface to various hard disk ioctls
.\"O supported by the stock Linux ATA/IDE device driver subsystem.
.B hdparm
は標準的な Linux の ATA/IDE デバイスドライバでサポートされる
色々なハードディスクの ioctl への、コマンドラインインタフェースを提供する。
.\"O Some options may work correctly only with the latest kernels.
.\"O For best results, compile hdparm with the include files from the latest kernel source code.
いくつかのオプションは、最新のカーネルでしか正しく動作しない。
最良の結果を得たいなら、最新のカーネルソースのインクルードファイルを使って
hdparm をコンパイルすること。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.\"O When no flags are given,
.\"O .I -acdgkmnru
.\"O is assumed.
何のフラグも指定されていない場合には
.I \-acdgkmnru
が指定されたとみなす。
.TP
.\"O .I -a 
.I \-a 
.\"O Get/set sector count for filesystem read-ahead.  This is used to improve
.\"O performance in sequential reads of large files, by prefetching additional
.\"O blocks in anticipation of them being needed by the running task.
ファイルシステムの先読みセクタ数を取得・設定する。
実行中のタスクから必要となる追加のブロックを予想、プリフェッチすることで、
大きなファイルのシーケンシャル読み出しの性能を改善するのに用いられる。
.\"O In the current kernel version (2.0.10) this has a default setting
.\"O of 8 sectors (4KB).  This value seems good for most purposes,
.\"O but in a system where most file accesses are random seeks,
.\"O a smaller setting might provide better performance.
現在のカーネルバージョン(2.0.10)では、デフォルトは 8 セクタ(4KB)である。
このデフォルト値は多くの場合は問題ないが、多くのファイルがランダムアクセス
であるようなシステムでは、もっと小さな設定の方が良い性能を出すだろう。
.\"O Also, many IDE drives also have a separate built-in read-ahead function,
.\"O which alleviates the need for a filesystem read-ahead in many situations.
また多くの IDE ドライブでは先読み機構を内蔵しており、
これは多くの場合、ファイルシステムでの先読みの代わりとなる。
.TP
.\"O .I -A
.I \-A
.\"O Disable/enable the IDE drive's read-lookahead feature (usually ON by default).
IDE ドライブの先読み機能を無効・有効にする(普通は ON がデフォルト)。
.\"O Usage:
.\"O .B -A0
.\"O (disable) or
.\"O .B -A1
.\"O (enable).
使い方:
.B \-A0
(無効にする)または
.B \-A1
(有効にする)。
.TP
.\"O .I -b
.I \-b
.\"O Get/set bus state.
バスの状態を取得・設定する。
.TP
.\"O .I -B
.I \-B
.\"O Set Advanced Power Management feature, if the drive supports it. A low value
.\"O means aggressive power management and a high value means better performance. A value of 255 will disable apm on the drive.
ドライバがサポートしていれば、APM(advanced Power Management)
機能を設定する。
低い値は積極的な電源管理を意味し、高い値はパフォーマンス優先を意味する。
255 という値は、そのドライブでの APM を無効にする。
.TP
.\"O .I -c
.I \-c
.\"O Query/enable (E)IDE 32-bit I/O support.  A numeric parameter can be
.\"O used to enable/disable 32-bit I/O support:
(E)IDE の 32 ビット I/O サポートを取得・設定する。
32 ビット I/O サポートを有効・無効にするには、以下の数値が用いられる。
.\"O Currently supported values include
.\"O .I 0
.\"O to disable 32-bit I/O support,
.\"O .I 1
.\"O to enable 32-bit data transfers, and
.\"O .I 3
.\"O to enable 32-bit data transfers with a special
.\"O .I sync
.\"O sequence required by many chipsets.  The value
.\"O .I 3
.\"O works with nearly all
.\"O 32-bit IDE chipsets, but incurs slightly more overhead.

.PD 0
.RS
.TP 3n
.I 0
32 ビット I/O サポートを無効にする
.TP 3n
.I 1
32 ビットデータ転送を有効にする
.TP 3n
.I 3
多くのチップセットで必要とされる、特別な
.I sync
シーケンスを使った 32 ビットデータ転送を有効にする
.RE
.PD

.IP
ほぼ全ての 32 ビット IDE チップセットで
.I 3
は有効であるが、ほんの少しだけオーバーヘッドがある。
.\"O Note that "32-bit" refers to data transfers across a PCI or VLB bus to the
.\"O interface card only; all (E)IDE drives still have only a 16-bit connection
.\"O over the ribbon cable from the interface card.
"32 ビット" とは、PCI または VLB バスとインタフェースカードとの間の
データ転送についてである。
すべての (E)IDE ドライブは、いまだにインタフェースからリボンケーブルを通る
16 ビット接続しか持たない。
.TP
.\"O .I -C
.I \-C
.\"O Check the current IDE power mode status, which will always be one of
.\"O .B unknown
.\"O (drive does not support this command),
.\"O .B active/idle
.\"O (normal operation),
.\"O .B standby
.\"O (low power mode, drive has spun down),
.\"O or
.\"O .B sleeping
.\"O (lowest power mode, drive is completely shut down).
現在の IDE 電源モード状況を調べる。
これは必ず、
.B unkown
(ドライブはこのコマンドをサポートしない)、
.B active/idel
(通常の動作)、
.B standby
(低電力モード、ドライブはスピンダウンしている)、
.B sleeping
(最小電力モード、ドライブは完全に停止している)
のうちのいずれかである。
.\"O The
.\"O .B -S, -y, -Y,
.\"O and
.\"O .B -Z
.\"O flags can be used to manipulate the IDE power modes.
フラグ
.BR \-S ,
.BR \-y ,
.BR \-Y ,
.B \-Z
は IDE 電源モードを操作するのに用いられる。
.TP
.\"O .I -d
.I \-d
.\"O Disable/enable the "using_dma" flag for this drive.  This option now works
.\"O with most combinations of drives and PCI interfaces which support DMA
.\"O and which are known to the kernel IDE driver.
ドライブの "using_dma" フラグを無効/有効にする。
現在このオプションは、ドライブと DMA をサポートした
(カーネルの IDE ドライバが認識する)PCI インタフェース
とのほとんどの組み合わせで動作する。
.\"O It is also a good idea to use the appropriate
.\"O .I -X
.\"O option in combination with
.\"O .I -d1
.\"O to ensure that the drive itself is programmed for the correct DMA mode,
.\"O although most BIOSs should do this for you at boot time.
正しい DMA モードがドライブ自身にプログラムされることを
確実にするために、
.I \-d1
オプションと共に適切な
.I \-X
オプションを使用するのはよい考えである。
ただし、これは多くの BIOS が起動時に実行してくれることである。
.\"O Using DMA nearly always gives the best performance,
.\"O with fast I/O throughput and low CPU usage.
DMA の使用は、ほとんどいつでも、高速な I/O スループットと
低い CPU 使用率によって、最高のパフォーマンスを提供してくれる。
.\"O But there are at least a few configurations of chipsets and drives
.\"O for which DMA does not make much of a difference, or may even slow
.\"O things down (on really messed up hardware!).  Your mileage may vary.
しかし、少なくともいくつかのチップセットとドライブの設定では、
DMA が大きな違いを見せず、(本当に間違ったハードウェア上では)
遅くなることもある。
効果は様々である。
.TP
.\"O .I -D
.I \-D
.\"O Enable/disable the on-drive defect management feature,
.\"O whereby the drive firmware tries to automatically manage
.\"O defective sectors by relocating them to "spare" sectors
.\"O reserved by the factory for such.
ドライブ上の不良セクタ管理機能を有効/無効にする。
有効にすると、ドライブのファームウェアは、不良セクタを
工場設定された予約"スペア"領域に自動的に再配置しようと試みる。
.TP
.\"O .I -E
.I \-E
.\"O Set cdrom speed.  This is NOT necessary for regular operation,
.\"O as the drive will automatically switch speeds on its own.
.\"O But if you want to play with it, just supply a speed number
.\"O after the option, usually a number like 2 or 4.
CDROM のスピードを設定する。
ドライブはそれ自身で自動的に速度を変更するものなので、
通常の操作では必要ない。
しかし、それで遊びたいなら、2 や 4 といったような数字を
オプションの後に指定すること。
.TP
.\"O .I -f
.I \-f
.\"O Sync and flush the buffer cache for the device on exit.
終了時に、デバイスのバッファキャッシュを同期、消去する。
.\"O This operation is also performed as part of the
.\"O .I -t
.\"O and
.\"O .I -T
.\"O timings.
この操作は、
.I \-t
および
.I \-T
のタイミングでも実行される。
.TP
.\"O .I -g
.I \-g
.\"O Display the drive geometry (cylinders, heads, sectors),
.\"O the size (in sectors) of the device,
.\"O and the starting offset (in sectors) of the device from
.\"O the beginning of the drive.
ドライブのジオメトリ(シリンダ数、ヘッダ数、セクタ数)、
デバイスのサイズ(セクタ数)、デバイスのドライブ先頭からの
開始オフセット(セクタ数)を表示する。
.\"tsekine: ドライブ/デバイスが混在しているのは、/dev/hda1 のような
.\"tsekine: デバイスを指定した場合のこと。
.TP
.\"O .I -h
.I \-h
.\"O Display terse usage information (help).
簡単な使用方法(ヘルプ)を表示する。
.TP
.\"O .I -i
.I \-i
.\"O Display the identification info that was obtained from the drive at
.\"O .I boot time,
.\"O if available.
.I 起動時に
取得した識別情報を表示する。
.\"O This is a feature of modern IDE drives,
.\"O and may not be supported by older devices.
.\"O The data returned may or may not be current, depending on activity
.\"O since booting the system.
この機能は、現在の IDE のものであり、古いデバイスではサポート
されていないかもしれない。
返されるデータは現在のものかもしれないし、そうでないかもしれない。
どちらになるかは、システム起動後の行動による。
.\"O However, the current multiple sector mode count is always shown.
.\"O For a more detailed interpretation of the identification info,
.\"O refer to
.\"O .I AT Attachment Interface for Disk Drives
.\"O (ANSI ASC X3T9.2 working draft, revision 4a, April 19/93).
ただし複数セクタモードカウントは、いつでも現在のものが表示される。
識別情報の説明についての詳細は、
.I AT Attachment Interface for Disk Drives
(ANSI ASC X3T9.2 working draft, revision 4a, April 19/93)
を参照のこと。
.TP
.\"O .I -I
.I \-I
.\"O Request identification info directly from the drive,
.\"O which is displayed in a new expanded format with considerably
.\"O more detail than with the older
.\"O .I -i
.\"O flag.
直接ドライブに識別情報を要求する。
結果は、古い
.I \-i
フラグと比べるとかなり詳細で、新しい拡張されたフォーマットで表示される。
.TP
.\"O .I -Istdin
.I \-Istdin
.\"O This is a special "no seatbelts" variation on the
.\"O .B -I
.\"O option,
.\"O which accepts a drive identification block as standard input
.\"O instead of using a /dev/hd* parameter.
これは
.B \-I
オプションの特別な "シートベルトなし" の変形で、
/dev/hd* パラメータを使う代わりに、標準入力から
ドライブ識別ブロックを受け付ける。
.\"O The format of this block must be
.\"O .I exactly
.\"O the same as that found in the /proc/ide/*/hd*/identify "files",
.\"O or that produced by the
.\"O .B -Istdout
.\"O option described below.
このブロックのフォーマットは、
/proc/ide/*/hd*/identify "ファイル" から得られるものか、
次に示す
.B \-Istdout
オプションが生成するものと
.I 正確に
同じものでなければならない。
.\"O This variation is designed for use with collected "libraries" of drive
.\"O identification information, and can also be used on ATAPI
.\"O drives which may give media errors with the standard mechanism.
この変形版は、ドライブ識別情報の "ライブラリ" 集合と共に
使用するよう設計されており、また標準メカニズムでは
メディアエラーになってしまう ATAPI ドライブに使用することもできる。
.TP
.\"O .I -Istdout
.I \-Istdout
.\"O This option simply dumps the identify data in hex to stdout,
.\"O in a format similar to that from /proc/, and suitable for
.\"O later use with the
.\"O .I -Istdin
.\"O option.
単純に、識別データを標準出力に 16進でダンプする。
フォーマットは /proc/ から得られるものに似ており、
後で
.I \-Istdin
オプションを使うのに適している。
.TP
.\"O .I -k
.I \-k
.\"O Get/set the keep_settings_over_reset flag for the drive.
.\"O When this flag is set, the driver will preserve the
.\"O .I -dmu
.\"O options over a soft reset, (as done during the error recovery sequence).
ドライブの keep_settings_over_reset フラグを取得・設定する。
このフラグがセットされた場合、ドライブは
(エラー回復手順の間に実行される)ソフトリセット後も
.I \-dmu
オプションを保持しようとする。
.\"O This flag defaults to off,
.\"O to prevent drive reset loops which could be caused by combinations of
.\"O .I -dmu
.\"O settings.  The
.\"O .I -k
.\"O flag should therefore only be set after one has achieved confidence in
.\"O correct system operation with a chosen set of configuration settings.
このフラグはデフォルトではオフになっている。
なぜなら、\-dmu の組み合わせが原因で発生する、
ドライブのリセットループを避けるためである。
したがって、選んだ設定の組み合わせでシステムが
正しく動作するという確信を持てる場合にのみ
.I \-k
フラグを設定すべきである。
.\"O In practice, all that is typically necessary to test a configuration
.\"O (prior to using -k) is to verify that the drive can be read/written,
.\"O and that no error logs (kernel messages) are generated in the process
.\"O (look in /var/adm/messages on most systems).
実際には、(\-k オプションを使う前に) 設定のテストとして
通常行っておくべきことは、ドライブに読み書きできるか、
その処理中に (カーネルの) エラーログが生成されていないかを
確認することくらいである。
.TP
.\"O .I -K
.I \-K
.\"O Set the drive's keep_features_over_reset flag.  Setting this enables
.\"O the drive to retain the settings for
.\"O .I -APSWXZ
.\"O over a soft reset (as done during the error recovery sequence).
ドライブの keep_settings_over_reset フラグを取得、設定する。
このフラグがセットされた場合、ドライブは
(エラー回復手順の間に実行される)ソフトリセット後も
.I \-APSWXZ
オプションを保持しようとする。
.\"O Not all drives support this feature.
すべてのドライブがこの機能をサポートするわけではない。
.TP
.\"O .I -L
.I \-L
.\"O Set the drive's doorlock flag.  Setting this to
.\"O .B 1
.\"O will lock the door mechanism of some removable hard drives
.\"O (eg. Syquest, ZIP, Jazz..), and setting it to
.\"O .B 0
.\"O will unlock the door mechanism.  Normally, Linux
.\"O maintains the door locking mechanism automatically, depending on drive usage
.\"O (locked whenever a filesystem is mounted).  But on system shutdown, this can
.\"O be a nuisance if the root partition is on a removeable disk, since the root
.\"O partition is left mounted (read-only) after shutdown.  So, by using this
.\"O command to unlock the door
.\"O .B after
.\"O the root filesystem is remounted read-only, one can then remove the cartridge
.\"O from the drive after shutdown.
ドライブのドアロックフラグを設定する。
これを
.B 1
にセットすると、ある種のリムーバブルなドライブ
(例えば Syquest, ZIP Jazz など)でドア機構をロックし、
.B 0
にセットするとドア機構のロックを解除する。
普通、Linux はドライブの使用
(ファイルシステムがマウントされている時にはいつもロックする)
に応じてドアロック機構を自動的に維持しようとする。
しかしルートパーティションがリムーバルディスク上にある場合には、
ルートパーティションはシャットダウン後も(リードオンリーで)
マウントされたままなので、この仕組みはシャットダウン時には
迷惑なものになる。
よって、ルートファイルシステムがリードオンリーで再マウントされた
.B 後に
このコマンドを使ってドアロックを解除すれば、シャットダウン後に
カートリッジをドライブから取り出すことができる。
.TP
.\"O .I -m
.I \-m
.\"O Get/set sector count for multiple sector I/O on the drive.  A setting of
.\"O .B 0
.\"O disables this feature.  Multiple sector mode (aka IDE Block Mode), is a feature
.\"O of most modern IDE hard drives, permitting the transfer of multiple sectors per
.\"O I/O interrupt, rather than the usual one sector per interrupt.  When this
.\"O feature is enabled, it typically reduces operating system overhead for disk
.\"O I/O by 30-50%.  On many systems, it also provides increased data throughput
.\"O of anywhere from 5% to 50%.  Some drives, however
.\"O (most notably the WD Caviar series),
.\"O seem to run slower with multiple mode enabled.  Your mileage may vary.
ドライブの複数セクタ I/O のセクタ数を取得・設定する。
.B 0
に設定すると、この機能を無効にする。複数セクタモード
(これは IDE ブロックモードとしても知られる)は現在のほとんどの
IDEハードドライブが持つ機能で、一つの I/O 割り込みで一つのセクタではなく、
一つの I/O 割り込みで複数のセクタの転送を可能にする。
この機能を有効にすると、典型的には、ディスク I/O に対する
オペレーティングシステムのオーバーヘッドを 30% から 50% 減らす。
また、多くのシステムではデータのスループットを 5% から 50%
向上させる。
しかしいくつかのドライブ(特に WD Caviar シリーズ)では、
複数セクタモードを有効にすると遅くなるように見える。
効果は様々である。
.\"O Most drives support the minimum settings of
.\"O 2, 4, 8, or 16 (sectors).  Larger settings may also be possible, depending on
.\"O the drive.  A setting of 16 or 32 seems optimal on many systems.
.\"O Western Digital recommends lower settings of 4 to 8 on many of their drives,
.\"O due tiny (32kB) drive buffers and non-optimized buffering algorithms.
多くのドライブでは、最低限の設定である 2, 4, 8, 16(セクタ)をサポート
する。ドライブによるが、さらに大きな設定も可能かもしれない。
多くのシステムでは、16 または 32 が最適のようである。
多くの Western Digital のドライブでは、その小さなドライブバッファ(32kB)と
最適化されていないバッファアルゴリズムのせいで、
4 から 8 という小さな値が推奨されている。
.\"O The
.\"O .B -i
.\"O flag can be used to find the maximum setting supported by an installed drive
.\"O (look for MaxMultSect in the output).
.\"O Some drives claim to support multiple mode, but lose data at some settings.
.\"O Under rare circumstances, such failures can result in
.\"O .B massive filesystem corruption.
ドライブの最大値を見つけるのには、
.B \-i
フラグが使用できる(出力の MaxMultSect を参照のこと)。
あるドライブでは、複数モードをサポートしていると主張するものの、
設定によってはデータを失ってしまう。
まれな状況の下では、そのような失敗は
.B 大量のファイルシステムの不正
を生む結果となる。
.TP
.\"O .I -M
.I \-M
.\"O Get/set Automatic Acoustic Management (AAM) setting. Most modern harddisk drives 
.\"O have the ability to speed down the head movements to reduce their noise output.
自動音響管理(Automatic Acoustic Management; AAM)を取得・設定する。
現在のほとんどのハードディスクドライブは動作音を低減させるために
ヘッド動作をスピードダウンさせる能力を持つ。
.\"O The possible values are between 0 and 254. 128 is the most quiet (and therefore
.\"O slowest) setting and 254 the fastest (and loudest). Some drives have only two 
.\"O levels (quiet / fast), while others may have different levels between 128 and 254.
.\"O .B THIS FEATURE IS EXPERIMENTAL AND NOT WELL TESTED. USE AT YOUR OWN RISK.
指定可能な値は 0 から 254 である。
128 が最も静かで(よって最も遅く)、254 が最も速い(そして最もうるさい)。
あるドライブでは(静音・高速の) 2 つのレベルしか持たないが、
他のものは 128 から 254 の間で異なるレベルを持つ。
.B この機能は実験的なもので、あまりよくはテストされていない。
.B 自己責任で使用すること。
.TP
.\"O .I -n
.I \-n
.\"O Get or set the "ignore write errors" flag in the driver.
.\"O Do NOT play with this without grokking the driver source code first.
ドライブの "ignore write errors" フラグを設定・取得する。
ドライバーのソースコードを把握することなしに、このフラグで遊ばないこと。
.TP
.\"O .I -p
.I \-p
.\"O Attempt to reprogram the IDE interface chipset for the specified PIO mode,
.\"O or attempt to auto-tune for the "best" PIO mode supported by the drive.
指定した PIO モードに IDE チップセットインタフェースを再プログラムする
よう試みるか、またはドライブがサポートする "最良の" PIO モードに
自動設定しようと試みる。
.\"O This feature is supported in the kernel for only a few "known" chipsets,
.\"O and even then the support is iffy at best.  Some IDE chipsets are unable
.\"O to alter the PIO mode for a single drive, in which case this flag may cause
.\"O the PIO mode for
.\"O .I both
.\"O drives to be set.  Many IDE chipsets support either fewer or more than the
.\"O standard six (0 to 5) PIO modes, so the exact speed setting that is actually
.\"O implemented will vary by chipset/driver sophistication.
この機能は少数の "知られた" チップセットでのみカーネルで
サポートされており、そのサポートもよくて不確実なものである。
ある IDE チップセットでは、一つのドライブに対して PIO モードを
変更することができず、その場合は、このフラグは
.I 両方の
ドライブに設定される。
多くの IDE チップセットがサポートするモードは、標準の 6 個(0 から 5)の
PIO モードより多かったり少なかったりするので、実際に実装されている
正確な速度設定は、チップセット・ドライバの性格によって様々である。
.\"O .I Use with extreme caution!
.\"O This feature includes zero protection for the unwary,
.\"O and an unsuccessful outcome may result in
.\"O .I severe filesystem corruption!
.I 最大の注意を払って使用すること!
この機能は不注意からは何も守ってくれず、また実行の失敗は
.I 深刻なファイルシステムの不正
をもたらすであろう。
.TP
.\"O .I -P
.I \-P
.\"O Set the maximum sector count for the drive's internal prefetch mechanism.
.\"O Not all drives support this feature.
ドライブ内部のプリフェッチ機構の、最大セクタ数を設定する。
すべてのドライブがこの機能をサポートするわけではない。
.TP
.\"O .I -q
.I \-q
.\"O Handle the next flag quietly, suppressing normal output.  This is useful
.\"O for reducing screen clutter when running from system startup scripts.
その次に来るフラグに対し、通常の出力を抑止する。
システム起動スクリプトから実行するときに、画面が混乱するのを減らすのに
便利である。
.\"O Not applicable to the
.\"O .I -i
.\"O or
.\"O .I -v
.\"O or
.\"O .I -t
.\"O or
.\"O .I -T
.\"O flags.
.IR -i ,
.IR -v ,
.IR -t ,
.I -T
フラグには適用できない。
.TP
.\"O .I -Q
.I \-Q
.\"O Set tagged queue depth (1 or greater), or turn tagged queuing off (0).
.\"O This only works with the newer 2.5.xx (or later) kernels, and only with
.\"O the few drives that currently support it.
タグ付きキューの深さを設定する(1以上)、
またはタグ付きキューを無効にする(0)。
これは 2.5.xx(以降)のカーネルで動作し、またこれを現在サポートしている
少数のドライブで動作する。
.TP
.\"O .I -r
.I \-r
.\"O Get/set read-only flag for the device.  When set, Linux disallows write operations on the device.
デバイスのリードオンリーフラグを設定・取得する。
フラグをセットすると、Linux はデバイスへの書き込み操作を許可しない。
.TP
.\"O .I -R
.I \-R
.\"O Register an IDE interface.
.\"O .B Dangerous.
.\"O See the
.\"O .B -U
.\"O option for more information.
IDE インタフェースを登録する。
\fB危険\fPである。
さらなる情報につては
.B \-U
オプションを参照のこと。
.TP
.\"O .I -S
.I \-S
.\"O Set the standby (spindown) timeout for the drive.  This value is used
.\"O by the drive to determine how long to wait (with no disk activity)
.\"O before turning off the spindle motor to save power.  Under such
.\"O circumstances, the drive may take as long as 30 seconds to respond to
.\"O a subsequent disk access, though most drives are much quicker.  The
.\"O encoding of the timeout value is somewhat peculiar.  A value of zero
.\"O means "timeouts are disabled": the device will not automatically enter
.\"O standby mode.  Values from 1 to 240 specify multiples of 5 seconds,
.\"O yielding timeouts from 5 seconds to 20 minutes.  Values from 241 to
.\"O 251 specify from 1 to 11 units of 30 minutes, yielding timeouts from
.\"O 30 minutes to 5.5 hours.  A value of 252 signifies a timeout of 21
.\"O minutes. A value of 253 sets a vendor-defined timeout period between 8
.\"O and 12 hours, and the value 254 is reserved.  255 is interpreted as 21
.\"O minutes plus 15 seconds.  Note that some older drives may have very
.\"O different interpretations of these values.
ドライブのスタンバイ(スピンダウン)タイムアウトを設定する。
電力を節約するためにスピンドルモーターを停止するまでに、
どれだけ長く(ディスク動作のない状態を)待つかを
ドライブが決定するのにこの値が使用される。
そのような状況下では、次のディスクアクセスには 30 秒以内に反応するはずだ。
ほとんどのドライブはもっと速く反応する。
タイムアウト値の符号化はちょっと変わっている。
.P
.RS
.PD 0
.IP ・ 3
値 0 は "タイムアウトは無効" を意味し、スタンバイモードに自動的には
移行しない。
.IP ・
値が 1 から 240 の場合は、5 秒の倍数の指定になり、
タイムアウトは 5 秒から 20 分になる。
.IP ・
値 241 から 251 は、30 分単位の 1 から 11 の指定になり、
タイムアウトは 30 分から 5.5 時間になる。
.IP ・
値 252 は 21 分を意味する。
.IP ・
値 253 はベンダ定義のタイムアウトで、8 分から 12 時間の間のいずれかである。
.IP ・
値 254 は予約されている。
.IP ・
値 255 は、21 分 15 秒を意味する。
.PD
.P
いくつかの古いドライブでは、これらの値に対して全く異なる解釈をするので
注意して欲しい。
.RE
.TP
.\"O .I -T
.I \-T
.\"O Perform timings of cache reads for benchmark and comparison purposes.
.\"O For meaningful results, this operation should be repeated 2-3 times
.\"O on an otherwise inactive system (no other active processes) with at
.\"O least a couple of megabytes of free memory.  This displays the speed
.\"O of reading directly from the Linux buffer cache without disk access.
ベンチマーク及び比較目的で、キャッシュ読み込みを測定する。
有意な結果を得るためには、少なくとも数メガバイトの空きメモリがあり、
他にアクティブなプロセスがない状態で、この操作を 2, 3 回
繰り返すべきである。
これは、ディスクアクセスなしに、Linux のバッファキャッシュから直接
読み出す速度を表示する。
.\"O This measurement is essentially an indication of the throughput of the
.\"O processor, cache, and memory of the system under test.
これは、テスト環境下でのプロセッサ・キャッシュ・メモリの
基本的な処理能力を測定するものである。
.\"O If the
.\"O .I -t
.\"O flag is also specified, then a correction factor based on the outcome of
.\"O .I -T
.\"O will be incorporated into the result reported for the
.\"O .I -t
.\"O operation.
.I \-t
フラグが同時に指定された場合には、
.I \-T
の出力を元にした補正係数が
.I \-t
操作の結果に加味される。
.TP
.\"O .I -t
.I \-t
.\"O Perform timings of device reads for benchmark and comparison purposes.
.\"O For meaningful results, this operation should be repeated 2-3 times on
.\"O an otherwise inactive system (no other active processes) with at least a
.\"O couple of megabytes of free memory.  This displays the speed of reading
.\"O through the buffer cache to the disk without any prior caching of data.
ベンチマーク及び比較目的で、デバイス読み込みを測定する。
有意な結果を得るためには、少なくとも数メガバイトの空きメモリがあり、
他にアクティブなプロセスがない状態で、この操作を 2, 3 回
繰り返すべきである。
これはデータのキャッシュがない状態から、バッファキャッシュを通して
ディスクを読み出す速度を表示する。
.\"O This measurement is an indication of how fast the drive can sustain
.\"O sequential data reads under Linux, without any filesystem overhead.  To
.\"O ensure accurate measurements, the buffer cache is flushed during the
.\"O processing of
.\"O .I -t
.\"O using the BLKFLSBUF ioctl.
これは、ファイルシステムのオーバーヘッドなしに、そのドライブが Linux で
どれだけ連続データ読み込み速度を維持できるかを測定するものである。
測定の正確さを上げたいのであれば、
.I \-t
の実行の間に BLKFLSBUF ioctl を使ってバッファキャッシュをクリアする。
.\"O If the
.\"O .I -T
.\"O flag is also specified, then a correction factor based on the outcome of
.\"O .I -T
.\"O will be incorporated into the result reported for the
.\"O .I -t
.\"O operation.
.I \-T
フラグが同時に指定された場合には、
.I \-T
の出力を元にした補正係数が
.I \-t
操作の結果に加味される。
.TP
.\"O .I -u
.I \-u
.\"O Get/set interrupt-unmask flag for the drive.  A setting of
.\"O .B 1
.\"O permits the
.\"O driver to unmask other interrupts during processing of a disk interrupt,
.\"O which greatly improves Linux's responsiveness and eliminates "serial port
.\"O overrun" errors.
ドライブの割り込み許可フラグを取得・設定する。
.B 1
に設定すると、ディスク割り込み処理中に他の割り込みのマスクを
(ドライバーが)外すことを許可する。
これは Linux の反応を大いに改善し、"serial port overrun" エラーを
出なくなるようにする。
.\"O .B Use this feature with caution:
.\"O some drive/controller combinations do
.\"O not tolerate the increased I/O latencies possible when this feature is enabled,
.\"O resulting in
.\"O .B massive filesystem corruption.
あるドライブとコントローラーの組み合わせでは、この機能を有効にしたときに
I/O 遅延の増加を許容せず、その結果
.B 大量のファイルシステムの不正
を引き起こす。
よって、\fBこの機能は注意して使用すること\fP。
.\"O In particular,
.\"O .B CMD-640B
.\"O and
.\"O .B RZ1000
.\"O (E)IDE interfaces can be
.\"O .B unreliable
.\"O (due to a hardware flaw) when this option is used with kernel versions earlier
.\"O than 2.0.13.  Disabling the
.\"O .B IDE prefetch
.\"O feature of these interfaces (usually a BIOS/CMOS setting)
.\"O provides a safe fix for the problem for use with earlier kernels.
特に
.B CMD-640B
と
.B RZ10000
(E)IDE インタフェースは(ハードウェアの欠陥から)では、
このオプションを 2.0.13 カーネル以前のバージョンで使用した場合には
\fB信頼できない\fP。
これらのインタフェースの(通常は BIOS/CMOS の設定にある)
.B IDE プリフェッチ
機能を無効にすれば、それより前のカーネルでこの問題を安全に
避けることができる。
.TP
.\"O .I -U
.I \-U
.\"O Un-register an IDE interface.
.\"O .B Dangerous.
.\"O The companion for the
.\"O .B -R
.\"O option.
IDE インタフェースを登録から外す。
\fB危険\fPである。
.B \-R
オプションの対である。
.\"O Intended for use with hardware made specifically for hot-swapping (very rare!).  
.\"O Use with knowledge and
.\"O .B extreme caution
.\"O as this can easily hang or damage your system.
.\"O The hdparm source distribution includes a 'contrib' directory with
.\"O some user-donated scripts for hot-swapping on the UltraBay of a ThinkPad 600E.
.\"O Use at your own risk.
ホットスワップ用に作られたハードウェア(これは大変珍しい!)
に使用することを意図している。
簡単にハングしたり、システムにダメージを与えたりするので、
知識と\fB最大限の注意\fPをもって使用すること。
ThinkPad 600E のウルトラベイでホットスワップするために、
ユーザーから寄贈されたスクリプトが hdparm のソース配布の 'contrib'
ディレクトリに含まれている。
自己責任で使用すること。
.TP
.\"O .I -v 
.I \-v
.\"O Display all settings, except -i (same as -acdgkmnru for IDE, -gr for SCSI or
.\"O -adgr for XT).  This is also the default behaviour when no flags are specified.
\-i を除くすべての設定を表示する(IDE では \-acdgkmnru、SCSI では \-gr、
XTで は \-adgr に等しい)。
これはまた、フラグが何も指定されなかった場合のデフォルト動作である。
.TP
.\"O .I -w
.I \-w
.\"O Perform a device reset (DANGEROUS).  Do NOT use this option.
.\"O It exists for unlikely situations where a reboot might otherwise be
.\"O required to get a confused drive back into a useable state.
デバイスのリセットを実行する (危険である)。
このオプションを使用し*ない*こと。
混乱したドライブを使用可能な状態へと戻すためにリブートが必要になる
ような、あまりない有り得ない状況のために、このオプションはある。
.TP
.\"O .I -W
.I \-W
.\"O Disable/enable the IDE drive's write-caching feature
.\"O (default state is undeterminable; manufacturer/model specific).
IDE ドライブの書き込みキャッシュ機能取得・設定する
(初期状態は製造メーカー・モデルに依存するので、不確定である)。
.TP
.\"O .I -x 
.I \-x
.\"O Tristate device for hotswap (DANGEROUS).
ホットスワップのためのトライステートデバイス (危険である)。
.\"tsekine:さっぱり分かりません
.TP
.\"O .I -X 
.I -X
.\"O Set the IDE transfer mode for newer (E)IDE/ATA drives.
.\"O This is typically used in combination with
.\"O .I -d1
.\"O when enabling DMA to/from a drive on a supported interface chipset, where
.\"O .I -X mdma2
.\"O is used to select multiword DMA mode2 transfers and
.\"O .I -X sdma1 
.\"O is used to select simple mode 1 DMA transfers.
最近の (E)IDE/ATA ドライブの IDE 転送モードを設定する。
サポートされているインタフェースチップセットにつながったドライブの
DMA を有効にする
.I \-d1
と共に使用するの普通である。その場合、
.I \-X mdma2
はマルチワード DMA モード 2 転送を選択し、
.I \-X sdma
はシンプルモード 1 DMA 転送を選択する。
.\"O With systems which support UltraDMA burst timings,
.\"O .I -X udma2
.\"O is used to select UltraDMA mode2 transfers (you'll need to prepare
.\"O the chipset for UltraDMA beforehand).
UltraDMA バースト転送をサポートしているシステムでは、
.I \-X udma2
で UltraDMA mode2 転送を選択する(事前に、チップセットを
UltraDMA のために準備する必要がある)。
.\"O Apart from that, use of this flag is
.\"O .I seldom necessary
.\"O since most/all modern IDE drives default to their fastest PIO transfer mode
.\"O at power-on.  Fiddling with this can be both needless and risky.
それはさておき、
現在のほとんど全ての IDE ドライブは、電源投入時にデフォルトで最も速い
PIO 転送モードになるので、このフラグの\fI必要性はめったにない\fP。
これでもてあそぶことは、不要で危険なことである。
.\"O On drives which support alternate transfer modes,
.\"O .I -X
.\"O can be used to switch the mode of the drive
.\"O .I only.
他の転送モードをサポートするドライブでは、
.I \-X
はそのドライブ\fIのみ\fP、転送モードを変更する。
.\"O Prior to changing the transfer mode, the IDE interface should be jumpered
.\"O or programmed (see
.\"O .I -p
.\"O flag)
.\"O for the new mode setting to prevent loss and/or corruption of data.
.\"O .I Use this with extreme caution!
データの喪失・不正を避けるために、転送モードの変更する前に
IDE インタフェースを新しいモードへとジャンプ、またはプログラム(
.I \-p
フラグを見よ)すべきである。
.I 最大限の注意をもってこのオプションを使用すること!
.\"O For the PIO (Programmed Input/Output)
.\"O transfer modes used by Linux, this value is simply the desired
.\"O PIO mode number plus 8.
.\"O Thus, a value of 09 sets PIO mode1, 10 enables PIO mode2,
.\"O and 11 selects PIO mode3.
.\"O Setting 00 restores the drive's "default" PIO mode, and 01 disables IORDY.
Linux で使用される PIO (Programmed Input/Output) 転送モードでは、
この値は指定したい PIO モード番号に 8 加えたものである。
よって、値 09 は PIO モード 1、10 は PIO モード 2、
11 は PIO モード 3 を選択する。
設定値 00 はドライブの "デフォルト" PIO モードに戻し、
01 は IORDY を無効にする。
.\"O For multiword DMA, the value used is the desired DMA mode number
.\"O plus 32.  for UltraDMA, the value is the desired UltraDMA mode number
.\"O plus 64.
マルチモード DMA では、指定したい DMA モード番号に 32 を足す。
UltraDMA では、指定したい UltraDMA モード番号に 64 を足す。
.TP
.\"O .I -y
.I \-y
.\"O Force an IDE drive to immediately enter the low power consumption
.\"O .B standby
.\"O mode, usually causing it to spin down.
IDE ドライブをすぐに強制的に低消費電力
.B スタンバイ
モードにする。通常、これはスピンダウンさせる。
.\"O The current power mode status can be checked using the
.\"O .B -C
.\"O flag.
現在の電力モード状態は
.B \-C
フラグで確認できる。
.TP
.\"O .I -Y
.I \-Y
.\"O Force an IDE drive to immediately enter the lowest power consumption
.\"O .B sleep
.\"O mode, causing it to shut down completely.  A hard or soft reset
.\"O is required before the drive can be accessed again
.\"O (the Linux IDE driver will automatically handle issuing a reset if/when needed).
IDE ドライブをすぐに強制的に最低消費電力
.B スリープ
モードにする。通常、これは完全に停止させる。
ドライブに再びアクセスできるようにするには、
ハードリセットまたはソフトリセットが必要である
(Linux の IDE ドライバーは、必要であれば自動的にリセット発行を処理する)。
.\"O The current power mode status can be checked using the
.\"O .B -C
.\"O flag.
現在の電力モード状態は
.B \-C
フラグで確認できる。
.TP
.\"O .TP
.\"O .I -z
.I \-z
.\"O Force a kernel re-read of the partition table of the specified device(s).
指定したデバイス(複数可)のパーティションテーブルを、カーネルに
再読み込みさせる。
.TP
.\"O .I -Z
.I \-Z
.\"O Disable the automatic power-saving function of certain Seagate drives
.\"O (ST3xxx models?), to prevent them from idling/spinning-down
.\"O at inconvenient times.
ある種の Seagate ドライブ(ST3xxx モデル?)で、迷惑な時間で
アイドル/スピンダウンしてしまうのを避けるため、
自動パワーセーブ機能を無効にする。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O As noted above, the
.\"O .B -m sectcount
.\"O and
.\"O .B -u 1
.\"O options should be used with caution at first, preferably on a
.\"O read-only filesystem.  Most drives work well with these features, but
.\"O a few drive/controller combinations are not 100% compatible.  Filesystem
.\"O corruption may result.  Backup everything before experimenting!
まず既に示した通り、
.B \-m setcount
と
.B \-u 1
オプションは、注意して使用する必要があり、
リードオンリーのファイルシステムでするのが望ましい。
これらの機能はほとんどのドライブでちゃんと動作するが、
いくつかのドライバーとコントローラーの組み合わせは、100% 互換ではない。
その結果は、ファイルシステムの不正である。
実験する前に、すべてをバックアップしておくこと!
.PP
.\"O Some options (eg. -r for SCSI) may not work with old kernels as 
.\"O necessary ioctl()'s were not supported.
古いカーネルでは、必要な ioctl() がサポートされていないために、
いくつかのオプション(例えば SCSI での \-r)は動作しない。
.PP
.\"O Although this utility is intended primarily for use with (E)IDE hard disk
.\"O devices, several of the options are also valid (and permitted) for use with 
.\"O SCSI hard disk devices and MFM/RLL hard disks with XT interfaces.
このユーティリティは主に (E)IDE ハードディスクデバイスでの使用を
意図してはいるが、いくつかのオプションは SCSI ハードディスクデバイス
及び XT インタフェース上の MFM/RLL ハードディスクでも有効である。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B hdparm
.\"O has been written by Mark Lord <mlord@pobox.com>, the primary developer and
.\"O maintainer of the (E)IDE driver for Linux, with suggestions from many netfolk.
.B hdparm
は Linux の (E)IDE ドライバの初期の開発者でありメンテナーである
 Mark Lord <mlord@pobox.com> によって書かれ、
ネット上の多くの「家族」から多くの提案を受けた。
.PP
.\"O The disable Seagate auto-powersaving code
.\"O is courtesy of Tomi Leppikangas(tomilepp@paju.oulu.fi).
Seagate の無能な自動パワーセーブに対するコードは
Tomi Leppikangas(tomilepp@paju.oulu.fi) の好意によるものである。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.B AT Attachment Interface for Disk Drives,
ANSI ASC X3T9.2 working draft, revision 4a, April 19, 1993.
.PP
.B AT Attachment Interface with Extensions (ATA-2),
ANSI ASC X3T9.2 working draft, revision 2f, July 26, 1994.
.PP
.B AT Attachment with Packet Interface - 5 (ATA/ATAPI-5),
T13-1321D working draft, revision 3, February 29, 2000.
.PP
.B AT Attachment with Packet Interface - 6 (ATA/ATAPI-6),
T13-1410D working draft, revision 3b, February 26, 2002.
.PP
.B Western Digital Enhanced IDE Implementation Guide,
by Western Digital Corporation, revision 5.0, November 10, 1993.
.PP
.B Enhanced Disk Drive Specification,
by Phoenix Technologies Ltd., version 1.0, January 25, 1994.
