.\" This file Copyright (C) 2001-2005 Jeff Tranter
.\" (tranter@pobox.com)
.\" It may be distributed under the GNU Public License, version 2, or
.\" any higher version. See section COPYING of the GNU Public license
.\" for conditions under which this file may be redistributed.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001-2006 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri May 25 21:10:42 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>, eject-2.0.9
.\" Updated & Modified Wed Oct 18 04:49:27 JST 2006
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>, eject-2.1.5
.\"
.TH VOLNAME 1 "13 Nov 2004" "Linux" "User Commands"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O volname \- return volume name
volname \- ボリューム名を返す
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
volname [<device-file>]

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明

.\"O .B Volname
.\"O returns the volume name for a device formatted with an
.\"O ISO-9660 file system, typically a CD-ROM. It also works with
.\"O normal files that contain a ISO-9660 file system.
.B volname
は、ISO-9660 ファイルシステムにフォーマットされたデバイス
(典型的なものとしては CD-ROM) のボリューム名を返す。
ISO-9660 ファイルシステムを含む通常のファイルに対しても動作する。

.\"O The file name can be specified on the command line.  If omitted,
.\"O it defaults to /dev/cdrom.
ファイル名はコマンドラインで指定できる。
省略した場合、/dev/cdrom をデフォルトとする。

.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\"O .B Volname
.\"O was written by Jeff Tranter (tranter@pobox.com) and is released
.\"O under the conditions of the GNU General Public License. See the file
.\"O COPYING and notes in the source code for details.
.B volname
は Jeff Tranter (tranter@pobox.com) によって開発され、
GNU 一般公有使用許諾書の条件下でリリースされる。
詳細については、COPYING ファイルと、ソースコードの注記を参照のこと。

.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目

eject(1)
