.\" Copyright (C) 2000-2001  Richard Gooch
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.\" Richard Gooch may be reached by email at  rgooch@atnf.csiro.au
.\" The postal address is:
.\"   Richard Gooch, c/o ATNF, P. O. Box 76, Epping, N.S.W., 2121, Australia.
.\"
.\"	initctl.8		Richard Gooch	21-FEB-2001
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Feb 26 19:13:14 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH INITCTL 8 "21 Feb 2001" "Util-Linux Package"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O initctl \- utility to control simpleinit(8)
initctl \- simpleinit(8) を制御するためのユーティリティ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
\fBneed\fP [\fB-r\fP] \fBservice\fP
.BR display-services
\fBprovide service\fP
.fi
.\"O .SH OVERVIEW
.SH 概略
.\"O The \fBinitctl\fP programme is designed to help improve the
.\"O robustness, scalability and readability of system boot scripts. It is
.\"O now possible to write a modularised set of boot scripts without the
.\"O complex and fragile numbered symlink scheme used in SysV-style boot
.\"O scripts. Each script can simply declare, using \fBneed\fP(8), what
.\"O must run before them.
\fBinitctl\fP プログラムは、システム起動スクリプトの
堅牢さ・拡張性・可読性を向上するためにデザインされている。
現在では、SysV 形式の起動スクリプトで使われている
複雑で脆い多くのシンボリックリンクによる方法を使うことなく、
モジュール化した起動スクリプトを書くことができる。
各スクリプトは、それを起動する前に何が必要かを
\fBneed\fP(8) を使って簡単に宣言できる。
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION for need
.SH need の説明
.\"O The \fBneed\fP programme is a utility that tells \fBsimpleinit\fP(8)
.\"O to start a \fIservice\fP (usually a script in \fI/sbin/init.d\fP) and
.\"O will wait for the service to become available. If the service is
.\"O already available, it will not be started again.
\fBneed\fP プログラムは、\fBsimpleinit\fP(8) に対して
\fIservice\fP (通常は \fI/sbin/init.d\fP 内のスクリプト) を
開始するように指示し、
その service が使用可能になるまで待たせるためのユーティリティである。
service が既に使用可能な場合、再び起動されることはない。

.\"O The \fB-r\fP option is used to tell \fBsimpleinit\fP(8) to "roll back"
.\"O (stop) services up to (but not including) \fIservice\fP. If
.\"O \fIservice\fP is not specified, all services are stopped. The \fB-r\fP
.\"O option thus allows the system to be partially or wholly shut down in
.\"O an orderly fashion. The \fBshutdown\fP(8) programme still needs to be
.\"O run.
\fB-r\fP オプションは、\fBsimpleinit\fP(8) に対して
\fIservice\fP までのサービスを
「押し戻す (roll back)」(停止する) ように指示する
(指定されたサービスは含まない)。
\fIservice\fP が指定されない場合、
全てのサービスを停止する。
よって、\fB-r\fP オプションにより、
システムを部分的または全体的に順序立ててシャットダウンすることができる。
実行するためには、未だに \fBshutdown\fP(8) プログラムが必要とされる。

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION for display-services
.SH display-services の説明
.\"O When invoked as \fBdisplay-services\fP it will write the list of
.\"O currently available services and the list of failed services to the
.\"O standard output.
\fBdisplay-services\fP として起動された場合、
現在使用可能なサービスのリストと失敗したサービスのリストを
標準出力に書き出す。

.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION for provide
.SH provide の説明
.\"O When invoked as \fBprovide\fP it tells \fBsimpleinit\fP(8) that the
.\"O parent (calling) process will be providing a service with name
.\"O \fIservice\fP. If the calling process exits successfully (status 0)
.\"O the service is deemed to be available. Only one instance of
.\"O \fIservice\fP may be started, so alternate providers will block and
.\"O may fail.
\fBprovide\fP として起動された場合、
\fBsimpleinit\fP(8) に対して親プロセス (呼び出したプロセス) が
\fIservice\fP という名前のサービスを提供するように指示する。
呼び出したプロセスが正常に (ステータス 0 で) 終了した場合、
サービスが使用可能であると考えられる。
\fIservice\fP のインスタンスは 1 つだけ起動されるので、
他にこのサービスを提供するプログラムはブロックされて失敗する。

.\"O Using \fBprovide\fP it is possible to have multiple potential
.\"O providers for the same (generic) service (e.g. \fBsendmail\fP and
.\"O \fBqmail\fP both provide a \fBmta\fP service), where only one actually
.\"O provides the service. This may be used by service startup scripts
.\"O which check for configuration files.
\fBprovide\fP を使うことにより、
同じ (一般的な) サービスを提供できる複数のプログラムを持つことができる
(例えば \fBsendmail\fP と \fBqmail\fP は共に \fBmta\fP サービスを提供する)。
ここで、実際にサービスを提供するのは 1 つだけである。
これは設定ファイルをチェックするサービス起動スクリプトで使うことができる。
.\"O .SH EXIT CODE
.SH 終了コード
.\"O The exit code from \fBneed\fP is 0 if the service was successfully
.\"O started, 1 if the service failed badly, and 2 if the service is
.\"O unavailable (i.e. disabled in configuration files). These exit codes
.\"O reflect the exit codes from the service startup scripts.
サービスが正常に起動した場合、
\fBneed\fP からの終了コードは 0 である。
サービスが失敗した場合は 1 である。
サービスが使用不能の場合
(つまり、設定ファイルで不可にされている場合) は 2 である。
これらの終了コードは、サービス起動スクリプトからの終了コードを反映する。

.\"O The exit code from \fBneed -r\fP is 0 if the service was successfully
.\"O stopped, 1 if the service could not be stopped, and 2 if the service
.\"O was not available to start with. The service shutdown scripts may only
.\"O return 0 (for success) or 1 (for failure).
サービスが正常に停止した場合、
\fBneed -r\fP からの終了コードは 0 である。
サービスが停止できなかった場合は 1 である。
サービスが開始できなかった場合は 2 である。
サービスのシャットダウンスクリプトは、
(正常な場合の) 0 と (失敗の場合の) 1 しか返さない。

.\"O The exit code from \fBprovide\fP is 0 if the service may be provided,
.\"O 1 if it may not, and 2 if the parent process is not a child of
.\"O init. It may block waiting for another provider which is initialising
.\"O the service.
サービスが提供できた場合、\fBprovide\fP の終了コードは 0 である。
提供できなかった場合は 1 である。
親プロセスが init の子でない場合は 2 である。
このプログラムは、そのサービスを初期化する
他のサービス提供プログラムをブロックして待たせる。
.\"O .SH SIGNALS
.SH シグナル
.\"O \fBinitctl\fP(8) uses \fBSIGUSR1\fP, \fBSIGUSR2\fP and \fBSIGPOLL\fP
.\"O for communication with \fBsimpleinit\fP(8). Don't send these signals
.\"O to it.
\fBinitctl\fP(8) は \fBsimpleinit\fP(8) と通信するために
\fBSIGUSR1\fP, \fBSIGUSR2\fP, \fBSIGPOLL\fP を使う。
これらのシグナルを \fBneed\fP(8) に送ってはならない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.PD 0
.TP 20
.BI /dev/initctl
.\"O This is the control FIFO, created by \fBsimpleinit\fP(8), which
.\"O \fBneed\fP(8) writes commands to.
\fBsimpleinit\fP(8) によって作成される制御 FIFO で、
\fBinitctl\fP(8) がコマンドを書き込む。
.\"O .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR simpleinit (8),
.BR init (8)
.PP
.\"O A more complete discussion of the new boot script system, based on
.\"O \fBneed\fP(8), is available from:
.\"O http://www.atnf.csiro.au/~rgooch/linux/boot-scripts/
\fBneed\fP(8) を使った
新しいブートスクリプトシステムについてのもっと全面的な議論は、
http://www.atnf.csiro.au/~rgooch/linux/boot-scripts/
で閲覧できる。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Richard Gooch (rgooch@atnf.csiro.au)
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 入手先
.\"O The Util-Linux package is available from:
.\"O ftp://ftp.??.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util-linux/
Util-Linux パッケージは
ftp://ftp.??.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util-linux/
から入手可能である。
