.\" Copyright 1992, 1994 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\" Updated Wed Jun 22 21:09:43 1994, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Koso Fukuba
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 27 12:00:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Koso Fukuba <koso@ga2.so-net.or.jp>
.\" Updated Thu Mar 16 14:42:20 JST 2000
.\"         by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@yo.rim.or.jp>
.TH KBDRATE 8 "22 June 1994" "Linux 1.1.19" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O kbdrate \- reset the keyboard repeat rate and delay time
kbdrate \- キーボードリピートレートと遅延時間をセットする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B "kbdrate [ \-s ] [ \-r"
rate
.B "] [ \-d"
delay
.B ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B kbdrate
.\"O is used to change the keyboard repeat rate and delay time.  The delay
.\"O is the amount of time that a key must be depressed before it will start to
.\"O repeat.
.B kbdrate
は、キーボードのリピートレートおよび遅延時間を変更するために使用す
る。ここでの遅延時間とは、キーが最初に押されてから、リピートを開始する
までの時間である。

.\"O Using
.\"O .B kbdrate
.\"O without any options will reset the repeat rate to 10.9 characters per second (cps)
.\"O and the delay to 250 milliseconds (ms) for Intel- and M68K-based systems.
.\"O These are the IBM defaults. On SPARC-based systems it will reset the repeat rate
.\"O to 5 cps and the delay to 200 ms.
.B kbdrate
をオプション無しで使用すると、Intel と M68K ベースのシステムでは
リピートレートが 1 秒当たり 10.9 文字 (cps)、遅延時間が 250 ミリ秒(ms)となる。
これらの値は、IBM のデフォルト値である。
SPARC ベースのシステムでは、
リピートレートが 1 秒当たり 5 文字 (cps)、遅延時間が 200 ミリ秒(ms)となる。

.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-s
.\"O Silent.  No messages are printed.
メッセージの抑制。メッセージを全く表示しなくなる。
.TP
.BI \-r " rate"
.\"O Change the keyboard repeat rate to
.\"O .I rate
.\"O cps.   For Intel-based systems, the allowable range is from 2.0 to 30.0 cps.
.\"O Only certain, specific values are possible, and the program will select the
.\"O nearest possible value to the one specified.  The possible values are given,
.\"O in characters per second, as follows: 2.0, 2.1, 2.3, 2.5, 2.7, 3.0, 3.3, 3.7,
.\"O 4.0, 4.3, 4.6, 5.0, 5.5, 6.0, 6.7, 7.5, 8.0, 8.6, 9.2, 10.0, 10.9, 12.0, 13.3,
.\"O 15.0, 16.0, 17.1, 18.5, 20.0, 21.8, 24.0, 26.7, 30.0.
.\"O For SPARC-based systems, the allowable range is from 0 (no repeat) to 50 cps.
キーボードリピートレートを
.I rate
で指定した値(単位 cps)に変更する。
Intel ベースのシステムでは指定可能な値の範囲は 2.0 から 30.0 cps の間であるが、
その間のある決められた値のみが使用可能である。
プログラムは指定された値に最も近い使用可能な値を選択する。
使用可能な値は以下の通り(単位 cps):
2.0, 2.1, 2.3, 2.5, 2.7, 3.0, 3.3, 3.7, 4.0, 4.3, 4.6,
5.0, 5.5, 6.0, 6.7, 7.5, 8.0, 8.6, 9.2, 10.0, 10.9, 12.0, 13.3, 15.0, 16.0,
17.1, 18.5, 20.0, 21.8, 24.0, 26.7, 30.0.
SPARC ベースのシステムでは、指定可能な値の範囲は 0 (リピートしない)から
50 cps の間である。
.TP
.BI \-d " delay"
.\"O Change the delay to
.\"O .I delay
.\"O milliseconds.
.\"O For Intel-based systems, the allowable range is from 250 to 1000 ms,
.\"O in 250 ms steps. For SPARC systems, possible values are between 10 ms and 1440 ms,
.\"O in 10 ms steps.
遅延時間を
.I delay
で指定された値に変更する。指定する値の単位はミリ秒である。
Intel ベースのシステムでは、指定可能な値の範囲は 250 ms 刻みで
250 ms から 1000 ms の間である。
SPARC ベースのシステムでは、指定可能な値の範囲は
10 ms 刻みで 10 ms から 1440 ms の間である。
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Display a version number and exit.
バージョン番号を表示して終了する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O Not all keyboards support all rates.
全てのキーボードが全てのレートに対応しているわけではない。
.PP
.\"O Not all keyboards have the rates mapped in the same way.
また、全てのキーボードでレートのマッピングの仕方が同じだというわけでもない。
.PP
.\"O Setting the repeat rate on the Gateway AnyKey keyboard does not work.  If
.\"O someone with a Gateway figures out how to program the keyboard, please send
.\"O mail to util-linux@math.uio.no.
Gateway の AnyKey キーボードでは、リピートレートの設定はできない。
Gateway を持っている人で、キーボードのプログラミングの方法を知っている
人は、 util-linux@math.uio.no までメールして欲しい。
.PP
.\"O All this is very architecture dependent.
これら全てはアーキテクチャに非常に依存している。
.\"O Nowadays
.\"O .B kbdrate
.\"O first tries the KDKBDREP and KIOCSRATE ioctls.
.\"O (The former usually works on an m68k machine, the latter for SPARC.)
.\"O When these ioctls fail an ioport interface as on i386 is assumed.
現在
.B kbdrate
はまず KDKBDREP と KIOCSRATE の ioctl を試す
(前者は普通 m68k マシンで動作し、後者は SPARC 用である)。
これらの ioctl に失敗した場合、 i386 の I/O ポートインターフェースを仮定する。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/rc.local
.br
.I /dev/port

