.\" Copyright 1992, 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\" Changes from sct@dcs.ed.ac.uk added Sat Oct  9 09:54:00 1993.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 Koso Fukuba
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Jan 27 12:00:00 JST 1997
.\"         by Koso Fukuba <koso@ga2.so-net.or.jp>
.\" Updated and Modified Mon Feb 26 19:23:38 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Jun  9 JST 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Tue May 10 JST 2005 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH RDEV 8 "20 November 1993" "Linux 0.99" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O rdev \- query/set image root device, RAM disk size, or video mode
rdev \- ルートデバイス・RAM ディスクサイズ・ビデオモードの問い合わせと設定
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.nf
.BR "rdev [ \-rvh ] [ \-o " offset " ] [ " image " [ " value " [ " offset " ] ] ]"
.BR "rdev [ \-Rrvh ] [ \-o " offset " ] [ " image " [ " value " [ " offset " ] ] ]"
.BR "ramsize [ \-o " offset " ] [ " image " [ " size " [ " offset " ] ] ]"
.BR "vidmode [ \-o " offset " ] [ " image " [ " mode " [ " offset " ] ] ]"
.BR "rootflags [ \-o " offset " ] [ " image " [ " flags " [ " offset " ] ] ]"
.fi
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O With no arguments,
.\"O .B rdev
.\"O outputs an
.\"O .I /etc/mtab
.\"O line for the current root file system.
.B rdev
を引数なしで起動すると、現在のルートファイルシステムに対応する
.I /etc/mtab
のエントリを表示する。
.\"O With no arguments,
.\"O .BR ramsize ", " vidmode ", and " rootflags
.\"O print usage information.
.BR ramsize ", " vidmode ", " rootflags
を引数なしで起動すると、使用方法が表示される。

.\"O In a bootable image for the Linux kernel on i386, there are several pairs
.\"O of bytes which specify the root device, the video mode, and the size of
.\"O the RAM disk.  These pairs of bytes, by default, begin
.\"O at offset 504 (decimal) in the kernel image:
i386 の Linux カーネルのブート可能なイメージには、ルートデバイス・ビデオモード・
RAM ディスクサイズを指定するための数バイトの領域がある。
デフォルトでは、これらの領域は
カーネルイメージのオフセット 504 (10 進) から始まる。

.nf
.RS
.\"O  498 Root flags
.\"O (500 and 502 Reserved)
.\"O  504 RAM Disk Size
.\"O  506 VGA Mode
.\"O  508 Root Device
.\"O  (510 Boot Signature)
 498 ルートフラグ
(500 と 502 は予約されている)
 504 RAM ディスクサイズ
 506 VGA モード
 508 ルートデバイス
(510 ブートシグネチャ)
.RE
.fi

.\"O .B rdev
.\"O will change these values.
.B rdev
は、これらの値を変更する。

.\"O Typical values for the
.\"O .I image
.\"O parameter, which is a bootable Linux kernel image, might be:
ブート可能な Linux カーネルイメージ
.I image
を指定する場合の典型的な値は、次のようなものである:

.nf
.RS
/vmlinux
/vmunix
/boot/bzImage-2.4.0
/dev/fd0
/dev/fd1
.RE
.fi

.\"O When using the
.\"O .B rdev
.\"O command, the
.\"O .I root_device
.\"O parameter might be something like:
.B rdev
コマンドを使用する場合、
.I root_device
パラメータは以下のようなものである:

.nf
.RS
/dev/hda1
/dev/hdf13
/dev/sda2
/dev/sdc4
/dev/ida/c0d0p1
.RE
.fi

.\"O One may also specify the device by a comma-separated pair
.\"O of decimal integers
.\"O .IR major , minor .
あるいは、デバイスをコンマで区切られた十進数の組
.IR major , minor
でデバイスを指定することもできる。

.\"O For the
.\"O .B ramsize
.\"O command, the
.\"O .B size
.\"O parameter specifies the size of the RAM disk in kilobytes.
.B ramsize
コマンドでは、
.B size
パラメータに RAM ディスクサイズをキロバイト(KB) 単位で指定する。

.\"O For the
.\"O .B rootflags
.\"O command, the
.\"O .B flags
.\"O parameter contains extra information used when mounting root.
.B rootflags
コマンドでは、
.B flags
パラメータに、
ルートディスクをマウントするときに使用されるオプション情報を指定する。
.\"O Currently the only effect of these flags is to force the kernel to
.\"O mount the root filesystem in readonly mode if 
.\"O .B flags
.\"O is non-zero.
今のところこれらのフラグの効果はひとつだけで、
.B flags
がゼロでないと、カーネルはルートファイルシステムを
リードオンリーモードでマウントする、というだけである。

.\"O For the
.\"O .B vidmode
.\"O command, the
.\"O .B mode
.\"O parameter specifies the video mode:
.B vidmode
コマンドでは、
.B mode
パラメータに以下のビデオモードを指定する:

.nf
.RS
.\"O -3 = Prompt
.\"O -2 = Extended VGA
.\"O -1 = Normal VGA
.\"O  0 = as if "0" was pressed at the prompt
.\"O  1 = as if "1" was pressed at the prompt
.\"O  2 = as if "2" was pressed at the prompt
.\"O  n = as if "n" was pressed at the prompt
-3 = プロンプト
-2 = Extended VGA
-1 = Normal VGA
 0 = プロンプトで "0" が入力されたのと同じ働きをする。
 1 = プロンプトで "1" が入力されたのと同じ働きをする。
 2 = プロンプトで "2" が入力されたのと同じ働きをする。
 n = プロンプトで "n" が入力されたのと同じ働きをする。
.RE
.fi

.\"O If the
.\"O .I value
.\"O is not specified, the
.\"O .I image
.\"O will be examined to determine the current settings.
.I value
が指定されない場合、現在の設定を決めるために
.I image
が調べられる。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-r
.\"O Causes
.\"O .B rdev
.\"O to act like
.\"O .BR ramsize .
.B rdev
に
.B ramsize
と同じ動作をさせる。
.TP
.B \-R
.\"O Causes
.\"O .B rdev
.\"O to act like
.\"O .BR rootflags .
.B rdev
に
.B rootflags
と同じ動作をさせる。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Causes
.\"O .B rdev
.\"O to act like
.\"O .BR vidmode .
.B rdev
に
.B vidmode
と同じ動作をさせる。
.TP
.B \-h
.\"O Provides help.
ヘルプメッセージを出力する。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The
.\"O .B rdev
.\"O utility, when used other than to find a name for the current root device,
.\"O is an ancient hack that works by patching a kernel image at a magic offset
.\"O with magic numbers. It does not work on architectures other than i386.
.B rdev
ユーティリティの、現在のルートデバイス名を表示する以外の機能は、
カーネルイメージの決め打ちのオフセットに決め打ちの数値を書き込むことによって
動作する、いにしえのハックである。
これは i386 以外のアーキテクチャでは動作しない。
.\"O Its use is strongly discouraged. Use a boot loader like SysLinux or LILO
.\"O instead.
これの使用は全く推奨できない。
SysLinux や LILO のようなブートローダを代わりに使うこと。
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 歴史
.\"O At offset 502 there used to be the device number of the swap device
.\"O (in Linux 0.12), and "rdev -s" or "swapdev" would set this.
オフセット 502 は以前 (Linux 0.12 の頃) スワップデバイスの
デバイス番号として使われており、
"rdev -s" や "swapdev" でそれを設定できた。
.\"O However, since Linux 0.95 this constant is not used any longer,
.\"O and the swap device is specified using the
.\"O .BR swapon (2)
.\"O system call.
しかし、 Linux 0.95 からはこの定数は使われなくなり、
スワップデバイスは
.BR swapon (2)
システムコールで指定するようになった。

.\"O At offset 504 there used to be the size of the ramdisk in kilobytes.
.\"O One would specify a size, and this much was grabbed off the top of memory.
ここでオフセット 504 はラムディスクの容量(キロバイト単位)として使われていた。
これは容量を指定し、メモリの先頭から取られていた。
.\"O In Linux 1.1.39 it became also possible to set this value on the kernel
.\"O command line.
Linux 1.1.39 で、この値をカーネルコマンドラインからも設定できるようになった。
.\"O In Linux 1.3.48 the ramdisk setup was changed. Ramdisk memory is now
.\"O taken from the buffer cache, so that the ramdisk can grow dynamically.
Linux 1.3.48 で、ラムディスクの設定方法が変更された。
ラムディスクのメモリはバッファキャッシュから取られるようになり、
そのため、ラムディスクの容量を動的に増加させることができるようになった。
.\"O The interpretation of the ramdisk word was changed to a word of which
.\"O the high order bit is a prompt flag (1: prompt for ramdisk:
.\"O "VFS: Insert ramdisk floppy and press ENTER" - this is needed with a
.\"O two-floppy boot), the next bit a load flag (1: load ramdisk),
.\"O and the low order 11 bits give the starting block number of the
.\"O root filesystem image (so that one can have a single floppy boot).
ラムディスクワードの解釈も変更され、最上位ビットはプロンプトフラグ
(1: ラムディスクのためのプロンプト
"VFS: Insert ramdisk floppy and press ENTER" を表示する - これは
フロッピー 2 枚によるブートに必要である)、次のビットはロードフラグ
(1: ラムディスクに読み込む)、そして下位の 11 ビットは(フロッピー 1 枚による
ブートのための)ルートファイルシステムイメージの開始ブロック番号となった。
.\"O See also
.\"O .IR linux/Documentation/ramdisk.txt .
.I linux/Documentation/ramdisk.txt
も参照のこと。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.nf
.\"O Originally by Werner Almesberger (almesber@nessie.cs.id.ethz.ch)
.\"O Modified by Peter MacDonald (pmacdona@sanjuan.UVic.CA)
.\"O rootflags support added by Stephen Tweedie (sct@dcs.ed.ac.uk)
初版、Werner Almesberger (almesber@nessie.cs.id.ethz.ch)
変更、Peter MacDonald (pmacdona@sanjuan.UVic.CA)
rootflags サポートの追加、Stephen Tweedie (sct@dcs.ed.ac.uk)
.fi
