.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Fri May 10 01:26:18 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH SNMP.CONF 5 "17 Nov 2000"
.ds )H U.C. Davis
.ds ]W V4.2.4
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O /usr/share/snmp/snmp.conf - configuration file for the ucd-snmp applications.
/usr/share/snmp/snmp.conf - ucd-snmp アプリケーションの設定ファイル
.br
.\"O ~/.snmp/snmp.conf - personal configuration file.
~/.snmp/snmp.conf - 個人用の設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 書式
.\"O .B snmp.conf
.\"O is the configuration file which define how the ucd-snmp SNMP
.\"O applications operate.  Tokens that can be put in them are described in
.\"O the
.\"O .B DIRECTIVES
.\"O section below.
.B snmp.conf
は ucd-snmp SNMP アプリケーションの動作方法を定義する設定ファイルである。
設定ファイルで使えるトークンは、
以下の「\fBディレクティブ\fR」セクションで説明されている。
.\"O .SH PLEASE READ FIRST
.SH 最初にお読みください
.\"O Make sure you make these files read-only by the user if you are
.\"O storing sensitive information in them like pass-phrases!
パスフレーズのような注意を要する情報を格納する場合は、
これらの設定ファイルを読み込みだけにすること !
.PP
.\"O First, make sure you have read the snmp_config(5) manual page that
.\"O describes how the ucd-snmp configuration files operate, where they
.\"O are located and how they all work together.
初めに snmp_config(5) の man ページを読むこと。
この man ページでは、ucd-snmp 設定ファイルの
動作・置き場所・連携法などが説明されている。
.\"O .SH DIRECTIVES
.SH ディレクティブ
.IP "mibdirs (mib-dirs|+mib-dirs)"
.\"O Look for textual mibs to parse in the list of ':' separated
.\"O directories.  If the directive value starts with a '+' it prepends
.\"O this list to the front of the default directory list compiled into the
.\"O application.  Note that this value can be overridden by the
.\"O .B MIBDIRS
.\"O environment variable.
.\"Osato:
.\"Osato: 第一文の詳細が分からないので、FAQから推測して訳出した。
.\"Osato:
このディレクティブで指定された
\&':' 区切りのディレクトリのリストを解析し、
テキストの mib ファイルを探す。
ディレクティブの値の前に '+' を置くと、
このリストをアプリケーションに組み込まれた
デフォルトのディレクトリより先に解釈する。
この値は環境変数
.B MIBDIRS
で上書きされる点に注意すること。
.IP "mibs (mib-tokens|+mib-tokens)"
.\"O Specifies a ':' separated list of mib tokens that represent textual
.\"O mib files that should be found and parsed.  If the directive value
.\"O starts with a '+' it prepends this list to the front of the default
.\"O mib token list compiled into the application.  The special keyword of
.\"O "ALL" forces all mibs files found to be read. Note that the value
.\"O specified here can be overridden by the
.\"O .B MIBS
.\"O environment variable.
\&':' で区切って mib トークンのリストを指定する。
このリストからテキストの mib ファイルを探して解析する。
ディレクティブの値の前に '+' を置くと、
このリストをアプリケーションに組み込まれた
デフォルトの mib トークンより先に解釈する。
特別なキーワード "ALL" を使うと、
見つかった全ての mib ファイルを読み込む。
この値は環境変数
.B MIBS
で上書きされる点に注意すること。
.IP "mibfile file"
.\"O Specifies a textual mib file to read and parse, in addition to the
.\"O list read from the mibs token.  Note that the value
.\"O specified here can be overridden by the
.\"O .B MIBFILES
.\"O environment variable.
mibs トークンから読み込んだリストに加え、
ここで指定したテキストの mib ファイルを読み込んで解析する。
この値は環境変数
.B MIBFILES
で上書きされる点に注意すること。
.IP "defaultPort port"
.\"O The default port number that all snmp applications and demons should use.
全ての snmp アプリケーションとデモで使用する
デフォルトのポート番号。
.IP "defVersion (v1|v2c|v3)"
.\"O The default snmp version to use.
デフォルトの snmp バージョン。
.IP "defCommunity string"
.\"O The default snmpv1 and snmpv2c community string to use.
snmpv1 と snmpv2c のデフォルトのコミュニティ文字列。
.IP "defSecurityName string"
.\"O The default snmpv3 USM security name you want to use for snmpv3 requests.
snmpv3 リクエストで使用するデフォルトの snmpv3 USM セキュリティ名。
.IP "defContext      string"
.\"O The default snmpv3 context name you want to use.
使用したいデフォルトの snmpv3 コンテキスト名。
.IP "defPassphrase   string"
.IP "defAuthPassphrase string"
.IP "defPrivPassphrase string"
.\"O The default snmpv3 USM passphrase(s) to use.  
デフォルトの snmpv3 USM パスフレーズ。
.\"O .B defPassphrase
.\"O will be used for both authentication and privacy pass phrases if it is 
.\"O specified.
.B defPassphrase
が指定された場合は、
認証とプライバシーの両方のパスフレーズとして使用される。
.IP "defAuthType     MD5|SHA"
.\"O The snmpv3 USM authentication type to use.  Only MD5 is supported out
.\"O of the box at this time.
snmpv3 USM 認証タイプ。
現在のところは MD5 しかサポートされていない。
.IP "defPrivType     DES"
.\"O The snmpv3 USM privacy type to use.  Currently, only DES is the
.\"O possible value, and isn't supported out of the box due to U.S. export
.\"O restrictions.
snmpv3 USM プライバシータイプ。
現在のところは DES のみが使用可能であるが、
アメリカ合衆国の輸出規制によりサポートされていない。
.IP "defSecurityLevel noAuthNoPriv|authNoPriv|authPriv"
.\"O The snmpv3 default security level to use.
snmpv3 のデフォルトのセキュリティレベル。
.IP "showMibErrors   (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Whether or not to display textual mib parsing errors when commands are
.\"O run.
コマンドを実行したときにテキスト mib の解析エラーを表示するか否か。
.IP "strictCommentTerm (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Whether or not mibs that are parsed should be strict about comment
.\"O termination.  "--" terminates a comment if this is true.  Many
.\"O distributed mibs have broken comments in them, hence this option.
解析される mib において、コメントの終了を厳密に行うか否か。
true の場合は、"--" でコメントを終了する。
配布されている多くの mib ではコメントの方法が間違っているため、
このオプションが存在する。
.IP "mibAllowUnderline (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Allow underline characters in mibs (illegal).
mib においてアンダーライン文字の使用を許可する (規格に違反している)。
.IP "mibWarningLevel integerValue"
.\"O The minimum warning level of the warnings printed by the mib parser.
mib パーサーが警告を表示する最小レベル。
.IP "logTimestamp      (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Whether the commands should log timestamps with their error/message
.\"O logging or not.  Note that output will not look as pretty with
.\"O timestamps if the source code that is doing the logging does
.\"O incremental logging of messages that are not line buffered before
.\"O being passed to the logging routines.
エラーまたはメッセージのログ記録において、
コマンドがタイムスタンプを記録するか否か。
ログ記録を行うソースコードでメッセージを追加記録しており、
かつログ記録ルーチンに渡される前に
メッセージ行がバッファーされない場合、
タイムスタンプを付けると出力がきれいに見えない。
.IP "printNumericEnums (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Equivalent to -Oe
-Oe と同じ。
.IP "printNumericOids (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Equivalent to -On
-On と同じ。
.IP "dontBreakdownOids (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Equivalent to -Ob
-Ob と同じ。
.IP "escapeQuotes (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Equivalent to -OE
-OE と同じ。
.IP "quickPrinting (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Equivalent to -Oq
-Oq と同じ。
.IP "suffixPrinting (0|1|2)"
.\"O If the value is 1, its equivalent to -Os and if the value is 2 it's
.\"O equivalent to -OS.
この値が 1 である場合は -Os と同じ。
この値が 2 である場合は -OS と同じ。
.IP "extendedIndex (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Equivalent to -OX
-OX と同じ。
.IP "noRangeCheck (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O disables the validation of values that is done by snmpset before issuing
.\"O the request to the agent.
snmpset がエージェントにリクエストを送る前に行う値の検証をしない。
.IP "dumpPacket      (1|yes|true|0|no|false)"
.\"O Whether the commands should dump packets by default.
コマンドを実行したときに、デフォルトでパケットをダンプするか否か。
.IP "doDebugging (1|0)"
.\"O Turns on debugging for all applications run if set to 1.
1 に設定した場合、全てのアプリケーションでデバッグが有効になる。
.IP "debugTokens token[,token...]"
.\"O The debugging tokens that should be printed.  See the
.\"O .I snmpcmd(1)
.\"O manual page for debugging usage details.
表示に使うデバッグ用トークン。
デバッグ方法の詳細については、
.I snmpcmd(1)
の man ページを参照すること。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
snmp_config(5), read_config(3), snmpcmd(1).
.\" Local Variables:
.\"  mode: nroff
.\" End:
