.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon May  6 20:59:37 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH SNMPD.CONF 5 "28 Aug 2001"
.ds )H U.C. Davis, ECE Dept.
.ds ]W V4.2.4
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O /usr/share/snmp/snmpd.conf - configuration file for the ucd-snmp SNMP agent.
/usr/share/snmp/snmpd.conf - ucd-snmp SNMP エージェントの設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B snmpd.conf
.\"O is the configuration file which defines how the ucd-smnp SNMP agent
.\"O operates.  These files may contain any of the directives found in the
.\"O DIRECTIVES section below.  This file is not required for the agent to
.\"O operate and report mib entries.
.B snmpd.conf
は ucd-smnp SNMP エージェントの操作法を定義する設定ファイルである。
このファイルは下記の「ディレクティブ」セクションにある
任意のディレクティブを含むことができる。
エージェントが mib エントリを操作したり表示したりするためには、
このファイルは必要ない。
.\"O .SH PLEASE READ FIRST
.SH 最初にお読みください
.\"O First, make sure you have read the snmp_config(5) manual page that
.\"O describes how the ucd-snmp configuration files operate, where they
.\"O are located and how they all work together.
最初に man ページ snmp_config(5) を読んでおくこと。
ここには ucd-snmp ファイルの操作法・場所・
互いにどのように動作するかが書かれている。
.PP
.\"O Also, you might consider looking into the
.\"O .I snmpconf
.\"O application (perl script) which can help you build a snmpd.conf file
.\"O by prompting you for information.  You should try it.  Really.  Go
.\"O ahead.  Right now.  Run:
さらに、
.I snmpconf
アプリケーション (perl スクリプト) にざっと目を通すのもよいかもしれない。
このアプリケーションはユーザーに情報を提示して
snmpd.conf ファイルの作成を助けてくれる。
試してみなさい。本当に。さあ、今すぐに。
.RS
.IP "snmpconf -g basic_setup"
.RE
.PP
.\"O to get you started.
で始められます。
.\"O .SH EXTENSIBLE-MIB
.SH 拡張可能 MIB
.PP
.\"O The ucd-snmp SNMP agent reports much of its information through
.\"O queries to the 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021 section of the mib tree.  Every mib in
.\"O this section has the following table entries in it.
ucd-snmp SNMP エージェントは、
mib ツリーの 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021 セクションに対してクェリーを行い、
多くの情報を表示する。
このセクションの各 mib には以下のテーブルエントリがある。
.IP ".1 -- index"
.\"O This is the table's index numbers for each of the DIRECTIVES listed below.
以下にリストされた「ディレクティブ」に対するテーブルのインデックス番号。
.IP ".2 -- name"
.\"O The name of the given table entry.  This should be unique, but is not
.\"O required to be.
指定されたテーブルエントリの名前。
これは他と重ならない方が良いが、重なっても構わない。
.IP ".100 -- errorFlag"
.\"O This is a flag returning either the integer value 1 or 0 if an error
.\"O is detected for this table entry.
このテーブルエントリにエラーが見つかった場合に、
整数 1 または 0 を返すフラグ。
.IP ".101 -- errorMsg"
.\"O This is a DISPLAY-STRING describing any error triggering the errorFlag above.
上記の errorFlag を引き起こすエラーを説明する「表示文字列」。
.\"sato: DISPLAY-STRING に対応する訳語はあるのかな？
.IP ".102 -- errorFix"
.\"O If this entry is SNMPset to the integer value of 1 AND the errorFlag
.\"O defined above is indeed a 1, a program or script will get executed
.\"O with the table entry name from above as the argument.  The program to
.\"O be executed is configured in the config.h file at compile time.
このエントリが SNMPset から整数 1 で、
かつ上で定義されている errorFlag が 1 の場合、
上記のテーブルエントリ名を引き数として
プログラムやスクリプトが実行される。
.\"sato: 1 行目の SNMPset to the integer value of 1 がよくわからない。
実行されるプログラムはコンパイル時に config.h ファイルで設定される。
.\"O .SS Directives
.SS ディレクティブ
.IP "proc NAME"
.IP "proc NAME MAX"
.IP "proc NAME MAX MIN"
.IP
.\"O Checks to see if the NAME'd processes are running on the agent's
.\"O machine.  An error flag (1) and a description message are then passed
.\"O to the 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.2.1.100 and
.\"O 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.2.1.101 mib columns (respectively) if the
.\"O NAME'd program is not found in the process table as reported by "/bin/ps -e".
NAME という名前のプロセスが
エージェントのマシンで稼働しているかをチェックする。
NAME という名前のプログラムが
"/bin/ps -e" で表示されるプロセステーブルにない場合、
エラーフラグ (1) と説明のメッセージが
mib コラムの 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.2.1.100 と
1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.2.1.101 に (それぞれ) 渡される。
.IP
.\"O If MAX and MIN are not specified, MAX is assumed to be 
.\"O .B infinity
.\"O and MIN is assumed to be 1.
MAX と MIN が指定されない場合、MAX は
.B infinity
(無限大) で MIN は 1 であると仮定される。
.IP
.\"O If MAX is specified but MIN is not specified, MIN is assumed to be 0.
MAX は指定されているが、MIN は指定されていない場合、
MIN は 0 であると仮定される。
.IP "procfix NAME PROG ARGS"
.\"O This registers a command that knows how to fix errors with the given
.\"O process NAME.  When 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.2.1.102 for a given
.\"O NAMEd program is set to the integer value of 1, this command will be
.\"O called.  It defaults to a compiled value set using the PROCFIXCMD
.\"O definition in the config.h file.
このディレクティブは、NAME で指定されたプロセスで発生したエラーを
修正するためのコマンドを登録する。
NAME で指定されたプログラムに対して 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.2.1.102 が
整数値 1 に設定された場合、このコマンドが呼び出される。
呼び出されるプログラムのデフォルトは、コンパイル時の値であり、
config.h ファイルの PROCFIXCMD で定義される。
.IP "exec NAME PROG ARGS"
.IP "exec MIBNUM NAME PROG ARGS"
.IP
.\"O If MIBNUM is not specified, the agent executes the named PROG with
.\"O arguments of ARGS and returns the exit status and the first line of
.\"O the STDOUT output of the PROG program to queries of the
.\"O 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.8.1.100 and
.\"O 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.8.1.101 mib columns (respectively).  All
.\"O STDOUT output beyond the first line is silently truncated.
MIBNUM が指定されない場合、
エージェントは PROG という名前のプログラムを引き数 ARGS を付けて実行し、
プログラム PROG の終了ステータスと標準出力の 1 行目を返す。
これらはそれぞれ mib コラムの 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.8.1.100 と
1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.8.1.101 の値をクェリーしたものである。
標準出力の 1 行目以降は暗黙の内に省略される。
.IP
.\"O If MIBNUM is specified, it acts as above but returns the exit status
.\"O to MIBNUM.100.0 and the entire STDOUT output to the table
.\"O MIBNUM.101 in a mib table.  In this case, the MIBNUM.101 mib
.\"O contains the entire STDOUT output, one mib table entry per line of
.\"O output (ie, the first line is output as MIBNUM.101.1, the second
.\"O at MIBNUM.101.2, etc...).
MIBNUM が指定された場合も、上と同じように動作するが、
終了ステータスを MIBNUM.100.0 に返し、
標準出力全体を mib テーブル内のテーブル MIBNUM.101 に返す。
このとき MIBNUM.101 mib には標準出力への出力全体が入り、
1 つの mib テーブルエントリには出力の 1 行分が入る
(つまり、出力の第 1 行は MIBNUM.101.1、
第 2 行は MIBNUM.101.2、... となる)。
.RS
.\"O .IP Note:
.IP 注意:
.\"O The MIBNUM must be specified in dotted-integer notation and can
.\"O not be specified as ".iso.org.dod.internet..." (should instead
.\"O be .1.3.6.1...).
MIBNUM はドット区切りの整数値表記でなければならない。
(.1.3.6.1... の代わりに) ".iso.org.dod.internet..." のように
指定することはできない。
.\"O .IP Note: 
.IP 注意:
.\"O The agent caches the exit status and STDOUT of the executed program
.\"O for 30 seconds after the initial query.  This is to increase speed and
.\"O maintain consistency of information for consecutive table queries.
エージェントは最初のクェリーを行った後、
実行したプログラムの終了ステータスと標準出力を 30 秒間キャッシュする。
これによりその後のテーブルのクェリーのスピードが上がり、
情報の一貫性が管理できる。
.\"O The cache can be flushed by a snmp-set request of integer(1) to
.\"O 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.100.VERCLEARCACHE.
このキャッシュは 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.100.VERCLEARCACHE を
整数 (1) に設定する snmp-set 要求により消去される。
.RE
.IP "execfix NAME PROG ARGS"
.\"O This registers a command that knows how to fix errors with the given
.\"O exec or sh NAME.  When 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.8.1.102 for a
.\"O given NAMEd entry is set to the integer value of 1, this command will
.\"O be called.  It defaults to a compiled value set using the EXECFIXCMD
.\"O definition in the config.h file.
このディレクティブは NAME で指定された
実行プログラムまたはシェルスクリプトで発生した
エラーを修正するためのコマンドを登録する。
NAME で指定したエントリに対して
1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.8.1.102 が整数値 1 に設定されると、
このコマンドが呼び出される。
呼び出されるプログラムのデフォルトは、コンパイル時の値であり、
config.h ファイルの EXECFIXCMD で定義される。
.IP "disk PATH"
.IP "disk PATH [ MINSPACE | MINPERCENT% ]"
.IP
.\"O Checks the named disks mounted at PATH for available disk space.  If
.\"O the disk space is less than MINSPACE (kB) if specified or less than
.\"O MINPERCENT (%) if a % sign is specified, or DEFDISKMINIMUMSPACE (kB)
.\"O if not specified, the associated entry in the
.\"O 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.9.1.100 mib table will be set to (1) and
.\"O a descriptive error message will be returned to queries of
.\"O 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.9.1.101.
PATH にマウントされたディスクの使用可能なディスク容量をチェックする。
ディスク容量が MINSPACE (kB) より少ない場合、
または % 記号を指定して MINPERCENT (%) より少ない場合、
または DEFDISKMINIMUMSPACE (kB) が指定されていない場合、
1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.9.1.100 mib テーブルの関連するエントリが (1) に設定され、
エラーを説明するメッセージが
1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.9.1.101 のクェリーによって返される。
.IP "load MAX1"
.IP "load MAX1 MAX5"
.IP "load MAX1 MAX5 MAX15"
.IP
.\"O Checks the load average of the machine and returns an error flag (1),
.\"O and an text-string error message
.\"O to queries of 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.10.1.100 and
.\"O 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.10.1.101 (respectively) when the
.\"O 1-minute, 5-minute, or 15-minute averages exceed the associated
.\"O maximum values.  If any of the MAX1, MAX5, or MAX15 values are
.\"O unspecified, they default to a value of DEFMAXLOADAVE.
マシンの平均負荷をチェックし、
1 分間・5 分間・15 分間の平均がそれぞれの最大値を超えている場合は、
1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.10.1.100 と 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.10.1.101 をクェリーして、
エラーフラグ (1) とテキスト文字列のエラーメッセージを返す。
MAX1, MAX5, MAX15 の値のうち指定されていないものは、
デフォルトの DEFMAXLOADAVE になる。
.IP "file FILE [MAXSIZE]"
.\"O Monitors file sizes and makes sure they don't grow beyond a certain
.\"O size (in kilobytes).  MAXSIZE defaults to infinite if not specified,
.\"O and only monitors the size without reporting errors about it.
ファイルサイズを監視し、(キロバイトで) 指定されたサイズを
超えてないかをチェックする。
MAXSIZE が指定されていない場合のデフォルトは無限大になり、
エラーを報告せずにサイズのみを監視する。
.\"O .SS "Errors"
.SS エラー
.PP
.\"O Any errors in obtaining the above information are reported via the
.\"O 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.101.1.100 flag and the
.\"O 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.101.1.101 text-string description.
上記の情報を取得するためのエラーは、
1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.101.1.100 フラグと
1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.101.1.101 テキスト文字列をクェリーして表示される。
.\"O .SH AGENTX SUB-AGENTS
.SH AGENTX サブエージェント
.\"O To enable AgentX support in the snmp master agent, put the following
.\"O line in your snmpd.conf file:
.\"O .IP "master agentx"
.\"O Note that this support is still experimental, and should not be used
.\"O on production systems.  See README.agentx for details.
snmp マスターエージェントで AgentX サポートを有効にするためには、
snmpd.conf ファイルに以下のような行を書き込めばよい:
.IP "master agentx"
このサポートはまだ実験的なもので、製品版のシステムでは使用すべきではない。
詳細は README.agentx を参照すること。
.\"O .SH SMUX SUB-AGENTS
.SH SMUX サブエージェント
.\"O To enable and SMUX based sub-agent, such as
.\"O .IR gated ,
.\"O use the
.\"O .I smuxpeer
.\"O configuration entry
.I gated
のような SMUX ベースのサブエージェントを有効にするためには、
以下のように
.I smuxpeer
設定エントリを使えばよい:
.IP "smuxpeer OID PASS"
.\"O For 
.\"O .I gated
.\"O a sensible entry might be
.\"O .I smuxpeer .1.3.6.1.4.1.4.1.3 secret
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: sensible の意味は「実際の」でいいかな？
.\"Osato: 
.I gated
についての実際のエントリは
.I smuxpeer .1.3.6.1.4.1.4.1.3 secret
のようになる。
.\"O .SH DYNAMICALLY LOADABLE MODULES
.SH 動的読み込み可能モジュール
.\"O If the agent is built with support for the UCD-DLMOD-MIB it is capable
.\"O of loading agent MIB modules dynamically at startup through
.\"O the \fIdlmod\fR directive and during runtime through use of the UCD-DLMOD-MIB.
.\"O The following directive loads the shared object module file PATH which
.\"O uses the module name prefix NAME.
エージェントが UCD-DLMOD-MIB のサポートを組み込んでいる場合、
エージェント MIB モジュールを
起動時に \fIdlmod\fR ディレクティブを使って動的にロードしたり、
実行中に UCD-DLMOD-MIB を使って動的にロードすることができる。
以下のディレクティブは、モジュール名プレフィックスが NAME である
共有オブジェクトモジュールファイル PATH をロードする。
.IP "dlmod NAME PATH"
.IP
.\"O .SH ACCESS CONTROL
.SH アクセス制御
.\"O snmpd supports the View-Based Access Control Model (vacm)
.\"O as defined in RFC 2275.
.\"O To this end, it recognizes the following keywords in the configuration
.\"O file: \fIcom2sec\fR, \fIgroup\fR, \fIaccess\fR, and \fIview\fR as well 
.\"O as some easier-to-use wrapper directives: \fIrocommunity\fR,
.\"O \fIrwcommunity\fR, \fIrouser\fR, \fIrwuser\fR.
snmpd は RFC 2275 で規定されている
View-Based Access Control Model (vacm) をサポートしている。
このため、snmpd は設定ファイルにある
\fIcom2sec\fR, \fIgroup\fR, \fIaccess\fR, \fIview\fR 
というキーワードを認識する。
また簡単に使用するためのラッパーディレクティブ
\fIrocommunity\fR, \fIrwcommunity\fR, 
\fIrouser\fR, \fIrwuser\fR も認識する。
.IP "rocommunity COMMUNITY [SOURCE] [OID]"
.IP "rwcommunity COMMUNITY [SOURCE] [OID]"
.\"O These create read-only and read-write communities that can be used to
.\"O access the agent.  They are a quick method of using the following
.\"O \fIcom2sec\fR, \fIgroup\fR, \fIaccess\fR, and \fIview\fR directive lines.  They are
.\"O not as efficient either, as groups aren't created so the tables are
.\"O possibly larger.  In other words: don't use these if you have complex
.\"O situations to set up.
これらディレクティブは読み込みしかできないコミュニティと
読み書きできるコミュニティを作成し、
エージェントにアクセスするために使用する。
これらは以下の \fIcom2sec\fR, \fIgroup\fR, 
\fIaccess\fR, \fIview\fR ディレクティブ行を簡単に使うための方法である。
これらは効率的ではなく、グループが作成されないために
テーブルが幾分大きくなる。
言い換えれば、複雑な状態を設定する場合には使用してはならない、
ということである。
.IP
.\"O The format of the SOURCE is token is described in the \fIcom2sec\fR
.\"O directive section below.  The OID token restricts access for that
.\"O community to everything below that given OID.
SOURCE のフォーマットは、以下の \fIcom2sec\fR ディレクティブセクションで
説明されているトークンと同じである。
OID トークンは、コミュニティのアクセスを、
指定された OID 以下のものだけに制限する。
.IP "rouser USER [noauth|auth|priv] [OID]"
.IP "rwuser USER [noauth|auth|priv] [OID]"
.\"O Creates a SNMPv3 USM user in the VACM access configuration tables.
.\"O Again, its more efficient (and powerful) to use the combined
.\"O \fIcom2sec\fR, \fIgroup\fR, \fIaccess\fR, and \fIview\fR directives instead.
SNMPv3 USM ユーザーを VACM アクセス設定テーブルに作成する。
これもまた、\fIcom2sec\fR, \fIgroup\fR, \fIaccess\fR, \fIview\fR 
ディレクティブを組み合わせて使用した方が効率的 (かつ強力) である。
.IP
.\"O The minimum level of authentication and privacy the user must use is
.\"O specified by the first token (which defaults to "auth").  The OID
.\"O parameter restricts access for that user to everything below the given 
.\"O OID.
ユーザーが使用しなければならない認証とプライバシーの最低レベルを
最初のトークンで指定する (デフォルトは "auth" である)。
OID パラメータは、そのユーザーのアクセスを、
指定された OID 以下のものだけに制限する。
.IP "com2sec NAME SOURCE COMMUNITY"
.\"O This directive specifies the mapping from a source/community pair to
.\"O a security name. SOURCE can be a hostname, a subnet, or the word
.\"O \fI"default"\fR.
このディレクティブはソース (SOURCE) とコミュニティ (COMMUNITY) のペアから
セキュリティ名 (NAME) へのマッピングを指定する。
SOURCE はホスト名・サブネット・\fI"default"\fR である。
.\"O A subnet can be specified as IP/MASK or IP/BITS.
.\"O The first source/community combination that matches the incoming packet
.\"O is selected.
サブネットは IP/MASK または IP/BITS で指定できる。
入ってくるパケットにマッチするソースとコミュニティの組み合わせが選択される。
.IP "group NAME MODEL SECURITY"
.\"O This directive defines the mapping from securitymodel/securityname to group.
.\"O MODEL is one of \fIv1\fR, \fIv2c\fR, or \fIusm\fR.
このディレクティブはセキュリティモデル (MODEL) と
セキュリティ名 (SECURITY) のペアから
グループ名 (NAME) へのマッピングを定義する。
MODEL は \fIv1\fR, \fIv2c\fR, \fIusm\fR のいずれか 1 つである。
.IP "access NAME CONTEXT MODEL LEVEL PREFX READ WRITE NOTIFY"
.\"O The access directive maps from group/security model/security level to
.\"O a view. 
.\"O MODEL is one of \fIany\fR, \fIv1\fR, \fIv2c\fR, or \fIusm\fR.
.\"O LEVEL is one of \fInoauth\fR, \fIauth\fR, or \fIpriv\fR.
access ディレクティブはグループセキュリティと
モデルセキュリティのレベルを、あるビュー (view) にマップする。
MODEL は \fIany\fR, \fIv1\fR, \fIv2c\fR, \fIusm\fR のいずれか 1 つである。
LEVEL は \fInoauth\fR, \fIauth\fR, \fIpriv\fR のいずれか 1 つである。
.\"O PREFX specifies how CONTEXT should be matched against the context of
.\"O the incoming pdu, either \fIexact\fR or \fIprefix\fR.
.\"O READ, WRITE and NOTIFY specifies the view to be used for the corresponding 
.\"O access.
.\"O For v1 or v2c access, LEVEL will be noauth, and CONTEXT will be empty.
PREFX は入ってくる pdu の内容に対する
CONTEXT のマッチの方法を指定するもので、
\fIexact\fR または \fIprefix\fR である。
READ, WRITE, NOTIFY はビューに対応するアクセス方法を指定するのに使われる。
v1 または v2c のアクセスでは、LEVEL は noauth、
CONTEXT は空文字列である。
.IP "view NAME TYPE SUBTREE [MASK]"
.\"O The defines the named view. TYPE is either \fIincluded\fR or \fIexcluded\fR.
.\"O MASK is a list of hex octets, separated by '.' or ':'.  The MASK
.\"O defaults to "ff" if not specified.
このディレクティブは指定した名前のビュー (view) を定義する。
TYPE は \fIincluded\fR または \fIexcluded\fR である。
MASK は 16 進数で表した 8 ビットを
\&'.' または ':' で区切ってリストにしたものである。
MASK が指定されていない場合のデフォルトは "ff" である。
.IP
.\"O The reason for the mask is, that it allows you to control access to
.\"O one row in a table, in a relatively simple way. As an example, as an ISP
.\"O you might consider giving each customer access to his or her own interface:
マスクを使用する理由は、比較的簡単に
テーブルの 1 つの行 (row) へのアクセスを制御することにある。
例えば、ISP ではそれぞれの顧客に対して
顧客ごとのインタフェースにアクセスさせたいと考えるかもしれない:
.IP
.nf
view cust1 included interfaces.ifTable.ifEntry.ifIndex.1 ff.a0
view cust2 included interfaces.ifTable.ifEntry.ifIndex.2 ff.a0
.IP
.\"O (interfaces.ifTable.ifEntry.ifIndex.1 == .1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.1.1,
.\"O ff.a0 == 11111111.10100000. which nicely covers up and including
.\"O the row index, but lets the user vary the field of the row)
(interfaces.ifTable.ifEntry.ifIndex.1 == .1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.1.1 で
ff.a0 == 11111111.10100000 である。
これは行インデックスをうまい具合いにカバーして含んでいるが、
行フィールドの変更をユーザーに許可している。)
.\"O .IP "VACM Examples:"
.IP "VACM の例:"
.nf
#       sec.name  source          community
com2sec local     localhost       private
com2sec mynet     10.10.10.0/24   public
com2sec public    default         public

#             sec.model  sec.name
group mygroup v1         mynet
group mygroup v2c        mynet
group mygroup usm        mynet
group local   v1         local
group local   v2c        local
group local   usm        local
group public  v1         public
group public  v2c        public
group public  usm        public

#           incl/excl subtree                          mask
view all    included  .1                               80
view system included  system                           fe
view mib2   included  .iso.org.dod.internet.mgmt.mib-2 fc

#              context sec.model sec.level prefix read   write notify
access mygroup ""      any       noauth    exact  mib2   none  none
access public  ""      any       noauth    exact  system none  none
access local   ""      any       noauth    exact  all    all   all
.\"O .IP "Default VACM model"
.IP "デフォルトの VACM モデル"
.\"O The default configuration of the agent, as shipped, is functionally
.\"O equivalent to the following entries:
最初の状態でのエージェントのデフォルトの設定は、
機能的には以下のエントリと等価である:
.nf
com2sec	public	default	public
group	public	v1	public
group	public	v2c	public
group	public	usm	public
view 	all	included	.1
access	public	""	any	noauth	exact	all	none	none
.\"O .SH SNMPv3 CONFIGURATION
.SH SNMPv3 設定
.PP
.IP "engineID STRING"
.\"O The snmpd agent needs to be configured with an engineID to be able to
.\"O respond to SNMPv3 messages.  With this configuration file line, the
.\"O engineID will be configured from STRING.  The default value of the
.\"O engineID is configured with the first IP address found for the
.\"O hostname of the machine.
snmpd エージェントが SNMPv3 メッセージに応答するためには
engineID を設定する必要がある。
設定ファイルにこの行があれば、STRING から engineID を設定する。
engineID のデフォルト値は、マシンのホスト名に対して見つかる
最初の IP アドレスに設定される。
.IP "createUser username (MD5|SHA) authpassphrase [DES] [privpassphrase]"
.\"O This directive should be placed into the
.\"O "/var/ucd-snmp"/snmpd.conf file instead of the other normal
.\"O locations.  The reason is that the information is read from the file
.\"O and then the line is removed (eliminating the storage of the master
.\"O password for that user) and replaced with the key that is derived from 
.\"O it.  This key is a localized key, so that if it is stolen it can not
.\"O be used to access other agents.  If the password is stolen, however,
.\"O it can be.
このディレクティブは、他の場所にある通常の設定ファイルではなく、
"/var/ucd-snmp"/snmpd.conf ファイルに書くべきである。
その理由は、情報がこのファイルから読み込まれた後、
この行が削除され (ユーザーのマスターパスワードの格納場所から消去されて)、
この行から得られるキーに置き換えられるためである。
このキーはローカルなキーであり、
盗まれたとしても他のエージェントにアクセスするのには使えない。
しかしパスワードが盗まれた場合は、他のエージェントにアクセスできる。
.IP
.\"O MD5 and SHA are the authentication types to use, but you must have
.\"O built the package with openssl installed in order to use SHA.  The
.\"O only privacy protocol currently supported is DES.  If the privacy
.\"O passphrase is not specified, it is assumed to be the same as the
.\"O authentication passphrase.  Note that the users created will be
.\"O useless unless they are also added to the VACM access control tables
.\"O described above.
MD5 と SHA は使用される認証タイプであるが、
SHA を使用するためにはインストールされている openssl を使って
パッケージを作成しなければならない。
現在のところプライバシープロトコルがサポートされているのは DES のみである。
プライバシーパスフレーズが指定されていない場合、
認証パスフレーズと同じであると仮定される。
上で説明した VACM アクセス制御テーブルに入れなければ、
作成したユーザーの使い道がない点に注意すること。
.IP
.\"O Warning: the minimum pass phrase length is 8 characters.
警告: パスフレーズは少なくとも 8 文字である。
.IP
.\"O SNMPv3 users can be created at runtime using the
.\"O .I snmpusm
.\"O command.
.I snmpusm
コマンドを用いれば、実行中に SNMPv3 ユーザーを作成することができる。
.IP
.\"O .SH SETTING SYSTEM INFORMATION
.SH システム情報の設定
.IP "syslocation STRING"
.IP "syscontact STRING"
.IP "sysname STRING"
.\"O Sets the system location, system contact or system name for the agent.
.\"O This information is reported in the 'system' group the mibII tree.
エージェントが置かれているシステムの場所 (location)・
連絡先 (contact)・名前 (name) を設定する。
この情報は mibII ツリーの 'system' グループに設定される。
.\"O Ordinarily these objects (sysLocation.0, sysContact.0 and sysName.0)
.\"O are read-write.  However, specifying the value for one of these
.\"O objects by giving the appropriate token makes the corresponding object
.\"O read-only, and attempts to set the value of the object will result in
.\"O a notWritable error response.
通常、これらのオブジェクト (sysLocation.0, sysContact.0 and sysName.0) は
読み書き可能である。
ただし、これらのオブジェクトの値に適切なトークンを付加して指定すれば、
そのオブジェクトを読み込みのみにすることができ、
オブジェクトの値を設定しようとしたときに
notWritable エラーレスポンスを返すようにできる。
.IP "sysservices NUMBER"
.\"O Sets the value of the system.sysServices.0 object.
.\"O For a host, a good value is 72.
system.sysServices.0 オブジェクトの値を設定する。
ホストの場合は、72 がよい。
.IP "agentaddress [(udp|tcp):]port[@address][,...]"
.\"O Makes the agent list on the specified list of sockets instead of the
.\"O default port, which is port 161.  Multiple ports can be separated by
.\"O commas.  Transports can be specified by prepending the port number
.\"O with the transport name ("udp" or "tcp") followed by a colon.
.\"O Finally, to bind to a particular interface, you can specify the
.\"O address you want it to bind with.
デフォルトの 161 番ポートではなく、
指定したソケットのリストでエージェントのリストを作成する。
複数のポートをコンマで区切って指定できる。
トランスポート名 ("udp" または "tcp")・コロン・ポート名のようにして、
トランスポート名を指定できる。
特定のインタフェースにバインドするために、
アドレスを指定することができる。
.\"O For example, specifying
.\"O .I "agentaddress 161,tcp:161,9161@localhost"
.\"O will make the agent listen on: udp port 161 for any address, tcp port
.\"O 161 for any address, and udp port 9161 on only the interface
.\"O associated with the localhost address.  Note that the 
.\"O .I "-T"
.\"O flag changes the default transport mapping to use (in the
.\"O above example, the default transport mapping is 
.\"O .I udp.
例えば
.I "agentaddress 161,tcp:161,9161@localhost"
のように指定すれば、エージェントに対して、
全てのアドレスの udp ポート 161・全てのアドレスの tcp ポート 161・
localhost のアドレスに関連づけられた
インタフェースの udp ポート 9161 を監視 (listen) させることができる。
.I "-T"
フラグを用いれば、
使用するデフォルトのトランスポートマッピングを変更することができる
(上記の例では、デフォルトのトランスポートマッピングは
.I udp
である)。
.IP "agentgroup groupid"
.\"O Change to this gid after opening port. The groupid may refer to a group
.\"O by name or a number if the group number starts with '#'. For example,
.\"O specifying
.\"O .I agentgroup snmp
.\"O will cause the agent to run as the snmp group or
.\"O .I agentgroup #10
.\"O will cause the agent to run as the group with groupid 10.
ポートをオープンした後で、グループ ID を指定した値に変更する。
groupid はグループ名またはグループ番号である。
グループ番号の場合は '#' で始める。
例えば
.I agentgroup snmp
の場合は、エージェントを snmp グループで動作させる。
.I agentgroup #10
の場合は、エージェントをグループ ID 10 番で動作させる。
.IP "agentuser uid"
.\"O Change to this uid after opening port. The userid may refer to a user
.\"O by name or a number if the user number starts with '#'. For example,
.\"O specifying
.\"O .I agentuser snmp
.\"O will cause the agent to run as the snmp user or
.\"O .I agentuser #10
.\"O will cause the agent to run as the user with userid 10.
ポートをオープンした後で、ユーザー ID を指定した値に変更する。
userid はユーザー名またはユーザー番号である。
ユーザー番号の場合は '#' で始める。
例えば
.I agentuser snmp
の場合は、エージェントをユーザー snmp で動作させる。
.I agentuser #10
の場合は、エージェントをユーザー ID 10 番で動作させる。
.IP "interface NAME TYPE SPEED"
.\"O For interfaces where the agent fails to guess correctly on the type and
.\"O speed, this directive can supply additional information.
.\"O TYPE is a type value as given in the IANAifType-MIB.
エージェントがタイプやスピードの推測に失敗したインタフェースに対して、
このディレクティブで追加の情報を提供することができる。
TYPE は IANAifType-MIB で指定されるタイプである。
.IP "ignoredisk STRING"
.\"O When scanning for available disk devices the agent might block in trying
.\"O to open all possible disk devices. This might lead to a timeout when
.\"O walking the device tree. Sometimes the next walk will run without timeout,
.\"O sometimes it will timeout every time you try it.
使用可能なディスクデバイスをスキャンする場合、
エージェントは使用可能なディスクデバイスをオープンするときに
ブロックを行うことがある。
これによってデバイスツリーを辿っているときにタイムアウトが起るかもしれない。
次に辿ったときにタイムアウトになるかもしれないし、
毎回タイムアウトになるかもしれない。
.IP
.\"O If you experience such behaviour you might add this directive and give all
.\"O device names not to be checked (i.e. opened). You might have more than one
.\"O such directive in your configuration file stating all devices not to be
.\"O opened. You might also specify those devices using wildcards similar to
.\"O the syntax you can use in a bourne shell (see examples below).
このような現象が起った場合は、このディレクティブを追加し、
チェックしない (つまりオープンしない) 全てのデバイスを指定する。
設定ファイルにこのディレクティブを 1 つ以上の指定して、
オープンしない全てのデバイスを書き込む。
bourne シェルの文法の似たワイルドカードを使って、
デバイスを指定することもできる (下記の例を参照すること)。
.IP
.\"O .B Note:
.B 注意:
.\"O For a list of devices scanned for every system please consult the sources
.\"O (host/hr_disk.c) and check for the Add_HR_Disk_entry() calls relevant for
.\"O your type of OS.
全てのシステムでスキャンされるデバイスのリストは、
ソース (host/hr_disk.c) を見て、
OS タイプに対応した Add_HR_Disk_entry() コールをチェックすること。
.IP
.\"O Examples:
例:
.IP
ignoredisk /dev/rdsk/c0t2d0
.IP
.\"O This directive prevents the device /dev/rdsk/c0t2d0 from being scanned.
このディレクティブは、
デバイス /dev/rdsk/c0t2d0 をスキャンさせないようにする。
.IP
ignoredisk /dev/rdsk/c0t[!6]d0
.IP
.\"O This directive prevents all devices /dev/rdsk/c0tXd0 except .../c0t6d0
.\"O from being scanned. For most systems similar is the following directive:
このディレクティブは /dev/rdsk/c0t6d0 を除く /dev/rdsk/c0tXd0 の
全てのデバイスをスキャンさせないようにする。 
多くのシステムで同様なディレクティブとしては以下のものがある:
.IP
ignoredisk /dev/rdsk/c0t[0-57-9a-f]d0
.IP
ignoredisk /dev/rdsk/c1*
.IP
.\"O This directive prevents all devices whose device names start with /dev/rdsk/c1
.\"O from being scanned.
このディレクティブは、/dev/rdsk/c1 で始まる名前のデバイスを
全てスキャンさせないようにする。
.IP
ignoredisk /dev/rdsk/c?t0d0
.IP
.\"O This directive prevents all devices /dev/rdsk/cXt0d0 ('X' might be any char)
.\"O from being scanned.
このディレクティブは、デバイス /dev/rdsk/cXt0d0 ('X' は任意の文字) を
全てスキャンさせないようにする。
.IP
.\"O You might use more than one such wildcard expression in any such directive.
どのディレクティブにおいても、
このようなワイルドカード表現を 2 つ以上使うことできる。
.IP "authtrapenable NUMBER"
.\"O Setting authtrapenable to 1 enables generation of authentication failure
.\"O traps.  The default value is disabled(2).  Ordinarily the corresponding
.\"O object (snmpEnableAuthenTraps.0) is read-write, but setting its value
.\"O via this token makes the object read-only, and attempts to set the
.\"O value of the object will result in a notWritable error response.
authtrapenable を 1 に設定すると、
認証の失敗が起った場合にトラップを生成する。
デフォルトの値は disabled(2) である。
通常これに対応するオブジェクト
(snmpEnableAuthenTraps.0) は読み書き可能であるが、
このトークンを使って値を設定すると読み込みだけになり、
オブジェクトの値を設定しようとした場合には
notWritable エラーレスポンスを返す。
.IP "trapcommunity STRING"
.\"O This defines the default community string to be used when sending traps.
.\"O Note that this command must be used prior to any of the following three
.\"O commands that are intended use this community string.
このコマンドはトラップを送るときに使う
デフォルトのコミュニティ文字列を定義する。
このコマンドはコミュニティ文字列を使う以下の 3 つのコマンドより
前に使用しなければならない点に注意すること。
.IP "trapsink HOST [COMMUNITY [PORT]]"
.IP "trap2sink HOST [COMMUNITY [PORT]]"
.IP "informsink HOST [COMMUNITY [PORT]]"
.\"O These commands define
.\"O the hosts to receive traps (and/or inform notifications). The
.\"O daemon sends a Cold Start trap when it starts up. If enabled, it also sends
.\"O traps on authentication failures.  Multiple \fItrapsink\fR, \fItrap2sink\fR
.\"O and \fIinformsink\fR lines may be specified to specify multiple destinations.
これらのコマンドはトラップを受信する (通知を送る先の) ホストを定義する。
このデーモンは起動時に Cold Start トラップを送る。
有効になっている場合は、認証が失敗したときにもトラップを送る。
\fItrapsink\fR, \fItrap2sink\fR, \fIinformsink\fR 行を複数指定すれば、
複数の送信先を指定することができる。
.\"O Use \fItrap2sink\fR to send SNMPv2 traps and \fIinformsink\fR to send
.\"O inform notifications.
.\"O If COMMUNITY is not specified, the string from a preceding \fItrapcommunity\fR
.\"O directive will be used. If PORT is not specified, the well known SNMP trap
.\"O port (162) will be used.
\fItrap2sink\fR は SNMPv2 トラップを送るのに使う。
\fIinformsink\fR は通知を発行するのに使う。
COMMUNITY が指定されていない場合、
以前に \fItrapcommunity\fR ディレクティブで指定した文字列が使われる。
PORT が指定されていない場合、
良く知られている SNMP トラップポート (162) が使われる。
.IP "trapsess [SNMPCMD_ARGS] HOST [COMMUNITY]"
.\"O This is a more generic trap configuration token that allows any type
.\"O of trap destination to be specified with any version of SNMP.  See the 
.\"O .I snmpcmd(1)
.\"O manual page for further details on the arguments that can be passed as
.\"O .I "SNMPCMD ARGS".
これはより基本的なトラップ設定トークンで、
任意のトラップ送信先タイプと任意の SNMP バージョンを指定できる。
.I "SNMPCMD ARGS"
として渡される引き数のより詳しい情報は、
.I snmpcmd(1)
の man ページを参照すること。
.\"O In addition to the arguments listed there, the special argument
.\"O \fI-Ci\fR specifies that you want inform notifications to be used
.\"O instead of unacknowledged traps (this requires that you also specify a 
.\"O version number of v2c or v3 as well).
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: that you want ... to be used の訳が自信なし。
.\"Osato: 
ここで挙げた引き数に加えて、特別な引き数 \fI-Ci\fR があり、
unacknowledged トラップではなく通知を使用することを指定する。
(この引き数を指定するには、
バージョン番号 v2c または v3 を指定する必要がある)。
.\"O .SH "PROXY SUPPORT"
.SH プロキシのサポート
.IP "proxy [SNMPCMD ARGS] HOST OID [REMOTEOID]"
.\"O .B Warning:
.B 警告:
.\"O This functionality is at beta level support.
この機能はサポートはβ版である。
.IP
.\"O This token specifies that any incoming requests under OID should be
.\"O proxied on to HOST instead.  Optionally, relocate the local OID tree
.\"O to the new location at the REMOTEOID.  To authenticate to HOST you
.\"O should use the appropriate set of
.\"O .I "SNMPCMD ARGS."
.\"O See the snmpcmd man page for details.
このトークンは受信した OID 以下の任意のリクエストを HOST に中継して渡す。
通常はローカルの OID ツリーを新しい  REMOTEOID という場所に変更する。
HOST で認証されるためには、適切な
.I "SNMPCMD ARGS"
のセットを使わなければならない。
詳細は snmpcmd の man ページを参照すること。
.IP
.\"O Examples:
例:
.IP
proxy -v 1 -c public remotehost .1.3.6.1.4.1.2021
.IP
proxy -v 3 -l noAuthNoPriv -u user remotehost .1.3.6.1.3.10 .1.3.6.1.2.1.1
.\"O .SH "PASS-THROUGH CONTROL"
.SH パススルー制御
.IP "pass MIBOID EXEC"
.\"O Passes entire control of MIBOID to the EXEC program.  The EXEC program
.\"O is called in one of the following three ways:
MIBOID の全制御を EXEC プログラムに渡す。
EXEC プログラムは以下の 3 つのうちの 1 つの方法で呼び出す:
.RS
.IP "EXEC -g MIBOID"
.IP "EXEC -n MIBOID"
.IP
.\"O These call lines match to SNMP get and getnext requests.  It is
.\"O expected that the EXEC program will take the arguments passed to it
.\"O and return the appropriate response through it's stdout.  
これらの呼び出しは SNMP get と getnext リクエストにマッチする。
EXEC プログラムは渡された引き数を受け取り、
レスポンスを標準出力に返すと仮定されている。
.IP
.\"O The first line of stdout should be the mib OID of the returning value.
標準出力の 1 行目は返り値の mib OID である。
.\"O The second line should be the TYPE of value returned, where TYPE is
.\"O one of the text strings:
.\"O .B string, integer, unsigned, objectid, timeticks, ipaddress, counter, 
.\"O or
.\"O .B gauge.
2 行目は返される値の TYPE である。
TYPE はテキスト文字列
.BR string ", " integer ", " unsigned ", " objectid ", "
.BR timeticks ", " ipaddress ", " counter ", " gauge
のうちの 1 つである。
.\"O The third line of stdout should be the VALUE corresponding with the
.\"O returned TYPE.
標準出力の 3 行目は返された TYPE に対応する VALUE である。
.IP
.\"O For instance, if a script was to return the value integer value "42"
.\"O when a request for .1.3.6.1.4.100 was requested, the script should
.\"O return the following 3 lines:
例えば .1.3.6.1.4.100 へリクエストが送られたときに
スクリプトが整数値 "42" を返す場合、
スクリプトは以下の 3 行を返さなければならない:
.br
.RS
  .1.3.6.1.4.100
.br
  integer
.br
  42
.RE
.IP
.\"O To indicate that the script is unable to comply with the request due
.\"O to an end-of-mib condition or an invalid request, simple exit and
.\"O return no output to stdout at all.  A snmp error will be generated
.\"O corresponding to the SNMP NO-SUCH-NAME response.
end-of-mib 条件や不正なリクエスが原因で、
スクリプトが応答できないことを表すには、
単純に exit して標準出力に何も返さなければよい。
SNMP NO-SUCH-NAME レスポンスに対応する snmp エラーが生成される。
.IP "EXEC -s MIBOID TYPE VALUE"
.IP 
.\"O For SNMP set requests, the above call method is used.  The TYPE passed
.\"O to the EXEC program is one of the text strings:
.\"O .B integer, counter, gauge, timeticks, ipaddress, objid,
.\"O or 
.\"O .B string,
.\"O indicating the type of value passed in the next argument.
SNMP set リクエストを送るには、上の方法を用いる。
EXEC プログラムに渡される TYPE は、テキスト文字列
.BR integer ", " counter ", " gauge ", " timeticks ", " 
.BR ipaddress ", " objid ", " string
のうちの 1 つである。
これらは次の引き数で渡される VALUE のタイプを表す。
.IP
.\"O Return nothing to stdout, and the set will assumed to have been
.\"O successful.  Otherwise, return one of the following error strings to
.\"O signal an error:
.\"O .B not-writable, 
.\"O or 
.\"O .B wrong-type
.\"O and the appropriate error response will be generated instead.
標準出力に何も返さなかった場合は、set が成功したものと仮定する。
それ以外の場合としては、エラーを示すために
.B not-writable
または
.B wrong-type
のいずれかの文字列を返すことがあり、
適当なエラーレスポンスが生成される。
.RS
.\"O .IP Note:
.IP 注意:
.\"O By default, the only community allowed to write (ie snmpset) to your
.\"O script will be the "private" community,or community #2 if defined
.\"O differently by the "community" token discussed above.  Which
.\"O communities are allowed write access are controlled by the RWRITE
.\"O definition in the snmplib/snmp_impl.h source file.
デフォルトでは、ユーザーのスクリプトで
write (つまり snmpset) が許可されるコミュニティは、
"private" コミュニティと
上で説明した "community" トークンで別に定義した
コミュニティ #2 のみである。
どのコミュニティに書き込みアクセスを許可するかは、
ソースファイル snmplib/snmp_impl.h の
RWRITE 定義で制御できる。
.RE
.RE
.IP
.\"O Example (in snmpd.conf):
(snmpd.conf における) 例:
.IP
pass .1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.255 /path/to/local/passtest
.RE
.IP "pass_persist MIBOID EXEC"
.\"O Passes entire control of MIBOID to the EXEC program.  
.\"O Similar to pass, but the EXEC program continues to run after the initial
.\"O request is answered.
MIBOID の全ての制御を EXEC プログラムに渡す。
pass と似ているが、EXEC プログラムは
最初のリクエストに返答した後も稼働し続ける。
.IP
.\"O Upon initialization, EXEC is passed the string "PING\\n" in stdin,
.\"O and it should respond by printing "PONG\\n" to stdout.
初期化の際には、EXEC に対して標準入力から文字列 "PING\\n" が渡され、
標準出力に "PONG\\n" を表示して返答する。
.IP
.\"O For get and getnext requests, EXEC program is passed two lines,
.\"O the command (get or getnext) and the mib OID.  It should return
.\"O three lines, the mib OID, the TYPE of value returned,
.\"O the VALUE corresponding with the returned TYPE.
get または getnext リクエストを送るには、
EXEC プログラムにコマンド (get または getnext) と
mib OID という 2 行を渡す。
EXEC プログラムは、mib OID・返される VALUE の TYPE・
返された TYPE に対応する VALUE という 3 行を返す。
.IP
.\"O For example, if the value for .1.3.6.1.4.100 was requested, the following
.\"O 2 lines would be passed in to stdin:
例えば、.1.3.6.1.4.100 の値をリクエストする場合は、
標準入力に以下の 2 行を渡す。
.br
.RS
  get
.br
  .1.3.6.1.4.100  
.RE
.IP
.\"O To return the value, say, 42, the script would write to stdout:
値、つまり 42 を返すために、スクリプトは以下のような書き出しを行う:
.br
.RS
  .1.3.6.1.4.100
.br
  integer
.br
  42
.RE
.IP
.\"O To indicate that the script is unable to comply with the request due
.\"O to an end-of-mib condition or an invalid request, print "NONE\\n" to
.\"O stdout.
end-of-mib 条件または不正なリクエストが原因で、
スクリプトがリクエストに応答できないことを表すには、
標準出力に "NONE\\n" を書き出す。
.IP
.\"O Example (in snmpd.conf):
(snmpd.conf における) 例:
.IP
pass_persist .1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.255 /path/to/local/pass_persisttest
.RE
.\"O .SH "EXAMPLE"
.SH 例
.\"O See the EXAMPLE.CONF file in the top level source directory for a more
.\"O detailed example of how the above information is used in real
.\"O examples.
上記の情報が実際の例でどのように使われているかについては、
ソースのトップディレクトリにある EXAMPLE.CONF ファイルを参照すること。
.\"O .SH "RE-READING snmpd.conf and snmpd.local.conf"
.SH snmpd.conf と snmpd.local.conf の再読み込み
.\"O The ucd-snmp agent can be forced to re-read its configuration files.
.\"O It can be told to do so by one of two ways:
ucd-snmp エージェントは設定ファイルを再読み込みさせることが可能である。
以下の 2 つのうちの 1 つを実行すればよい:
.IP 1.
.\"O An snmpset of integer(1) to UCD-SNMP-MIB::versionUpdateConfig.0
.\"O (.1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.100.11.0)
snmpset で UCD-SNMP-MIB::versionUpdateConfig.0
(.1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.100.11.0) を整数 (1) に設定する。
.IP 2.
.\"O A "kill -HUP" signal sent to the snmpd agent process.
snmpd エージェントプロセスに "kill -HUP" シグナルを送る。
.\"O .SH "FILES"
.SH ファイル
/usr/share/snmp/snmpd.conf
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
snmpconf(1), snmp.conf(5), snmp_config(5), snmpd(1), EXAMPLE.conf, read_config(3).
.\" Local Variables:
.\"  mode: nroff
.\" End:
