.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 16 23:24:00 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH SNMPTRAPD.CONF 5 "28 Aug 2001"
.ds )H U.C. Davis
.ds ]W V4.2.4
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O /usr/share/snmp/snmptrapd.conf - configuration file for the ucd-snmp trap demon.
/usr/share/snmp/snmptrapd.conf - ucd-snmp trap デーモンの設定ファイル
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B snmptrapd.conf
.\"O is the configuration file(s) which define how the ucd-snmp SNMP trap
.\"O receiving demon operates when it receives a trap.  These files may
.\"O contain any of the directives found in the
.\"O .B DIRECTIVES
.\"O section below.  This file is not required for the demon to operate,
.\"O receive, or report traps.  It is used solely as a method of providing
.\"O extensibility to the trap demon.
.B snmptrapd.conf
は ucd-snmp SNMP trap を受信するデーモンが
trap を受信した際の動作を定義する設定ファイルである。
このファイルには、以下の
.RB 「 ディレクティブ 」
セクションで説明されているディレクティブを指定することができる。
このファイルはデーモンが trap を操作・受信・報告するために必要な訳ではない。
このファイルは trap デーモンに拡張性を提供するための手段として用いられる。
.\"O .SH PLEASE READ FIRST
.SH 最初にお読みください
.\"O First, make sure you have read the snmp_config(5) manual page that
.\"O describes how the ucd-snmp configuration files operate, where they
.\"O are located and how they all work together.
最初に、snmp_config(5) の man ページを読んでおくこと。
この man ページには、ucd-snmp 設定ファイルの処理のされ方・
ファイルの場所・設定ファイル間の関連性が書かれている。
.\"O .SH DIRECTIVES
.SH ディレクティブ
.IP "traphandle OID|default PROGRAM [ARGS ...]"
.\"O The
.\"O .I traphandle
.\"O configuration directive configures the snmptrapd program to launch an
.\"O external program any time it receives a trap matching the OID token.
.I traphandle
設定ディレクティブは、OID トークンにマッチする trap を受信したときに、
snmptrapd が起動する外部プログラムを設定する。
.\"O If the OID token is the word
.\"O .I default
.\"O then any trap not matching any other trap handler will call this
.\"O default one instead.
OID トークンが
.I default
の場合、他のトラップハンドラにマッチしない trap は、
このデフォルトの trap ハンドラを呼び出す
(訳註：そしてこのデフォルトハンドラが、
このディレクティブに書かれたプログラムを呼び出す)。
.\"O The program is fed details about the trap to its standard input, in the
.\"O following format, one entry per line:
プログラムは trap の詳細を標準入力から受け取る。
フォーマットは以下のようになっており、1 行につき 1 エントリである。
.RS
.IP HOSTNAME
.\"O The name of the host in question that sent the trap, as determined by
.\"O gethostbyaddr().
trap を送ってきた該当ホストの名前。
ホスト名は gethostbyaddr() で決定されたものである。
.br
.IP IPADDRESS
.\"O The IP address of the host that sent the trap.
trap を送ってきたホストの IP アドレス。
.br
.IP VARBINDS
.\"O A list of variable bindings that describe the trap and the variables
.\"O enclosed in it.  The first token on the line, up until the space, in
.\"O the OID and the remainder of the line is its value.  
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: enclose の良い訳が思い浮かばない。
.\"Osato:  
トラップとその変数の記述を含む variable bindings のリスト。
空白までの行の最初のトークンは OID で、
行の残りの部分はその値である。
.\"O The first OID
.\"O should be the system.sysUpTime.0 OID, and the second should be
.\"O the ...snmpTrap.snmpTrapOID.0 OID.  
1 番目の OID は system.sysUpTime.0、
2 番目の OID は ...snmpTrap.snmpTrapOID.0 にすべきである。
.\"O The remainder of the OIDs, with the
.\"O possible exception of the last one, are the variable bindings
.\"O contained within the trap.  
.\"Osato: 
.\"Osato: possible をどう訳せば良いのか？
.\"Osato:  
OID の残りは trap に含まれる variable bindings である
(ただし最後の OID はこの限りでないかもしれない)。
.\"O For SNMPv1 traps, the very last OID will
.\"O be the ...snmpTrap.snmpTrapEnterprise OID and its value.  
SNMPv1 trap では、一番最後の OID は
\&...snmpTrap.snmpTrapEnterprise とその値である。
.\"O Essentially, 
.\"O SNMPv1 traps have been converted to the SNMPv2 trap PDU type by the
.\"O method described in the SNMPv1/SNMPv2 coexistence document, for which
.\"O I forget the appropriate RFC number.
基本的に SNMPv1 trap は、
SNMPv1 と SNMPv2 の共存のためのドキュメントに書かれている方法で、
SNMPv2 trap の PDU タイプに変換されている。
しかし RFC の番号を忘れてしまった。
.RE
.IP "createUser username (MD5|SHA) authpassphrase [DES]"
.\"O See the snmpd.conf manual page for a description of how to create
.\"O SNMPv3 users.  It's roughly the same, but the file name changes to
.\"O snmptrapd.conf from snmpd.conf. 
SNMPv3 ユーザーの作成についての説明は、
snmpd.conf の man ページを参照すること。
大体同じであるが、ファイル名を snmpd.conf から
snmptrapd.conf に読み変えること。
.RE
.IP "format1 format"
.\"O The format used to print a SNMPv1 TRAP message. See
.\"O .IR snmptrapd (8)
.\"O for the layout characters available.
SNMPv1 TRAP メッセージを表示するときに使うフォーマット。
使用可能なレイアウト文字は
.IR snmptrapd (8)
を参照すること。
.RE
.IP "format2 format"
.\"O The format used to print a SNMPv2 TRAP2 or INFORM message (note that
.\"O the SNMPv3 protocol uses SNMPv2 style TRAPs and INFORMs).
SNMPv2 TRAP2 メッセージと SNMPv2 INFORM メッセージを
表示するときに使うフォーマット
(SNMPv3 は SNMPv2 形式の TRAP と INFORM を使っている点に注意)。
.\"O .SH NOTES
.SH 注意
.IP o
.\"O The demon blocks on the executing traphandle commands.  (This should
.\"O be fixed in the future with an appropriate signal catch and wait()
.\"O combination).
このデーモンは traphandle コマンドを実行するとブロックしてしまう
(適切なシグナルのキャッチと wait() の組合せにより、
将来修正しなければならない)。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
snmp_config(5), snmptrapd(8), syslog(8), variables(5), read_config(3).
