.\" /***********************************************************
.\" 	Copyright 1988, 1989 by Carnegie Mellon University
.\" 
.\"                       All Rights Reserved
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its 
.\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, 
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
.\" both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in 
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of CMU not be
.\" used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.  
.\" 
.\" CMU DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" CMU BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR
.\" ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION,
.\" ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" ******************************************************************/
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2002 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sat Feb 16 21:11:06 JST 2002
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	identifier	識別子
.\"
.TH VARIABLES 5 "02 Mar 1999"
.UC 4
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O     variables - Format of specifying variable names to SNMP tools.
variables - SNMP ツールに指定する変数名のフォーマット
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\"O     system.sysdescr.0
system.sysdescr.0
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O Variable names are in the format of Object Identifiers (ASN.1).  There are
.\"O several methods of representation. Each variable name is given in the format of A.B.C.D...,
.\"O where A, B, C, and D are subidentifiers in one of two forms of notation.
変数名はオブジェクト識別子
(Object Identifiers (ASN.1)) のフォーマットで記述され、
いくつかの表現法がある。
各変数名は A.B.C.D... という形式で指定される。
ここで A, B, C, D はサブ識別子であり、2 つの表記法のうちのどちらかである。
.\"O Each subidentifier may be encoded as a decimal integer, or a symbol as found in
.\"O the RFC1066 MIB.  The case of the symbols is not significant.
それぞれのサブ識別子には、10 進の整数でエンコードされた数値か、
RFC1066 MIB に記述されているシンボルを指定できる。
シンボルの大文字小文字は区別されない。
.br
.\"O If there is no leading "." in the variable name, the name will be formed
.\"O as if having been preceded with "iso.org.dod.internet.mgmt.mib.".  A "." must
.\"O be placed before the first variable if the user is to fully specify the name.
.\"O For example:
変数名の先頭に "." がない場合は、
名前の先頭に "iso.org.dod.internet.mgmt.mib." をつけて変数名が作成される。
ユーザーが完全な名前を指定する場合は、
最初の変数の前に "." を付けなければならない。
例えば、
.PP
.\"O .I 1.1.0  system.sysDescr.0 and 1.sysDescr.0
.I 1.1.0  system.sysDescr.0 1.sysDescr.0
.PP
.\"O all refer to the same variable name.  Likewise:
これらは同じ変数名を参照する。同様に
.PP
.I .1.3.6.1.2.1.1.1.0 .iso.org.dod.internet.mgmt.mib.system.sysdescr.0 .1.3.6.1.2.1.1.sysdescr.0
.PP
.\"O All refer to the same variable name.
これらも同じ変数名を参照する。
.PP
.\"O The description of the variables in the MIB is given in the set of mib
.\"O files defined by the MIBS environment variable (or the default list
.\"O defined at compilation time) and the mib files in the
.\"O DATADIR/snmp/mibs directory (or the MIBDIRS environment variable).
MIB の変数の説明は、MIBS 環境変数で定義されている mib ファイル
(またはコンパイル時に定義されるデフォルトのリスト) に書かれている。
また DATADIR/snmp/mibs ディレクトリ (または MIBDIRS 環境変数) にある
mib ファイルにも書かれている。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
RFC 1065, RFC 1066, RFC 1067, ISO IS 8824(ASN.1)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The parser of the mib files file is not expected to handle bizarre
.\"O (although correct) interpretations of the ASN.1 notation.
mib ファイルのパーサーは、ASN.1 表記の
(正しいけれども) 奇妙な記述を処理できるようには作られていない。
