.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" cardctl.8 1.17 2000/12/13 16:50:26
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 KOJIMA Mitsuhiro and NAKANO Takeo
.\" all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Apr 30 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" based on the draft by KOJIMA Mitsuhiro <isle@st.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2 Mar 2001 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH CARDCTL 8 "2000/12/13 16:50:26" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O cardctl \- PCMCIA card control utility
cardctl \- PCMCIA カード制御ユーティリティ
.\"O 
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
\fBcardctl\fR [\fB-V\fR] \fIcommand\fR [\fIsocket\fR]
.br
\fBcardctl\fR
[\fB\-c \fIconfig\fR] [\fB\-f \fIscheme\fR] [\fB\-s \fIstab\fR]
\fBscheme\fR [\fIname\fR]
.\"O 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O \fBCardctl\fR is used to monitor and control the state of PCMCIA
.\"O sockets.  If a socket number is specified, the command will be applied
.\"O to just one socket; otherwise, all sockets will be affected.
.B cardctl
は PCMCIA ソケットの状態を監視/制御するために用いられる。
ソケット番号を指定すればそのソケットのみを対象とし、
指定しなければ全てのソケットを対象とする。
.PP
.\"O \fBCardctl\fR is also used to select between multiple PCMCIA
.\"O configuration schemes.  The current scheme name is passed to the
.\"O device option scripts as part of the ``device address'', so the
.\"O scripts can use it to choose between different setups.
.B cardctl
は PCMCIA の設定スキーマを切り替える用途にも用いられる。
現在のスキーマ名はそれぞれのデバイス用のオプションスクリプトに
「デバイスアドレス」の一部として渡されるので、
これを使えばスクリプトで条件分けを行うことができる。
.PP
.\"O If \fBcardctl\fR is executed by root, all commands are available.  If
.\"O it is executed by an unpriviledged user, only the informational
.\"O commands are accessible.
.B cardctl
をルート権限で実行すると全てのコマンドを利用できる。
一般ユーザーからは情報表示系のコマンドのみが利用できる。
.PP
.\"O Some commands may not work or give misleading results if \fBcardmgr\fR
.\"O is not running.
コマンドによっては、
.B cardmgr
が起動されていないと動作しない (あるいはおかしな結果となる)
ことがある。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH COMMANDS
.TP \w'abcd'u
.SH コマンド
.B status
.\"O Display the current socket status flags.
現在のソケット状態フラグを表示する。
.TP
.B config
.\"O Display the socket configuration, including power settings, interrupt
.\"O and I/O window settings, and configuration registers.
ソケットの設定を表示する。表示される情報は、
電力の状態・割り込み・I/O ウインドウの設定・設定レジスタの状態、である。
.TP
.B ident
.\"O Display card identification information, including product
.\"O identification strings, manufacturer ID codes, and function ID codes.
カードの認識情報を表示する。表示される情報は、
製品の認識文字列・メーカの ID コード・function ID コード、である。
.TP
.B suspend
.\"O Shut down and then disable power for a socket.
ソケットをシャットダウンして、電力供給を止める。
.TP
.B resume
.\"O Restore power to a socket, and re-configure for use.
ソケットに再度電力を供給し、再設定する。
.TP
.B reset
.\"O Send a reset signal to a socket, subject to approval by any drivers
.\"O already bound to the socket.
ソケットにリセット信号を送る。
ただしそのソケットに接続されている全てのドライバの承認を必要とする。
.TP
.B eject
.\"O Notify all client drivers that this card will be ejected, then cut
.\"O power to the socket.
全てのクライアントドライバにカードがイジェクトされたことを知らせ、
ソケットへの電力供給を止める。
.TP
.B insert
.\"O Notify all client drivers that this card has just been inserted.
全てのクライアントドライバにカードが挿入されたことを知らせる。
.TP
.B scheme
.\"O If no scheme name is given,
.\"O .B cardctl
.\"O will display the current PCMCIA configuration scheme.  If a scheme
.\"O name is given,
.\"O .B cardctl
.\"O will unconfigure all PCMCIA devices, and reconfigure for the new
.\"O scheme.
スキーマが設定されなかった場合、現在設定されている
PCMCIA スキーマを表示する。
スキーマ名を指定すると、
全ての PCMCIA デバイスの設定を解除し、新しいスキーマで再設定する。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Show version information and exit.
バージョン情報を表示して終了する。
.TP
.BI "\-c " config
.\"O Look for the card configuration database and card configuration
.\"O scripts in the specified directory, instead of 
.\"O .IR /etc/pcmcia .
カード設定データベースとカード設定スクリプトの置場所として、
指定されたディレクトリを用いる。通常は
.I /etc/pcmcia
のものを読み込む。
.TP
.BI "\-f " scheme
.\"O Use the specified file to keep track of the current configuration
.\"O scheme, instead of
.\"O .IR /var/lib/pcmcia/scheme .
現在の設定スキーマの追跡に指定したファイルを用いる。
通常は
.I /var/lib/pcmcia/scheme
を用いる。
.TP
.BI "\-s " stab
.\"O Read current socket information from the specified file, instead of
.\"O .IR /var/lib/pcmcia/stab .
現在のソケット情報を指定したファイルから読み込む。通常は
.I /var/lib/pcmcia/stab
を用いる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
cardmgr(8).
