.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" cardmgr.8 1.38 2000/11/19 00:06:18
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 KOJIMA Mitsuhiro and NAKANO Takeo
.\" all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Apr 30 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" based on the draft by KOJIMA Mitsuhiro <isle@st.rim.or.jp>
.\" Updated 2 Mar 2001 by NAKANO Takeo
.\"
.TH CARDMGR 8 "2000/11/19 00:06:18" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O cardmgr \- PCMCIA device manager
.SH 名前
cardmgr \- PCMCIA デバイスマネージャー
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B cardmgr
.RB [ -V ]
.RB [ -q ]
.RB [ -d ]
.RB [ -o ]
.RB [ -f ]
.RB [ -v ]
.RB [ "\-c\ "\c
.I configpath\c
]
.RB [ "\-m\ "\c
.I modpath\c
]
.RB [ "\-p\ "\c
.I pidfile\c
]
.RB [ "\-s\ "\c
.I stabfile\c
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Cardmgr
.\"O monitors PCMCIA sockets for card insertion and removal events.  When a
.\"O card is inserted,
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O looks up the card in a database of known cards.  If the card can be
.\"O identified, appropriate device drivers will be loaded and bound to the
.\"O card.  When a card is ejected, that card's drivers will be shut down
.\"O and unloaded if possible.  Based on the contents of the PCMCIA card
.\"O configuration database,
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O may also execute arbitrary commands when appropriate cards are either
.\"O inserted or removed.
.B cardmgr
は PCMCIA ソケットの状態を監視し、カードの挿入やイジェクトを検知する。
カードが挿入されると、
.B cardmgr
は既知のカードのデータベースからそのカードを探す。
カードが認識できれば、適切なデバイスドライバをロードして
そのカードにバインドする。
カードがイジェクトされると、
そのカード用のドライバを終了し、可能ならばアンロードする。
PCMCIA カードの設定データベースに記述しておけば、
特定のカードが挿入されたり抜かれたりした場合に、
.B cardmgr
に任意のコマンドを実行させることもできる。
.PP
.\"O All insertion and removal events, device driver loads and unloads, and
.\"O startup and shutdown commands are reported in the system log file.
.\"O Warnings and errors will also be logged.  Current card and device
.\"O information for each socket is recorded in
.\"O .I /var/state/pcmcia/stab
.\"O or
.\"O .IR /var/lib/pcmcia/stab .
カードの挿入/イジェクト・デバイスドライバのロード/アンロード・
ロード時/アンロード時に実行したコマンドなどは、
システムのログファイルに記録される。
警告やエラーメッセージも記録される。
現在挿入されているカードとデバイスに関する情報は
.I /var/run/stab " または " /var/lib/pcmcia/stab
に記録される。
.PP
.\"O Normally, when a card is identified,
.\"O .I cardmgr
.\"O will send a beep to the console.  A beep is also generated when a card
.\"O is successfully configured.  A beep of lower pitch is generated if
.\"O either of these steps fails.  Ejecting a card produces a single beep.
通常カードが識別されると、
.B cardmgr
はコンソールに beep 音を発生させる。
カードが正しく設定された時にも beep 音がする。
低音の beep 音は識別か設定のどちらかのプロセスが
うまく行かなかったことを意味する。
カードを抜いた時も一度 beep 音がする。
.PP
.\"O When
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O receives a
.\"O .B SIGHUP
.\"O signal, it will reload its configuration file.  When
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O receives a
.\"O .B SIGTERM
.\"O signal, it will shut down all sockets that are not busy and then
.\"O exit, but drivers for busy sockets will stay loaded.
.B cardmgr
が
.B SIGHUP
シグナルを受けると、全てのソケットをいったん閉じ、
設定ファイルを再度読みこみ、ソケットをあらためて初期化する。
.B SIGTERM
シグナルを受けると、使用中でない全てのソケットを閉じて終了する。
しかし使用中のソケットのドライバはロードされたまま残る。
.PP
.\"O If the
.\"O .B PCMCIA_OPTS
.\"O environment variable is set, its contents will be parsed after the
.\"O main card configuration file is read.
.B PCMCIA_OPTS
環境変数が設定されていると、メインのカード設定ファイルを読んだ後に
その内容がパースされる。
.PP
.\"O At startup,
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O requires that
.\"O .I /tmp
.\"O reside on a filesystem that permits special device files (i.e., a real
.\"O linux filesystem, that is not mounted "nodev").
.B cardmgr
は起動時に、
.I /tmp
がファイルシステムに存在し、
スペシャルデバイスファイルの生成が可能であることを必要とする
(すなわち "nodev" を付けずにマウントした実際の linux ファイルシステム)。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-V
.\"O Show version information and exit.
バージョン情報を表示して終了する。
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Quiet mode: don't beep when cards are inserted.
沈黙モード。カードが挿入されても beep 音を発生しない。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose mode: generates more informational messages during normal
.\"O operation.
詳細表示モード。通常の動作時により詳しい情報メッセージを生成する。
.TP
.B \-d
.\"O Follow module dependencies when loading driver modules, by defaulting
.\"O to use
.\"O .B modprobe
.\"O instead of
.\"O .BR insmod .
.\"O Normally,
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O will try using
.\"O .B modprobe
.\"O only after an unsuccessful attempt with
.\"O .BR insmod .
ドライバモジュールのロード時に、モジュールの依存関係を追跡する。
.B insmod
の代わりに
.B modprobe
の方を使うようにする。通常
.B cardmgr
は、
.B insmod
の試行が失敗したときに限って
.B modprobe
を利用しようとする。
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Foreground: do not fork and run as a daemon until after configuring
.\"O any cards that are already present.
フォアグラウンド動作。既に存在しているあらゆるカードの設定が終わるまでは
fork → デーモン化しない。
.TP
.B \-o
.\"O One pass: configure cards that are present, then exit.  This flag
.\"O also forces
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O to run in the foreground.
1 パス動作。現存のカードを設定して終了する。
このフラグを設定すると、
.B cardmgr
はフォアグラウンドのみで動作する。
.TP
.BI "\-c " configpath
.\"O Look for the card configuration database and card configuration
.\"O scripts in the specified directory, instead of 
.\"O .IR /etc/pcmcia .
カードの設定データベースと設定用スプリプトを、
.I /etc/pcmcia
ではなく指定したディレクトリから探す。
.TP
.BI "\-m " modpath
.\"O Look for loadable kernel modules in the specified directory, instead
.\"O of
.\"O .IR /lib/modules/`uname -r` .
モジュールを、
.I /lib/modules/`uname`/
ディレクトリではなく指定したディレクトリから探す。
.TP
.BI "\-p " pidfile
.\"O Write the PID of the cardmgr process to the specified file, instead of
.\"O .IR /var/run/cardmgr.pid .
cardmgr の PID を、
.I /var/run/cardmgr.pid
ではなく指定したファイルに書き出す。
.TP
.BI "\-s " stabfile
.\"O Write current socket information to the specified file, instead of
.\"O .IR /var/lib/pcmcia/stab .
現在のソケットの状況を、
.I /var/lib/pcmicia/stab
ではなく指定したファイルに書き出す。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"nakano: 原文のこの PD と TP の幅指定はいらないと思う。
.\" .PD 0
.\" .TP \w'/etc/pcmcia/config.opts\ \ \ \|\|'u
.TP
/etc/pcmcia/config
.\"O Card configuration database
カードの設定データベース
.TP
/etc/pcmcia/config.opts
.\"O Local resource settings for PCMCIA devices
PCMCIA デバイスに対するローカルなリソース設定
.TP
/var/run/cardmgr.pid
.\"O PID of active cardmgr process
現在起動している cardmgr の PID
.TP
/var/lib/pcmcia/stab
.\"O Current card and device information for each socket.
それぞれのソケットに挿入されているカードとデバイスに関する情報
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O pcmcia(5), stab(5), cardctl(8), cardinfo(1).
.BR pcmcia (5),
.BR stab (5),
.BR cardctl (8),
.BR cardinfo (1)

