.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" dump_cis.8 1.4 1999/12/21 22:41:19
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon May  1 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH DUMP_CIS 8 "1999/12/21 22:41:19" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O dump_cis \- display PCMCIA Card Information Structures
.SH 名前
dump_cis \- PCMCIA のカード情報構造体を表示する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B dump_cis
.RB [ -f ]
.RB [ -v ]
.RB [ "\-i\ "\c
.I infile\c
]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Dump_cis
.\"O retrieves and parses the Card Information Structures for inserted
.\"O PCMCIA devices, or optionally, parses CIS information from a file.
.B dump_cis
は挿入された PCMCIA カードから
カード情報構造体 (Card Information Structure: CIS) を取得してパースする。
あるいは、ファイルの CIS 情報をパースすることもできる。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B pack_cis
.\"O utility can parse a subset of the non-verbose output
.\"O of
.\"O .BR dump_cis ,
.\"O so it is fairly easy to use
.\"O .B dump_cis
.\"O output as templates for
.\"O .BR pack_cis .
.\"O If a replacement CIS has been loaded for a card,
.\"O .B dump_cis
.\"O will display the replacement rather than the actual data on the card.
.B pack_cis
ユーティリティは
.B dump_cis
の非詳細出力のサブセットをパースすることができるので、
.B dump_cis
の出力を
.B pack_cis
のテンプレートとすることは比較的簡単である。
もしカードに対して代替 CIS がロードされていると、
.B dump_cis
はカードの本来のデータではなく代替データの方を表示する。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-f
.\"O Force: attempt to decode any available CIS information even if the
.\"O overall CIS organization appears to be invalid.
強制モード: CIS の全体の構成がおかしく見える場合でも、
取得できた CIS 情報をすべてデコードしようと試みる。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose output: display raw hex data for each tuple, and provide a
.\"O more complete dump of some tuple types.
詳細出力モード: 各タプルに対して raw 16 進データを表示し、
タプルの型によってはより完全なダンプを与える。
.TP
.BI "\-i " infile
.\"O Read packed CIS data from a file (as created by
.\"O .BR pack_cis )
.\"O instead of reading from active cards.
通常はアクティブなカードから読み込む packed CIS データを、
.RB ( pack_cis
によって作成された)ファイルから読み込む。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O pack_cis(8).
.BR pack_cis (8)


