.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" ftl_format.1 1.9 1999/10/25 19:50:46
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH FTL_FORMAT 1 "1999/10/25 19:50:46" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ftl_format \- Flash Translation Layer formatting utility
.SH 名前
ftl_format \- Flash Translation Layer フォーマットユーティリティ
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B ftl_format
.RB [ -q ]
.RB [ -i ]
.RB [ "\-s "\c
.IR spare ]
.RB [ "\-r "\c
.IR reserve ]
.RB [ "\-b "\c
.IR bootsize ]
.I device
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Ftl_format
.\"O creates a Flash Translation Layer partition on a flash memory device.   
.\"O It needs to access the flash partition's raw character-mode device
.\"O (such as
.\"O .IR /dev/mem0c0c ).
.B ftl_foramt
は Flash Translation Layer (FTL) パーティションを
フラッシュメモリデバイス上に作成する。
flash パーティションに対応する raw character モードデバイスファイル
.RI ( /dev/mem0c0c
など) にアクセスできる必要がある。
.PP
.\"O This is actually a low-level format operation, required before
.\"O accessing a memory device via the FTL block device driver.  Once a
.\"O partition is prepared with
.\"O .BR ftl_format ,
.\"O a filesystem should be created in a separate step.  Filesystem
.\"O commands should access the device via the FTL device file (such as
.\"O .IR /dev/ftl0 ).
これは実際には低レベルのフォーマット動作であり、
FTL ブロックデバイスドライバによるメモリデバイスへのアクセスの前に必要となる。
まず
.B ftl_format
によってパーティションを用意し、
次のステップでファイルシステムを作成することになる。
ファイルシステムコマンドはデバイスに FTL デバイスファイル
.RI ( /dev/ftl0
など) 経由でアクセスする。
.PP
.\"O Optionally,
.\"O .B ftl_format
.\"O can reserve a region at the beginning of the flash card address space
.\"O for a boot image (or any other purpose).  The boot area is not part of
.\"O the FTL partition, and can only be accessed via the raw memory device.
別の動作として、
.B ftl_format
はフラッシュカードのアドレス空間の先頭に、ブートイメージのための
(あるいはその他の目的のための) 領域を予約することもできる。
このブート領域は FTL パーティションの一部ではなく、
従って raw メモリデバイスを通してのみアクセスできる。
.PP
.\"O On Intel Series 100 flash cards, the first flash block is used to
.\"O store the card's configuration information structures.  If no boot
.\"O area is specified on the command line,
.\"O .B ftl_format
.\"O will automatically create one to span the first block.
Intel Series 100 フラッシュカードでは、
先頭の flash ブロックはカードの CIS を保存するために用いられる。
コマンドラインから boot 領域を指定しないと、
.B ftl_format
は自動的に 1 ブロックを確保し、先頭ブロックを飛ばすようにする。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-q
.\"O Quiet mode: don't print formatting statistics.
沈黙モード: フォーマットの進行状態を表示しない。
.TP
.B \-i
.\"O Interactive: confirm before beginning the format.
対話モード: フォーマットの開始前に確認をとる。
.TP
.BI "\-s " spare
.\"O Reserve the specified number of erase blocks as spares.  The default
.\"O is 1.  A read-write partition requires at least one spare block.
指定した個数の削除ブロックをスペアとして確保する。
デフォルトは 1。読み書きパーティションには、
少なくとも 1 つのスペアブロックが必要である。
.TP
.BI "\-r " reserve
.\"O Reserve the specified percentage of the total space on the device to
.\"O improve write efficiency.  The default is 5%.  Reserving less space
.\"O increases the frequency of flash erase operations to reclaim free
.\"O blocks.
指定したパーセンテージの領域をデバイス全体にたいして確保し、
書き込みを効率化する。デフォルトは 5%。この領域を少なくすると、
フリーなブロックを確保するために flash の消去操作が多くなる。
.TP
.BI "\-b " bootsize
.\"O Requests that a portion of the flash card be reserved for a boot
.\"O image.  The size will be rounded up to an integral number of erase
.\"O blocks.
フラッシュカードのある領域をブートイメージ用に予約する。
サイズは消去ブロックの整数倍に切り上げられる。
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O ftl_cs(4), ftl_check(8).
.BR ftl_cs (4),
.BR ftl_check (8)


