.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" ifport.8 1.8 1999/11/02 20:34:56
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH IFPORT 8 "1999/11/02 20:34:56" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O 
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ifport \- select the transceiver type for a network interface
.SH 名前
ifport \- ネットワークインターフェースのトランシーバのタイプを選択する
.\"O 
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B ifport
.I interface
.RB [ auto | 10baseT | 10base2 | aui | 100baseT | ## ]
.\"O 
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Ifport
.\"O sets the transceiver type for the specified network interface, for
.\"O drivers that support multiple transceiver types.  If a type is not
.\"O specified on the command line, then the current type is displayed.
.\"O The type can be specified either numerically or by keyword.  The five
.\"O standard transceiver types
.\"O .RB ( auto ,
.\"O .BR 10baseT ,
.\"O .BR 10base2 ,
.\"O .BR aui ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR 100baseT )
.\"O correspond to codes 0 to 3, for all the Linux PCMCIA network drivers.
.\"O The keyword match is case insensitive.
.B ifport
は指定したネットワークインターフェースのトランシーバタイプを設定する。
複数のトランシーバタイプをサポートするドライバのためのコマンドである。
タイプを指定しなかった場合は現在のタイプが表示される。
タイプは数値でもキーワードでも指定できる。
標準的な 5 つのトランシーバタイプ
.RB ( auto ", " 10baseT ", " 10base2 ", " aui ", " 100baseT )
がそれぞれコードの 0 から 4 に対応している。
これはすべての Linux PCMCIA ネットワークドライバで同じである。
キーワードマッチは英大文字小文字を区別しない。
.PP
.\"O The network drivers may not reconfigure a card for a new transceiver
.\"O type if the interface is already open.  It is best to invoke
.\"O .B ifport
.\"O prior to configuring the interface with
.\"O .B ifconfig
.\"O to ensure that the new setting takes effect immediately.
既にインターフェースがオープンしている場合には、
ネットワークドライバはそのカードに
新しいトランシーバタイプを再設定することはできない。
.B ifport
は
.B ifconfig
によるインターフェースの設定に先立って行うのが望ましく、
こうすれば新しい設定がすぐに有効となることを保証できる。
.PP
.\"O This utility only works with a limited set of 16-bit PC Card drivers:
.\"O .BR 3c589_cs ,
.\"O .BR nmclan_cs ,
.\"O .BR pcnet_cs ,
.\"O .BR smc91c92_cs ,
.\"O and
.\"O .BR xirc2ps_cs .
.\"O If invoked for other drivers,
.\"O .B ifport
.\"O may report bogus transceiver
.\"O settings, or report ``Operation not supported''.
このユーティリティは 16 ビット PC カードドライバの一部でしか動作しない。
使えるドライバは
.BR 3c589_cs ,
.BR nmclan_cs ,
.BR pcnet_cs ,
.BR smc91c92_cs ,
.B xirc2ps_cs 
である。他のドライバに対して用いると、
.B ifport
はいい加減なドライバ設定を返すか、
「Operation not supported」というレポートを返す。
.\"O 
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH 診断
.TP
.B ioctl: Operation not supported
.\"O Indicates that this network device does not support manual transceiver
.\"O selection.  There may be only one transceiver option, or the device
.\"O may always autodetect the appropriate transceiver.
このネットワークデバイスがマニュアルのトランシーバ選択を
サポートしていないことを示す。トランシーバの選択肢がひとつしかない、
デバイスが常に適切なトランシーバを自動選択する、などが考えられる。
.\"O 
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O ifconfig(8).
.BR ifconfig (8)

