.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" ifuser.8 1.5 1999/10/25 19:50:46
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH IFUSER 8 "1999/10/25 19:50:46" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O ifuser \- identify destinations routed to a particular network interface
.SH 名前
ifuser \- ネットワークインターフェースから指定先への経路があるかどうかを調べる
.\"nakano: 「指定した」が続くとあれなので、particular は無視。
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B ifuser
.RB [ -v ]
.I interface
.RI [ "target\ ..." ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 書式
.\"O This utility checks to see if any of the listed hosts or network
.\"O addresses are routed through the specified interface.  Destinations
.\"O may be specified either by IP address or by name.
このユーティリティは、
指定したインターフェースから
リストしたホストアドレスやネットワークアドレスへの経路が
存在するかどうかをチェックする。
到達先は IP アドレスでも名前でも指定できる。
.PP
.\"O The exit code will be 0 if any listed host or network is routed
.\"O through this interface, and 1 if the interface is not in use (similar
.\"O to 
.\"O .BR fuser ).
終了コードは、リストしたネットワークやホストのいずれかに到達する経路が、
このインターフェースを通っていれば 0、
このインターフェースを使わなければ 1 である。
.RB ( fuser
と似ている)。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose mode: if enabled, then the names of those destinations routed
.\"O to this interface (if any) will be reported on standard output.
詳細表示モード: 有効だと、このインターフェースから経路があった行き先があれば、
その名前を標準出力にレポートする。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.br
Regis "HPReg" Duchesne \- regis@via.ecp.fr

