.\" Copyright (C) 1999 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" lspnp.8 1.3 1999/10/25 19:50:46
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH LSPNP 8 "1999/10/25 19:50:46" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O lspnp \- list Plug and Play BIOS device nodes and resources
.SH 名前
lspnp \- Plug & Play BIOS のデバイスノードとリソースをリストする
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B lspnp
.RB [ -b ]
.RB [ -v [ v ]]
.RI [ "device ..." ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This utility presents a formatted interpretation of the contents of the
.\"O .I /proc/bus/pnp
.\"O tree.  Its default output is a list of Plug and Play device node
.\"O numbers, product identifiers, and descriptions.  Verbose output
.\"O .RB ( -v )
.\"O includes resource allocations (IO ports, memory, interrupts, and DMA 
.\"O channels) for each device.  Very verbose output
.\"O .RB ( -vv )
.\"O includes lists of possible resources, various configuration flags, and
.\"O product identifiers for compatible devices.
このユーティリティは
.I /proc/bus/pnp
ツリーの内容を解釈し、整形して表示する。
デフォルトの出力は Plug & Play デバイスのノード番号・
プロダクト識別子・記述、である。
詳細出力モード
.RB ( \-v )
を指定すると、各デバイスに割り当てられているリソース
(I/O ポート・メモリ・割り込み・DMA チャネル) も表示される。
さらに詳細な出力モード
.RB ( \-vv )
を指定すると、割り当て可能なリソース・様々な設定フラグ・
互換デバイスのプロダクト識別子なども表示される。
.PP
.\"O The output can be limited to one or more specific device nodes by
.\"O specifying their two-digit hex node numbers on the command line.  By
.\"O default, current (dynamic) device configuration information is
.\"O displayed; with the
.\"O .B -b
.\"O option, the boot (static) configuration is shown.
出力対象とするデバイスノードを限ることもできる。
これには 2 桁 16 進のノード番号をコマンドラインから指定する。
デフォルトでは現在の (動的な) デバイス設定情報が表示される。
.B \-b
オプションを指定すると、ブート時の (静的な) 設定が表示される。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b
.\"O Boot mode: read device resource information that will be used at next
.\"O boot (as opposed to current resource info).
ブートモード: デバイスのリソース情報を読み込む。
これが次回のブートで (現在のリソース情報の代わりに) 使われることになる。
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Selects more verbose output.  Can be used more than once.
より詳細な出力を行う。複数指定することもできる。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .TP \w'/usr/share/pnp.ids\ \ \ \ |\|'u
.TP
/usr/share/pnp.ids
.\"O A database of known Plug and Play device ID's.
既知の Plug & Play デバイス ID のデータベース
.TP
/proc/bus/pnp/...
.\"O The kernel interface for Plug and Play BIOS device services.
Plug & Play BIOS デバイスサービスのカーネルインターフェース
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O setpnp(8)
.BR setpnp (8)

