.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" pcinitrd.8 1.11 2000/03/26 07:47:28
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PCINITRD 8 "2000/03/26 07:47:28" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O pcinitrd \- create a PCMCIA initrd ram disk image
.SH 名前
pcinitrd \- PCMCIA initrd RAM ディスクイメージを作成する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B pcinitrd
.RB [ -v ]
.RB [ -a ]
.RB [ --all ]
.RB [ "\-d\ "\c
.I alternate-root\c
]
.RB [ \-\-dir=\c
.I alternate-root\c
]
.RB [ "\-r\ "\c
.I kernel-release\c
]
.RB [ \-\-release=\c
.I kernel-release\c
]
.RB [ "\-s\ "\c
.I image-size\c
]
.RB [ \-\-size=\c
.I image-size\c
]
.RB [ -u ]
.RB [ --update ]
.I initrd-image
.RI [ "modules\ ..." ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B pcinitrd
.\"O script creates an initrd ram disk image for booting with the root
.\"O filesystem on a PCMCIA device.  If the target is a block special
.\"O device (i.e.,
.\"O .IR /dev/fd0 ),
.\"O then the initrd image is created on that device.  If the target does
.\"O not already exist or if it is an ordinary file, then
.\"O .B pcinitrd
.\"O will create the image file using the ``loopback'' device.
.B pcinitrd
スクリプトは、
PCMCIA デバイス上に root ファイルシステムがある場合のブート用
initrd RAM ディスクイメージを作成する。
この initrd イメージは
ターゲットがブロックスペシャルデバイス (例:
.IR /dev/fd0 )
の場合は、 initrd イメージはそのデバイス上に作成される。
ターゲットが存在していない場合や通常のファイルだった場合は、
.B pcinitrd
はイメージファイルを "loopback" デバイスを用いて作成する。
.PP
.\"O Modules are specified with paths relative to
.\"O .IR /lib/modules/[kernel-release] .
.\"O The core PCMCIA modules
.\"O .RI ( pcmcia/pcmcia_core
.\"O and
.\"O .IR  pcmcia/ds )
.\"O will automatically be installed in the target image.  All other
.\"O device-specific modules need to be listed on the command line,
.\"O along with the appropriate socket driver
.\"O .RI ( pcmcia/i82365.o
.\"O or
.\"O .IR pcmcia/tcic.o ).
.\"O Alternatively, if
.\"O .B -a
.\"O is specified, then all available PCMCIA socket drivers and block
.\"O device drivers will be included in the image.  Additional files to be
.\"O copied to the initrd image may also be listed on the command line.
.\"O Executable programs will be installed in
.\"O .IR /bin ,
.\"O shared libraries will be installed in
.\"O .IR /lib ,
.\"O device files will be installed in
.\"O .IR /dev ,
.\"O and any other files will be placed in
.\"O .IR /etc .
モジュールは
.IR /lib/modules/[kernel-release]
からの相対パスで指定する。コア PCMCIA モジュール
.RI ( pcmcia/pcmcia_core
と
.IR  pcmcia/ds )
はターゲットイメージに自動的にインストールされる。
他の各デバイス用のモジュールと
適切なソケットドライバ
.RI ( pcmcia/i82365.o
または
.IR pcmcia/tcic.o )
のモジュールとはコマンドラインにリストする必要がある。
あるいは
.B \-a
を指定すれば、入手可能な全ての PCMCIA ソケットドライバと
ブロックデバイスドライバとがイメージに入れられる。
initrd イメージにコピーしたい他のファイルをコマンドラインにリストしてもよい。
実行ファイルは
.I /bin
に、共有ライブラリは
.I /lib
に、デバイスファイルは
.I /dev
に、他の全てのファイルは
.I /etc
にインストールされる。
.PP
.\"O The startup script in the resulting image,
.\"O .IR linuxrc ,
.\"O may need to be customized for a particular system.  It contains the
.\"O same variable definitions as the normal PCMCIA startup scripts (i.e.,
.\"O .BR PCIC= ,
.\"O .BR PCIC_OPTS= ,
.\"O and
.\"O .B CORE_OPTS=
.\"O variables).  The
.\"O .I /etc/config.opts
.\"O file may also need to be edited.  Any changes to
.\"O .I linuxrc
.\"O or
.\"O .I config.opts
.\"O will be preserved if
.\"O .B pcinitrd
.\"O is executed in ``update'' mode.
結果のイメージに入る起動スクリプト
.I linuxrc
は、それぞれのシステムにあわせてカスタマイズする必要がある。
このスクリプトには、通常の PCMCIA 起動スクリプトのように、
いくつかの変数定義 (例えば
.BR PCIC= ", " PCIC_OPTS ", " CORE_OPTS " など)"
が含まれる。
.I /etc/config.opts
ファイルも編集が必要かもしれない。
.IR linuxrc " または " config.opts
に行った全ての変更は、
.B pcinitd
を "update" モードで実行されていれば保存される。
.PP
.\"O Another feature of the generated
.\"O .I linuxrc
.\"O is that if the
.\"O .B DEBUG
.\"O variable is set to a non-blank string at the boot prompt, then cardmgr
.\"O will echo all its status messages to the console, and after
.\"O .I linuxrc
.\"O executes, it will fire up a shell on the console.  This can be helpful
.\"O for debugging initrd problems.  However, few commands are available in
.\"O the normal initrd environment.
作成される
.I linuxrc
の別の機能として、もし
.B DEBUG
変数がブートプロンプトで空白文字列以外に設定されると、
cardmgr は全ての状態メッセージをコンソールに表示し、
.I linuxrc
が実行されると、コンソールにシェルを起動する。
これは initrd の障害をデバッグする助けになるだろう。
ただ、普通の initrd 環境で使えるコマンドはほとんどないが。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-v
.\"O Verbose mode.  Identify files as they are copied.
詳細表示モード。ファイルがコピーされるたびに表示する。
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-all\fR
.\"O Install all socket drivers and block-style PCMCIA device drivers,
.\"O including memory card, SCSI card, and fixed-disk drivers.  This is
.\"O mainly intended for use by package maintainers.
全てのソケットドライバとブロック形式の
PCMCIA デバイスドライバをインストールする。
メモリーカード・ SCSI カード・固定ディスクドライバなどもインストールされる。
これはパッケージ管理者向けのものである。
.TP
\fB\-d\fI alternate-root\fR, \fB\-\-dir=\fIalternate-root\fR
.\"O Specifies an alternate directory tree to search for all the files used
.\"O to put together the initrd image.  This may be helpful for running 
.\"O .B pcinitrd
.\"O after booting from an installation or rescue diskette.
initrd イメージに追加する各ファイルを検索するディレクトリツリーを別に指定する。
これはインストールフロッピーやレスキューフロッピーからブートした後に
.B pcinitrd
を実行する場合に便利である。
.TP
\fB\-r\fI kernel-release\fR, \fB\-\-release=\fIkernel-release\fR
.\"O Specifies the kernel release number (i.e., 2.0.28) to use when looking
.\"O for modules in /lib/modules.  The default is the release of the
.\"O running kernel.
モジュールを
.I /lib/modules
から探す際に用いるカーネルのリリース番号 (例: 2.0.28) を指定する。
デフォルトは現在実行しているカーネルのリリース番号である。
.TP
\fB\-s\fI image-size\fR, \fB\-\-size=\fIimage-size\fR
.\"O Specifies the filesystem size to create on the target file or device,
.\"O in 1k blocks.  The default is 1440.
ターゲットのファイルやデバイスに作成するファイルシステムのサイズを
1k ブロック単位で指定する。デフォルトは 1440。
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-update\fR
.\"O Update mode: updates
.\"O .B cardmgr
.\"O and all the kernel modules in an existing initrd image, but does not
.\"O modify other files.
更新モード:
initrd イメージに含まれる
.B cardmgr
と全てのカーネルモジュールを更新する。しかし他のファイルは変更しない。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O pcmcia(5), cardmgr(8), lilo(8).
.BR pcmcia (5),
.BR cardmgr (8),
.BR  lilo (8)

