.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" scsi_info.8 1.7 2000/06/12 21:24:49
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Tue Oct 24 20:08:41 JST 2000
.\"    by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SCSI_INFO 8 "2000/06/12 21:24:49" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O scsi_info \- SCSI device description tool
.SH 名前
scsi_info \- SCSI デバイス記述ツール
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B scsi_info
.I device
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B Scsi_info
.\"O opens the specified SCSI device file, and retrieves its
.\"O actual SCSI address parameters.  It also looks up the device in
.\"O .I /proc/scsi/scsi
.\"O and retrieves the device's vendor information, if available.  Its
.\"O output is a pair of Bourne-style shell commands to define the
.\"O .B SCSI_ID
.\"O and
.\"O .B MODEL
.\"O variables based on this information.  The
.\"O .B SCSI_ID
.\"O variable has three comma-separated fields: the SCSI channel number,
.\"O the device ID, and the logical unit number.  In most cases, the
.\"O channel and logical unit will be 0.
.B scsi_info
は指定した SCSI デバイスファイルをオープンし、
デバイスの実際の SCSI アドレスパラメータを取得する。
またそのデバイスについて
.I /proc/scsi/scsi
を参照し、可能な場合はデバイスのベンダ情報を取得する。
このコマンドの出力は、シェル変数
.BR SCSI_ID " と " MODEL
を取得した情報に基づいて定義する、
Bourne 系シェルのコマンド文字列になっている。
.B SCSI_ID
シェル変数は 3 つのフィールドからなる (各フィールドはコンマで区切られる):
SCSI チャネル番号・デバイス ID・論理ユニット番号、である。
ほとんどの場合はチャネルと論理ユニットは 0 であろう。
.PP
.\"O The reason for the existence of this utility lies in the peculiar
.\"O method for assigning minor device numbers to Linux SCSI devices.
.\"O Devices are numbered based on the order in which they are detected,
.\"O irrespective of their device addresses.  This tool automatically
.\"O converts these arbitrary device assignments back to the
.\"O user-configured addresses.
このユーティリティの存在する理由は、 Linux での
SCSI デバイスへのマイナーデバイス番号の割り当て方法がちょっと
変わっているからである。デバイスの番号付けは、
デバイス番号に関係なく、検知された順序で行われる。
このツールを使うと、このように順序のわからないデバイス割り当てを、
ユーザの設定したアドレスに自動的に変換できる。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net

