.\" Copyright (C) 1999 David A. Hinds -- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\" setpnp.8 1.2 1999/10/25 19:50:46
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun May 14 2000 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH SETPNP 8 "1999/10/25 19:50:46" "pcmcia-cs"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O setpnp \- modify Plug and Play BIOS device resources
.SH 名前
setpnp \- Plug & Play BIOS のデバイスリソースを変更する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B setpnp
.RB [ -b ]
.I device resource...
.br
.B setpnp
.RB [ -b ]
.I device {on|off}
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This utility updates the system resource information for Plug and Play
.\"O BIOS device nodes.  A device is specified by its two-digit hex node
.\"O number.  In its first form, a list of resources are given on the
.\"O command line.  Alternatively, a device can either be simply switched
.\"O ``on'' (reset to its boot configuration) or ``off'' (all resources
.\"O disabled).
このユーティリティは、 Plug & Play BIOS デバイスノードの
システムリソース情報を更新する。デバイスは 2 桁 16 進の
ノード番号によって指定する。
1 番目の形式では、リソースのリストはコマンドラインから与えられる。
あるいは、デバイスを単に on (ブート時の設定にリセットする) にしたり
off (全てのリソースを無効にする) にすることもできる。
.PP
.\"O There are four types of resources: ``io'', ``mem'', ``irq'', and
.\"O ``dma''.  A resource list consists of one or more space-separated
.\"O pairs of a resource type with one or more values.  Multiple values for
.\"O one resource type can be separated by commas.  Values can also either
.\"O be unitary or dash-separated ranges.  For example:
リソースの型は 4 つある。 "io", "mem", "irq", "dma" である。
リソースリストは、リソース型とその値をスペースで区切ったペアからなる。
一つのリソース型に複数の値を与えるときはコンマで区切る。
値は単一の値のこともあるし、
ダッシュ ("\-") で区切られた範囲のこともある。
例を示す。
.sp
.RS
.nf
setpnp 0d io 0x2f8-0x2ff irq 3
setpnp 12 io 0x350-0x35f,0x2f8-0x2ff irq 3 irq 10
.RE
.fi
.sp
.\"O The order of items of different types is not important, but if more
.\"O than one item of the same type is present, their relative order is
.\"O significant.  The Plug and Play BIOS will reject invalid configuration
.\"O attempts; however,
.\"O .B setpnp
.\"O will not attempt to determine why a configuration was rejected.
型の並び順は重要ではない。しかし同じ型に 2 つ以上の指定がなされたときは、
それらの間の並び順が重要となる。
Plug & Play BIOS は不正な設定を拒否するが、
.B setpnp
はなぜその設定が拒否されたかを調べようとはしない。
.PP
.\"O By default, current (dynamic) device configuration information is
.\"O modified.  With the
.\"O .B -b
.\"O option, a device's boot (static) configuration can be updated.  Some
.\"O devices may only be reconfigured for the following boot.  Be especially
.\"O careful when modifying your system's boot configuration.  Improper use
.\"O of this command may disable vital system devices and render your
.\"O system unbootable. 
デフォルトでは、現在の (動的な) デバイス設定情報が修正される。
.B \-b
オプションを用いると、デバイスのブート時 (静的) 情報を更新できる。
デバイスによっては次回のブート時でないと再設定できないかもしれない。
このコマンドを誤って用いると、正しく動作しているシステムデバイスを
無効にしてしまい、システムをブート不能にしてしまうかもしれない。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP
.B \-b
.\"O Boot mode: update the device resource information that will be used at
.\"O next boot (as opposed to current resource info).
ブートモード: デバイスのリソース情報を更新し、
これが次回のブートで (現在のリソース情報の代わりに) 使われることになる。
.\"O .TP
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.\"O .TP \w'/proc/bus/pnp/...\ \ \ \ |\|'u
.TP
/proc/bus/pnp/...
.\"O The kernel interface for Plug and Play BIOS device services.
Plug & Play BIOS デバイスサービスのカーネルインターフェース
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
David Hinds \- dhinds@pcmcia.sourceforge.org
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.\"O lspnp(8)
.BR lspnp (8)

