.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1989, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)fstab.5	6.5 (Berkeley) 5/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Mar  6 20:45:03 1993, faith@cs.unc.edu, for Linux
.\" Sat Oct  9 10:07:10 1993: converted to man format by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Sat Nov 20 20:47:38 1993: hpfs documentation added
.\" Sat Nov 27 20:23:32 1993: Updated authorship information
.\" Wed Jul 26 00:00:00 1995: Updated some nfs stuff, joey@infodrom.north.de
.\" Tue Apr  2 00:38:28 1996: added info about "noauto", "user", etc.
.\" Tue Jun 15 20:02:18 1999: added LABEL and UUID
.\" Sat Jul 14 2001: Michael K. Johnson <johnsonm@redhat.com> added -O
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997-1999 ISHIOKA Takashi and NAKANO Takeo
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon Sep  8 14:02:18 1997
.\"         by ISHIOKA Takashi       
.\" Thu Feb  5 10:31:23 1998: follow man-pages 1.18
.\" Mon Feb  9 15:16:13 1998: correction
.\" Updated Sat 23 Oct by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Mon Apr  9 20:43:51 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\" Updated Sat Aug 18 10:01:58 JST 2001 by Yuichi SATO
.\" Updated & Modified Sun Mar  2 16:58:13 JST 2003
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato444@yahoo.co.jp>
.\" Updated & Modified Fri May  6 04:29:45 JST 2005 by Yuichi SATO
.\"
.TH FSTAB 5 "15 June 1999" "Linux 2.2" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.\"O fstab \- static information about the filesystems
.SH 名前
fstab \- ファイルシステムの静的な情報
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <fstab.h>
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The file
.\"O .B fstab
.\"O contains descriptive information about the various file systems.
.\"O .B fstab
.\"O is only read by programs, and not written; it is the duty of the system
.\"O administrator to properly create and maintain this file.  Each filesystem
.\"O is described on a separate line; fields on each line are separated by tabs
.\"O or spaces.  Lines starting with '#' are comments.  The order of records in
.\"O .B fstab
.\"O is important because
.\"O .BR fsck (8),
.\"O .BR mount (8),
.\"O and 
.\"O .BR umount (8)
.\"O sequentially iterate through
.\"O .B fstab
.\"O doing their thing.
このファイル
.B fstab
には様々なファイルシステムに関する情報が記述されている。
.B fstab
ファイルはプログラムによって読みこまれるだけで書き込まれることはない。
このファイルを適切に作り、保守するのはシステム管理者の責任である。
それぞれのファイルシステムは一行単位で記述され、
各行のフィールドは TAB 文字もしくは空白 (spaces) で区切られる。
\&'#' で始まる行はコメントである。
.BR fsck (8),
.BR mount (8),
.BR umount (8)
などのプログラムは、
.B fstab
ファイルを先頭から順に読み込んで処理するため、
.B fstab
に記述されるレコード (ファイルシステム) の順序は重要である。

.\"O The first field,
.\"O .RI ( fs_spec ),
.\"O describes the block special device or
.\"O remote filesystem to be mounted.
最初のフィールド
.RI ( fs_spec )
は、マウントしたいブロックスペシャルデバイス
もしくはリモートファイルシステムを記述する。
.LP
.\"O For ordinary mounts it will hold (a link to) a block special
.\"O device node (as created by
.\"O .BR mknod (8))
.\"O for the device to be mounted, like `/dev/cdrom' or `/dev/sdb7'.
.\"O For NFS mounts one will have <host>:<dir>, e.g., `knuth.aeb.nl:/'.
.\"O For procfs, use `proc'.
通常のマウントでは、これはマウントされるブロックスペシャルデバイスノード
(またはそれへのリンク) である。これは
.BR mknod (8)
によって作成される。たとえば `/dev/cdrom' や `/dev/sdb7'
といったものになる。
NFS マウントの場合は <host>:<dir> という書式になる。
たとえば `knuth.aeb.nl:/' などである。
procfs の場合は `proc' を使う。
.LP
.\"O Instead of giving the device explicitly, one may indicate
.\"O the (ext2 or xfs) filesystem that is to be mounted by its UUID or
.\"O volume label (cf.
.\"O .BR e2label (8)
.\"O or
.\"O .BR xfs_admin (8)),
.\"O writing LABEL=<label> or UUID=<uuid>,
.\"O e.g., `LABEL=Boot' or `UUID=3e6be9de\%-8139\%-11d1\%-9106\%-a43f08d823a6'.
.\"O This will make the system more robust: adding or removing a SCSI disk
.\"O changes the disk device name but not the filesystem volume label.
デバイスを明示する代わりに、
マウントされる (ext2 または xfs) ファイルシステムを
UUID とボリュームラベルで指定することもできる
.RB ( e2label (8)
または
.BR xfs_admin (8)
を参照のこと)。
この場合は LABEL=<label> または UUID=<uuid> のように書く。
たとえば `LABEL=Boot' や
`UUID=3e6be9de\%-8139\%-11d1\%-9106\%-a43f08d823a6' のようになる。
こうするとシステムはより強固になる。
SCSI ディスクを追加・削除してディスクデバイスの名前が変わっても、
ファイルシステムのボリュームラベルは変化しないからである。

.\"O The second field,
.\"O .RI ( fs_file ),
.\"O describes the mount point for the filesystem.  For swap partitions, this
.\"O field should be specified as `none'. If the name of the mount point
.\"O contains spaces these can be escaped as `\\040'.
2 番目のフィールド
.RI ( fs_file )
は、ファイルシステムのマウントポイントを記述する。
スワップパーティションの場合、
このフィールドは `none' と明記する必要がある。
マウントポイントに含まれている空白は、`\\040' のようにエスケープできる。

.\"O The third field,
.\"O .RI ( fs_vfstype ),
.\"O describes the type of the filesystem.  Linux supports lots
.\"O of filesystem types, such as
3 番目のフィールド
.RI ( fs_vfstype )
は、ファイルシステムのタイプを記述する。
Linux では
.IR adfs ,
.IR affs ,
.IR autofs ,
.IR coda ,
.IR coherent ,
.IR cramfs ,
.IR devpts ,
.IR efs ,
.IR ext2 ,
.IR ext3 ,
.IR hfs ,
.IR hpfs ,
.IR iso9660 ,
.IR jfs ,
.IR minix ,
.IR msdos ,
.IR ncpfs ,
.IR nfs ,
.IR ntfs ,
.IR proc ,
.IR qnx4 ,
.IR reiserfs ,
.IR romfs ,
.IR smbfs ,
.IR sysv ,
.IR tmpfs ,
.IR udf ,
.IR ufs ,
.IR umsdos ,
.IR vfat ,
.IR xenix ,
.IR xfs ,
.\"O and possibly others. For more details, see
.\"O .BR mount (8).
更にそれ以外の多くのファイルシステムタイプをサポートする。
詳細は
.BR mount (8)
を参照すること。
.\"O For the filesystems currently supported by the running kernel, see
.\"O .IR /proc/filesystems .
稼働中のカーネルが現在サポートしているファイルシステムについては、
.I /proc/filesystems
を見よ。
.\"O An entry
.\"O .I swap
.\"O denotes a file or partition to be used
.\"O for swapping, cf.\&
.\"O .BR swapon (8).
エントリ
.I swap
はスワップに使われるファイルまたはパーティションを表す。
.BR swapon (8)
を参照。
.\"O An entry
.\"O .I ignore
.\"O causes the line to be ignored.  This is useful
.\"O to show disk partitions which are currently unused.
エントリ
.I ignore
により、その行は無視される。
これは現在使用されていないディスクパーティションを表示するのに役立つ。

.\"O The fourth field,
.\"O .RI ( fs_mntops ),
.\"O describes the mount options associated with the filesystem.
4 番目のフィールド
.RI ( fs_mntops )
は、 ファイルシステム毎のマウントオプションを記述する。

.\"O It is formatted as a comma separated list of options.  It contains at least
.\"O the type of mount plus any additional options appropriate to the filesystem
.\"O type.  For documentation on the available options for non-nfs file systems,
.\"O see
.\"O .BR mount (8).
これはカンマで区切られたオプションのリストである。
少なくともマウントのタイプを書く必要がある。
加えてファイルシステムのタイプに応じた
適切なオプションが書かれていることが多い。
NFS 以外のファイルシステムで使用可能なオプションについては、
.BR mount (8)
を参照のこと。
.\"O For documentation on all nfs-specific options have a look at
.\"O .BR nfs (5).
nfs 固有のオプションについては
.BR nfs (5)
を参照のこと。
.\"O Common for all types of file system are the options ``noauto''
.\"O (do not mount when "mount -a" is given, e.g., at boot time), ``user''
.\"O (allow a user to mount), and ``owner''
.\"O (allow device owner to mount), and ``comment''
.\"O (e.g., for use by fstab-maintaining programs).
どのようなファイルシステムにも適用できるオプションは、
``noauto'' ("mount -a"  を実行したとき (ブート時など) にマウントしない),
``user'' (ユーザにマウントを許可する),
``owner'' (デバイスの所有者にマウントを許可する),
``comment'' (例えば、fstab 管理プログラムで使用するため) である。
.\"O The ``owner'' and ``comment'' options are Linux-specific.
``owner'' と ``comment'' は Linux 独自のオプションである。
.\"O For more details, see
.\"O .BR mount (8).
詳細は
.BR mount (8)
を参照のこと。

.\"O The fifth field,
.\"O .RI ( fs_freq ),
.\"O is used for these filesystems by the
.\"O .BR dump (8)
.\"O command to determine which filesystems need to be dumped.  If the fifth
.\"O field is not present, a value of zero is returned and
.\"O .B dump
.\"O will assume that the filesystem does not need to be dumped.
5 番目のフィールド
.RI ( fs_freq )
は、これらのファイルシステムを
.BR dump (8)
コマンドが
ダンプする必要があるかを決定するために用いられる。
5 番目のフィールドがなければ、
0 が戻り値となり、
.B dump
はそのファイルシステムをダンプする必要が無いとみなす。

.\"O The sixth field,
.\"O .RI ( fs_passno ),
.\"O is used by the
.\"O .BR fsck (8)
.\"O program to determine the order in which filesystem checks are done at
.\"O reboot time.  The root filesystem should be specified with a
.\"O .I fs_passno
.\"O of 1, and other filesystems should have a 
.\"O .I fs_passno
.\"O of 2.  Filesystems within a drive will be checked sequentially, but
.\"O filesystems on different drives will be checked at the same time to utilize
.\"O parallelism available in the hardware.  If the sixth field is not present
.\"O or zero, a value of zero is returned and
.\"O .B fsck
.\"O will assume that the filesystem does not need to be checked.
6 番目のフィールド
.RI ( fs_passno )
は
.BR fsck (8)
プログラムが用い、
ブート時にファイルシステムのチェックを実行する順序を
決定するために参照される。
ルートファイルシステムは 
.I fs_passno
を 1 と明記する必要があり、
その他のパーティションは、
.I fs_passno
を 2 とする必要がある。
1 つのドライブ中のファイルシステムは順番にチェックされる。
しかし、異なるドライブのファイルシステムは
ハードウェアの並列性を役立たせる為に
同時にチェックされる。
6 番目のフィールドが存在しないか 0 である場合には
0 値が返り、
.B fsck
はそのファイルシステムをチェックする必要がないとみなす。

.\"O The proper way to read records from
.\"O .B fstab
.\"O is to use the routines
.\"O .BR getmntent (3).
.B fstab
ファイルからレコードを読む正しい方法は、
.BR getmntent (3)
ルーチンを用いることである。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/fstab
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR getmntent (3),
.BR mount (8),
.BR swapon (8),
.BR fs (5)
.BR nfs (5)
.\"O .SH HISTORY
.SH 履歴
.\"O The ancestor of this
.\"O .B fstab
.\"O file format appeared in 4.0BSD.
この
.B fstab
ファイルフォーマットの原型は 4.0BSD で導入された。
.\"O .\" But without comment convention, and options and vfs_type.
.\"O .\" Instead there was a type rw/ro/rq/sw/xx, where xx is the present 'ignore'.
.\" ただし、コメントの方法、オプション、vfs_type は無かった。
.\" 代わりにタイプ rw/ro/rq/sw/xx があった。ここで xx は 'ignore' を表す。
