.\" nfs.5 "Rick Sladkey" <jrs@world.std.com>
.\" Wed Feb  8 12:52:42 1995, faith@cs.unc.edu: updates for Ross Biro's
.\" patches. "
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996, 1998
.\"	SUMI Yasutaka and NAKANO Takeo, all rights reserved.
.\" Translated 2 Jul 1996 by SUMI Ysutaka <sum@liniere.gen.u-tokyo.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Wed 12 Aug 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\" Modified Tue  5 Jun 2001 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\" Updated Fri 16 Oct 2002 by Kentaro Shirakata <argrath@ub32.org>
.\"
.TH NFS 5 "20 November 1993" "Linux 0.99" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O nfs \- nfs fstab format and options
nfs \- NFS 関係の fstab フォーマットとオプション
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B /etc/fstab
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .I fstab
.\"O file contains information about which filesystems
.\"O to mount where and with what options.
.\"O For NFS mounts, it contains the server name and
.\"O exported server directory to mount from,
.\"O the local directory that is the mount point,
.\"O and the NFS specific options that control
.\"O the way the filesystem is mounted.
.I fstab
ファイルにはファイルシステムをマウントする場所と、その時に用いるオプショ
ンとが記述されている。
NFS マウントの場合は、マウントの対象にする NFS サーバ−名と、そのサーバー
でエキスポートされているディレクトリ、マウントポイントにするロー
カルディレクトリ、ファイルシステムのマウント方法を制御する NFS 固有の
オプション、が記述される。
.P
.\"O Here is an example from an \fI/etc/fstab\fP file from an NFS mount.
以下は \fI/etc/fstab\fP ファイルにおける  NFS マウントの記述例である。
.sp
.nf
.ta 2.5i +0.75i +0.75i +1.0i
server:/usr/local/pub	/pub	nfs	rsize=8192,wsize=8192,timeo=14,intr
.fi
.DT
.\"O .SS Options
.SS オプション
.TP 1.5i
.I rsize=n
.\"O The number of bytes NFS uses when reading files from an NFS server.
.\"O The default value is dependent on the kernel, currently 1024 bytes.
.\"O (However, throughput is improved greatly by asking for
.\"O .IR rsize=8192 .)
NFS サーバからファイルを読み込む際に、 NFS が用いるバッファのバイト数
を指定する。デフォルト値はカーネルに依存する。現在は 1024 バイト。
(しかし
.I rsize=8192
でうまく動作するようなら、転送速度は大きく向上する。)
.TP 1.5i
.I wsize=n
.\"O The number of bytes NFS uses when writing files to an NFS server.
.\"O The default value is dependent on the kernel, currently 1024 bytes.
.\"O (However, throughput is improved greatly by asking for
.\"O .IR wsize=8192 .)
NFS サーバにファイルを書き込む際に、 NFS が用いるバッファのバイト数を
指定する。デフォルト値はカーネルに依存する。現在は 1024 バイト。
(しかし
.I wsize=8192
でうまく動作するようなら、転送速度は大きく向上する。)
.TP 1.5i
.I timeo=n
.\"O The value in tenths of a second before sending the
.\"O first retransmission after an RPC timeout.
.\"O The default value is 7 tenths of a second.  After the first timeout,
.\"O the timeout is doubled after each successive timeout until a maximum
.\"O timeout of 60 seconds is reached or the enough retransmissions
.\"O have occured to cause a major timeout.  Then, if the filesystem
.\"O is hard mounted, each new timeout cascade restarts at twice the
.\"O initial value of the previous cascade, again doubling at each
.\"O retransmission.  The maximum timeout is always 60 seconds.
.\"O Better overall performance may be achieved by increasing the
.\"O timeout when mounting on a busy network, to a slow server, or through
.\"O several routers or gateways.
RPC タイムアウトの後、最初の再送を行うまでの時間を 1/10 秒単位で指定す
る。デフォルトは 7（つまり 0.7 秒）。最初のタイムアウトの後は、タイム
アウトの時間は倍々される。これはタイムアウトが最大値の 60 秒になるか、
あるいは再送の回数が指定した値よりも大きくなって、メジャータイムアウト
となるまで続けられる。メジャータイムアウトになると、ファイルシステムがハード
マウントされている場合には、新たなタイムアウトシーケンスが初期値を 2 
倍にして再び試みられる（シーケンス内部でのタイムアウトは倍々）。タイム
アウトの最大値は常に 60 秒である。ネットワークが混雑している、サーバが
遅い、経路に複数のルータまたはゲートウェイがある、などの場合には、このタ
イムアウトを増やすと全体の性能を向上させることができるかもしれない。
.TP 1.5i
.I retrans=n
.\"O The number of minor timeouts and retransmissions that must occur before
.\"O a major timeout occurs.  The default is 3 timeouts.  When a major timeout
.\"O occurs, the file operation is either aborted or a "server not responding"
.\"O message is printed on the console.
マイナータイムアウトと再送の合計数がこの値を超えるとメジャータイムアウ
トとなる。デフォルトは 3 回。メジャータイムアウトが起こると、ファイル
操作は中断されるか、あるいは"server not responding" のメッセージがコン
ソールに表示される。
.TP 1.5i
.I acregmin=n
.\"O The minimum time in seconds that attributes of a regular file should
.\"O be cached before requesting fresh information from a server.
.\"O The default is 3 seconds.
一般のファイル (regular file) の属性 (attribute) がキャッシュされる
最小の時間を秒単位で指定する。
この時間内では、サーバーへの新たな情報の問い合わせは行われない。
デフォルトは 3 秒。
.TP 1.5i
.I acregmax=n
.\"O The maximum time in seconds that attributes of a regular file can
.\"O be cached before requesting fresh information from a server.
.\"O The default is 60 seconds.
一般のファイルの属性がキャッシュされる最大の時間を秒単位で指定する。
この時間を越えると、必ずサーバーへ新たな情報の問い合わせが行われる。
デフォルトは 60 秒。
.TP 1.5i
.I acdirmin=n
.\"O The minimum time in seconds that attributes of a directory should
.\"O be cached before requesting fresh information from a server.
.\"O The default is 30 seconds.
ディレクトリの属性がキャッシュされる最小の時間を秒単位で指定する。
この時間内では、サーバーへの新たな情報の問い合わせは行われない。
デフォルトは 30 秒。
.TP 1.5i
.I acdirmax=n
.\"O The maximum time in seconds that attributes of a directory can
.\"O be cached before requesting fresh information from a server.
.\"O The default is 60 seconds.
ディレクトリの属性がキャッシュされる最大の時間を秒単位で指定する。
この時間を越えると、必ずサーバーへ新たな情報の問い合わせが行われる。
デフォルトは 60 秒。
.TP 1.5i
.I actimeo=n
.\"O Using actimeo sets all of
.\"O .I acregmin,
.\"O .I acregmax,
.\"O .I acdirmin,
.\"O and
.\"O .I acdirmax
.\"O to the same value.
.\"O There is no default value.
.I acregmin,
.I acregmax,
.I acdirmin,
.I acdirmax
すべてを同じ値にする。デフォルト値はない。
.TP 1.5i
.I retry=n
.\"O The number of minutes to retry an NFS mount operation
.\"O in the foreground or background before giving up.
.\"O The default value is 10000 minutes, which is roughly one week.
フォアグラウンド、またはバックグラウンドでの NFS マウントオペレーショ
ンが、リトライを放棄するまでの時間を指定する。デフォルトは 10000 分
(だいたい一週間) である。
.TP 1.5i
.I namlen=n
.\"O When an NFS server does not support version two of the
.\"O RPC mount protocol, this option can be used to specify
.\"O the maximum length of a filename that is supported on
.\"O the remote filesystem.  This is used to support the
.\"O POSIX pathconf functions.  The default is 255 characters.
NFS サーバが RPC マウントプロトコルのバージョン 2 をサポートしていない
場合に、このオプションを用いるとリモートファイルシステムにおいてサポー
トされているファイル名の最大長を指定できる。これは POSIX pathconf 関数
をサポートするために用いられる。デフォルトは 255文字。
.TP 1.5i
.I port=n
.\"O The numeric value of the port to connect to the NFS server on.
.\"O If the port number is 0 (the default) then query the
.\"O remote host's portmapper for the port number to use.
.\"O If the remote host's NFS daemon is not registered with
.\"O its portmapper, the standard NFS port number 2049 is
.\"O used instead.
NFS サーバに接続する際のポート番号を指定する。指定が 0 (デフォルト) の
場合、用いるべきポート番号をリモートホストのポートマッパーに尋ねる。も
しリモートホストの NFS デーモンがポートマッパーに登録されていなければ、
一般的なNFS ポート番号である 2049 を使用する。
.TP 1.5i
.I mountport=n
.\"O The numeric value of the
.\"O .B mountd
.\"O port.
.B mountd
のポート番号を指定する。
.TP 1.5i
.I mounthost=name
.\"O The name of the host running
.\"O .B mountd .
.B mountd
が起動されているホスト名を指定する。
.TP 1.5i
.I mountprog=n
.\"O Use an alternate RPC program number to contact the
.\"O mount daemon on the remote host.  This option is useful
.\"O for hosts that can run multiple NFS servers.
.\"O The default value is 100005 which is the standard RPC
.\"O mount daemon program number.
リモートホストの mount デーモンに接続する際に、通常と異なる RPC プログ
ラム番号を用いる。このオプションは複数の NFS サーバが動作しているホス
トに対して用いると便利である。デフォルトは 100005 で、これは mount デー
モンに対して標準的に用いられるプログラム番号である。
.TP 1.5i
.I mountvers=n
.\"O Use an alternate RPC version number to contact the
.\"O mount daemon on the remote host.  This option is useful
.\"O for hosts that can run multiple NFS servers.
.\"O The default value is version 1.
リモートホストの mount デーモンに接続する際に、通常と異なる RPC バージョ
ン番号を用いる。このオプションは複数の NFS サーバが動作しているホスト
に対して用いると便利である。デフォルトは 1。
.TP 1.5i
.I nfsprog=n
.\"O Use an alternate RPC program number to contact the
.\"O NFS daemon on the remote host.  This option is useful
.\"O for hosts that can run multiple NFS servers.
.\"O The default value is 100003 which is the standard RPC
.\"O NFS daemon program number.
リモートホストの NFS デーモンに接続する際に、通常と異なる RPC プログ
ラム番号を用いる。このオプションは複数の NFS サーバが動作しているホス
トに対して用いると便利である。デフォルトは 100003 で、これは NFS デー
モンに対して標準的に用いられるプログラム番号である。
.TP 1.5i
.I nfsvers=n
.\"O Use an alternate RPC version number to contact the
.\"O NFS daemon on the remote host.  This option is useful
.\"O for hosts that can run multiple NFS servers.
.\"O The default value is version 2.
リモートホストの NFS デーモンに接続する際に、通常と異なる RPC バージョ
ン番号を用いる。このオプションは複数の NFS サーバが動作しているホスト
に対して用いると便利である。デフォルトは 2。
.TP 1.5i
.I nolock
.\"O Disable NFS locking. Do not start lockd.
.\"O This has to be used with some old NFS servers
NFS ロックを無効にする。lockd を起動しない。
これは古い NFS サーバーに使わなくてはならない。
.TP 1.5i
.I bg
.\"O If the first NFS mount attempt times out, retry the mount
.\"O in the background.
.\"O After a mount operation is backgrounded, all subsequent mounts
.\"O on the same NFS server will be backgrounded immediately, without
.\"O first attempting the mount.
.\"O A missing mount point is treated as a timeout,
.\"O to allow for nested NFS mounts.
最初の NFS マウントの試行がタイムアウトになったときに、バックグラウン
ドでマウントを試み続ける。マウント動作がバックグラウンドになると、その 
NFS サーバーに対して引き続き行われることになっている、他の mount 動作
もただちにバックグラウンドになる。これらに対して、最初のマウント試行は
行われない。マウントポイントが失われると、タイムアウトと同じように扱わ
れる。 NFS マウントのネストを許すためである。
.TP 1.5i
.I fg
.\"O If the first NFS mount attempt times out, retry the mount
.\"O in the foreground.
.\"O This is the complement of the
.\"O .I bg
.\"O option, and also the default behavior.
最初の NFS マウントの試行がタイムアウトになったときに、再試行をフォア
グラウンドで行う。これは
.I bg
の反対の意味を持つ指定であり、こちらがデフォルト。
.TP 1.5i
.I soft
.\"O If an NFS file operation has a major timeout then report an I/O error to
.\"O the calling program.
.\"O The default is to continue retrying NFS file operations indefinitely.
NFS へのファイル操作がメジャータイムアウトとなった場合、呼び出したプロ
グラムに対し I/O エラーを返す。デフォルトでは、ファイル操作を無期限に
再試行し続ける。
.TP 1.5i
.I hard
.\"O If an NFS file operation has a major timeout then report
.\"O "server not responding" on the console and continue retrying indefinitely.
.\"O This is the default.
NFS へのファイル操作がメジャータイムアウトとなった場合、コンソールに
"server not responding"と表示し、ファイル操作を無期限に再試行し続ける。
これがデフォルトの動作である。
.TP 1.5i
.I intr
.\"O If an NFS file operation has a major timeout and it is hard mounted,
.\"O then allow signals to interupt the file operation and cause it to
.\"O return EINTR to the calling program.  The default is to not
.\"O allow file operations to be interrupted.
NFS へのファイル操作がメジャータイムアウトとなり、かつその NFS 接続が 
hard マウントされている場合、シグナルによるファイル操作の中断を許可し、
中断された場合には呼び出したプログラムに対して EINTR を返す。デフォル
トではファイル操作の中断を許さない。
.TP 1.5i
.I posix
.\"O Mount the NFS filesystem using POSIX semantics.  This allows
.\"O an NFS filesystem to properly support the POSIX pathconf
.\"O command by querying the mount server for the maximum length
.\"O of a filename.  To do this, the remote host must support version
.\"O two of the RPC mount protocol.  Many NFS servers support only
.\"O version one.
POSIX の手法を用いて NFS ファイルシステムをマウントする。ファイル名の
最大長がマウントサーバに問い合わされるようになり、 NFS ファイルシス
テムが POSIX pathconf コマンドを正しくサポートできるようになる。
これを行うためには、リモートホストが RPC マウントプロトコルのバージョ
ン 2 をサポートしていなければならない。多くの NFS サーバはバージョン 1 
しかサポートしていない。
.TP 1.5i
.I nocto
.\"O Suppress the retrieval of new attributes when creating a file.
ファイルを作成するときに、新たな属性の取得を抑制する。
.TP 1.5i
.I noac
.\"O Disable all forms of attribute caching entirely.  This extracts a
.\"O server performance penalty but it allows two different NFS clients
.\"O to get reasonable good results when both clients are actively
.\"O writing to common filesystem on the server.
属性のキャッシングのすべてを完全に無効にする。これはサーバの性能を低下さ
せるが、 2 つの異なる NFS クライアントの両方が、サーバ上の共通のファイ
ルシステムに頻繁に書き込みをしている場合に、正しい結果をそれぞれのクラ
イアントに返すことを保証する。
.TP 1.5i
.I tcp
.\"O Mount the NFS filesystem using the TCP protocol instead of the
.\"O default UDP protocol.  Many NFS servers only support UDP.
NFS ファイルシステムのマウントに、デフォルトの UDP プロトコルではなく 
TCP プロトコルを用いる。多くの NFS サーバは UDP しかサポートしていない。
.TP 1.5i
.I udp
.\"O Mount the NFS filesystem using the UDP protocol.  This
.\"O is the default.
NFS ファイルシステムのマウントに UDP プロトコルを用いる。こちら
がデフォルトである。
.P
.\"O All of the non-value options have corresponding nooption forms.
.\"O For example, nointr means don't allow file operations to be
.\"O interrupted.
数値を指定しないオプションすべてに対して、それぞれ no を前置したオプショ
ンが存在する。例えば、 nointr はファイル操作の中断を許可しない。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /etc/fstab
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR fstab "(5), " mount "(8), " umount "(8), " exports (5)
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
"Rick Sladkey" <jrs@world.std.com>
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The posix, and nocto options are parsed by mount
.\"O but currently are silently ignored.
posix オプションと nocto オプションは mount によって受け入れられるが、
現在のところは単に無視される。
.P
.\"O The tcp and namlen options are implemented but are not currently
.\"O supported by the Linux kernel.
tcp および namlen オプションは実装されているが、現在のところ Linux カー
ネルではサポートされていない。
.P
.\"O The umount command should notify the server
.\"O when an NFS filesystem is unmounted.
umount コマンドは、 NFS ファイルシステムがアンマウントされたときにサー
バに通知するべきである。
