
.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH intro 9 "July 1997" "Linux DDI" "Linux DDI"

.\" Copyright 1997 Stephen Williams

.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.

.SH 名前
.\"O intro \- Introduction to kernel interface
intro \- カーネルインターフェースの紹介
.SH 書式
.B #include <linux/version.h>
.SH 説明
.\"O This section documents the functions available to device driver
.\"O writers and kernel level modules. The functions are of interest mainly
.\"O to device driver writers, although anyone considering running code in
.\"O linux kernel mode may need to be familiar with these interfaces.
この節はデバイスドライバの書き手とカーネルレベルでのモジュールに利用可
能な関数の文書を提供するものである。これらの関数は主にデバイスドライバ
の書き手にとって興味あるものであるが、カーネル・モードで走っているコー
ドについて考えるものは誰でも、これらのインターフェースについて、よく知
る必要があるだろう。linuxカーネルモードにおいてコードを走らせることを
考えている誰もがこれらのインターフェースを熟知しておく必要があるだろう。
.PP
.\"O Some of the functions of the DDI exist only in certain versions of the
.\"O kernel. Use the
DDIの関数の中にはカーネルのあるバージョンにのみ存在するものもある。
.B LINUX_VERSION_CODE
.\"O macro to test for specific versions of the kernel. For example, to use
.\"O a feature that is new to 2.1, say:
マクロをカーネルの特定のバージョンを検査するために使用されたい。例えば、
2.1 で新しくなった機能を使用するためには、
.PP
.nf
#if LINUX_VERSION_CODE >= 0x020100
.\"O     ... use new stuff ...
    ... 新しいものを使う ...
#else
.\"O     ... do it the old way ...
    ... 古い仕方でする ...
#endif
とする。
.fi
.PP
.\"O The following is a list of the man pages, divided roughly into
.\"O function groups.
以下は本章のマンページの一覧で、大雑把に関数群に分けられている。
.\"O .SS "Kernel Functions"
.SS "カーネル 関数"
.\"O These are general kernel functions.
これらは一般的なカーネル関数である。
.RS
.TP
MAJOR
.TP
MOD_INC_USE_COUNT
.TP
cli
.TP
get_user
.TP
init_bh
.TP
init_module
.TP
kmalloc
.TP
poll_wait
.TP
printk
.TP
probe_irq_on
.TP
register_chrdev
.TP
register_console
.TP
request_irq
.TP
save_flags
.TP
sleep_on
.TP
wake_up
.RE
.\"O .SS "/proc functions"
.\"O These functions relate to manipulation of the
.SS "/proc 関数"
これらの関数は
.B /proc
.\"O filesystem.
ファイルシステムの操作に関係している。
.RS
.TP
proc_dir_entry
.TP
proc_net_register
.TP
proc_scsi_register
.RE
.\"O .SS "BIOS32 functions"
.\"O These are specific to PCI (BIOS32) support.
.SS "BIOS32 関数"
これらのは PCI (BIOS32) サポートに固有のものである。
.RS
.TP
pcibios_find_class
.TP
pcibios_present
.TP
pcibios_read_config_byte
.TP
pcibios_read_config_dword
.TP
pcibios_read_config_word
.TP
pcibios_strerror
.TP
pcibios_write_config_byte
.TP
pcibios_write_config_dword
.TP
pcibios_write_config_word
.RE
.\"O .SS "VM functions"
.\"O These are functions that support manipulating the virtual memory
.\"O subsystem.
.SS "VM(仮想メモリ) 関数"
これらは仮想メモリサブシステムの操作をサポートする関数である。
.RS
.TP
MAP_NR
.TP
mem_map_reserve
.RE
.\"O .SS "Network Functions"
.SS ネットワーク関数
.RS
.TP
skb_dequeue
.TP
skb_insert
.TP
skb_peek
.TP
skb_queue_empty
.TP
skb_queue_head
.TP
skb_queue_head_init
.TP
skb_queue_len
.TP
skb_queue_tail
.TP
skb_unlink
.RE
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.\"O Each man page attempts to list the kernel versions where the function
.\"O is available. If the form of the function changes, this section tells
.\"O when the described form applies.
.SH 可用性
各マンページはその関数が利用可能なカーネルバージョンの掲載につとめている。
関数の形式が変化しているならば、この節はいつ記述された形式が適合するかを
示す。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\"O This section lists other man pages that may be of interest. Also,
.\"O interesting source files in the linux kernel may be listed here.
.SH "関連項目"
この節では関心を持たれるであろう他のマンページを挙げる。また、
linuxカーネル内の興味あるソースファイルもここで示されるだろう。
.\"O .SH AUTHORS
.\"O Each man page has a section like this one that lists the author(s) who
.\"O contributed significantly to that page. Other unnamed individuals may
.\"O also have contributed corrections, editorial, etc.
.SH 著者
各マンページはそのページに著しく貢献した著者を示すこのような節を有する。
他の名前の記されない個人もまた訂正や編集等に貢献しているかもしれない。
.PP
.\"O Major contributors are (in alphabetical order)
.\"O Niel Moore <amethyst@maxwell.ml.org>,
.\"O Keith Owens <kaos@ocs.com.au>,
.\"O Kirk Petersen <kirk@speakeasy.org>,
.\"O and Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>.
主な寄稿者は(アルファベット順で)
Cyrus Durgin <cider@speakeasy.org>,
Niel Moore <amethyst@maxwell.ml.org>,
Keith Owens <kaos@ocs.com.au>,
Kirk Petersen <kirk@speakeasy.org>,
Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com>,
および
Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>.
.PP
.\"O Editorial, and this intro page, were done by Stephen Williams
.\"O <steve@icarus.com>.
編集、及びこの紹介ページはStepehn Williams
<steve@icarus.com>.
によってなされた。
.\"O .SH BUGS
.\"O The living linux kernel is a moving target, and the kernel functions
.\"O are unique to linux. Therefore, although the editor and contributers
.\"O make a good effort to be as accurate as possible, errors may
.\"O exist. The source codes of the linux kernel are the ultimate authority
.\"O on the behavior of any function and should be considered the final word.
.SH バグ
生けるlinuxカーネルは常に動いている標的であって、そのカーネル関数は
linux固有のものである。したがって、編者及び寄稿者はできる限り正確なも
のになるよう努力を尽くしているのだが、誤りが存在するかもしれない。
Linuxカーネルのソースコードがいかなる関数の振舞いに対しても究極的なよ
りどころであり、最後の言葉であると考えていただきたい。


