.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2000 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.   
.\" Translated Sat Jul  8 01:50:43 JST 2000
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <sato@complex.eng.hokudai.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:        major		メジャー
.\"WORD:        minor		マイナー
.\"WORD:        device		デバイス
.\"WORD:        structure	構造体
.\"
.TH MAJOR 9 "$Date: 1999/08/11 11:46:46 $" "Linux DDI" "Kernel Functions"
.\"
.\" Turn off hyphenation and right justification for the first sections.
.hlm 0
.na
.\" The name should be formatted this way for apropos to work
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O MAJOR, MINOR, MKDEV \- macros to manipulate device major/minor numbers
MAJOR, MINOR, MKDEV \- デバイスのマイナー番号と
メジャー番号を操作するマクロ
.\"
.\"
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <linux/fs.h>
.sp
.BI "#define MAJOR(" dev ")"
.br
.BI "#define MINOR(" dev ")"
.br
.BI "#define MKDEV(" major ", " minor ")"
.HP
.\"
.\" Turn hyphenation and adjustment back on.
.hlm 1
.ad
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O The
.\"O .B MAJOR
.\"O and
.\"O .B MINOR
.\"O macros extract from a device id (of type
.\"O .IR dev_t )
.\"O the major and minor numbers respectively. It is the combined device
.\"O number that is found in the
.\"O .B "struct~file"
.\"O structure.
.BR MAJOR ,
.B MINOR
マクロは
.RI ( dev_t
型の) デバイス ID から、それぞれメジャー番号とマイナー番号を取り出す。
デバイス ID は (メジャー番号とマイナー番号が) 連結されたデバイス番号で、
.B "struct~file"
構造体の中にある。
.PP
.\"O The
.\"O .B MKDEV
.\"O macro assembles a device number from the supplied major and minor
.\"O numbers.
.B MKDEV
マクロは、指定されたメジャー番号とマイナー番号から
デバイス番号を作る。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O Describe the return values. Enumerate all the distinct values and all
.\"O the ranges.
返り値について説明する。
このマクロは、あらゆるデバイス固有の値を全範囲で列挙する。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 有効性
.\"O Linux 0.0+
Linux 0.0 以降
.PP
.\"O In later kernels (Linux 2.1 and later) there is movement towards using
.\"O 64bit device numbers. Although it is generally a good idea to not
.\"O presume to know how device numbers are constructed, it is during this
.\"O period of transition fundamentally important that you ONLY use these
.\"O functions to manipulate device numbers.
(Linux 2.1 以降の) カーネルでは、64 ビットのデバイス番号に移行する動きがある。
しかし、どのようにしてデバイス番号が作られるかを (ユーザーが)
知っていると仮定しないのは、基本的に良い考えである。
この移行期間において根本的に重要なのは、
デバイス番号を操作するために、
これらの関数を使用するだけでよいということである。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.hlm 0
.na
.BR mknod "(1)"
.ad
.hlm 1
.PP
.\"O Also list some source files for the
.\"O kernel that implement the functions of the page.
このページの関数を実装するカーネルのソースファイルが載っている。
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O These are macros, so parameters may be evaluated multiple times.
マクロであるため、引き数が何度も評価される。
