.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2001 Yuichi SATO
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Nov 13 03:43:33 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\"
.TH skel 9 "$Date: 2001/12/14 08:31:32 $" "Linux DDI" "VM Functions"
.\"
.\" Turn off hyphenation and right justification for the first sections.
.hlm 0
.na
.\" The name should be formatted this way for apropos to work
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O MAP_NR \- get memory map index for page in kernel memory
MAP_NR \- カーネルメモリにあるページのメモリマップインデックスを取得する
.\"
.\"
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B #include <linux/mm.h>
.sp
.BI "#define MAP_NR(" page ")"
.HP
.\"
.\" Turn hyphenation and adjustment back on.
.hlm 1
.ad
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O This macro maps the page of kernel memory to an index into the
.\"O .B mem_map
.\"O array. The input page is kernel-space page addresses such as those
.\"O that come from the
.\"O .BR get_free_page "(9)"
.\"O function. 
このマクロは、カーネルメモリのページを
.B mem_map
配列へのインデックスにマップする。
引き数となるページはカーネル空間ページアドレスであり、
.BR get_free_page "(9)"
関数などで返される。
.\"O The expression
.\"O .I "mem_map[MAP_NR(page)]"
.\"O returns a pointer to a
.\"O .I mem_map_t
.\"O for the page in question.
.I "mem_map[MAP_NR(page)]"
とすれば、問題としているページの
.I mem_map_t
へのポインタが返される。
.PP
.\"O Device drivers need access to the page structure if it is implimenting
.\"O some special kind of memory segment, i.e. cache for a virtual frame buffer.
デバイスドライバは、仮想フレームバッファのキャッシュなどの
特殊なメモリセグメントを実装する場合、
ページ構造にアクセスする必要がある。
.\"O .SH "RETURN VALUE"
.SH 返り値
.\"O Returns an index into the
.\"O .B mem_map
.\"O array.
.B mem_map
配列へのインデックスが返される。
.\"O .SH AVAILABILITY
.SH 可用性
.\"O Linux 2.0+
Linux 2.0 以降
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.hlm 0
.na
.BR get_free_pages "(9)"
.ad
.hlm 1
.PP
.I "/usr/include/asm/page.h"
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O There is no check that the page you are passing really is a valid page
.\"O address.
引き数として渡したページが有効なページアドレスであるかをチェックしない。
