
---
.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH register_console 9 "$Date:$" "Linux DDI" "Kernel Functions"
.SH 名前
register_console \- カーネルコンソールの役目を引き受ける
.SH 書式
.BI "extern void register_console(void(*" proc ")(const char*))"
.SH 説明
この関数は、
.BR printk "(9)"
関数により出力されたすべてのカーネル・メッセージを表示するために、
カーネルに関数を登録する。
.PP
この関数は、通常はブート時に一度だけ、コンソールデバイス用の
デバイスドライバからコールされるのだが、コンソールデバイスは
どれも結局のところそのマシンのためのものである。
このコンソール・プロシージャは、表示されるべきメッセージを
表示するためだけにコールされ、ログレベルに関する仕分けは
すでに行われているものとする。
.SH 返り値
なし
.SH 可用性
Linux 1.0+
.SH 関連項目
.BR printk "(9)"
.PP
.I "/usr/src/linux/kernel/printk.c"
.SH 著者
Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.SH バグ
同時に存在することができるのはただ1つのコンソールだけであり、
またその他のデバイスがコンソールとして登録されているかどうかを
知る方法はない。
.SH 日本語訳注
Linux 2.1.57カーネルソースを参照したところ、複数の関数を
登録可能なように仕様が変更されているようである。

堀田 倫英（Michihide Hotta)
[Mail] sim@remus.dti.ne.jp     [Web] http://www.remus.dti.ne.jp/~sim/

