.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" copyright (C) 1997 Stephen Williams <steve@icarus.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH wake_up 9 "$Date:$" "Linux DDI" "Kernel Functions"
.\"
.\" Turn off hyphenation and right justification for the first sections.
.hlm 0
.na
.\" The name should be formatted this way for apropos to work
.SH 名前
wake_up \- スリープしているプロセスを起こす
.\"
.\"
.SH 書式
.B #include <linux/sched.h>
.HP
.BI "void wake_up(struct\ wait_queue**" condition ")"
.\"
.\" Turn hyphenation and adjustment back on.
.hlm 1
.ad
.SH 説明
.B wake_up
関数はちょうど
.BR sleep_on "(9)"
関数の反対で、同じ状態変数を使ってスリープさせられている
プロセスを起こすものである。与えられた状態でスリープして
いるすべてのプロセスが起こされる。もし(引数 condition 
で示されるものと)同じ状態にあるプロセスが存在しなければ、
何も起こらない。
.PP
.BR sleep_on "(9)"
関数とは異なり、
.B wake_up
はブロックせず、また割り込みハンドラからコールされる場合
もある。実際、これが割り込みイベントの同期化の原理的な
意味である。
.PP
.I condition
パラメータがNULLであるか、または
.I condition
でスリープしているプロセスがない場合は、
.B wake_up
をコールしても何も行われない。
.SH 返り値
なし
.SH 利用可能な環境
Linux 1+
.SH 関連項目
.hlm 0
.na
.BR sleep_on "(9)"
.ad
.hlm 1
.PP
.I "/usr/src/linux/kernel/sched.c"
.SH 著者
Stephen Williams (steve@icarus.com)
.SH バグ

