.\"
.\" Original man-page is part of at-3.1.14.
.\"
.\" This is the Debian GNU/Linux prepackaged version of the deferred
.\" execution scheduler called at.
.\"
.\" This package was debianized by its author Thomas Koenig
.\" <ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de>, taken over and re-packaged first by Martin
.\" Schulze <joey@debian.org> and then by Siggy Brentrup <bsb@winnegan.de>,
.\" and then taken over by Ryan Murray <rmurray@debian.org>.
.\"
.\" In August 2009 the upstream development and Debian packaging were taken over
.\" by Ansgar Burchardt <ansgar@debian.org> and Cyril Brulebois <kibi@debian.org>.
.\"
.\" This may be considered the experimental upstream source, and since there
.\" doesn't seem to be any other upstream source, the only upstream source.
.\"
.\"    Copyright: 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 (c) Thomas Koenig
.\"               1993 (c) David Parsons
.\" 	      2002, 2005 (c) Ryan Murray
.\"
.\"    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"    (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"    GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1996 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Mon 22 Jun 1998 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" Modified to reflect changes at-3.1.14
.\" Fri 1 Aug 2014, by Takayuki Ogawa <takayuki@compusophia.com>
.\"
.TH ATD 8 2009-11-14
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O atd \- run jobs queued for later execution
atd \- 後で実行するためにキューに入れられたジョブを実行する
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B atd
.RB [ -l
.IR load_avg ]
.RB [ -b
.IR batch_interval ]
.RB [ -d ]
.RB [ -f ]
.RB [ -s ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B atd
.\"O runs jobs queued by
.\"O .BR at(1) .
.B atd
は
.BR at (1)
によってキューに入れられたジョブを実行する。
.PP
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.TP 8
.B -l
.\"O Specifies a limiting load factor, over which batch jobs should
.\"O not be run, instead of the compile-time choice of 0.8.
.\"O For an SMP system with
.\"O .I n
.\"O CPUs, you will probably want to set this higher than
.\"O .IR n-1.
負荷レベル (load factor) の限界値を指定する。これより大きい状態では、
batch ジョブは起動されない。コンパイル時のデフォルトの値は 0.8 である。
.I n
個の CPU からなる SMP システムでは、この値は
.I n-1
より大きくすると良いだろう。
.TP 8
.B -b
.\"O Specify the minimum interval in seconds between the start of two
.\"O batch jobs (60 default).
バッチジョブの起動間隔の最小値を秒単位で指定する (デフォルトは 60)。
.TP 8
.B -d
.\"O Debug; print error messages to standard error instead of using
.\"O .BR syslog(3) .
.\"O This option also implies
.\"O .BR -f .
デバッグモード。エラーメッセージを
.BR syslog (3)
に渡すのではなく、標準エラー出力に表示する。
このオプションは
.BR -f
も意味する。
.TP
.B -f
.\"O Run
.\"O .BR atd
.\"O in the foreground.
.BR atd
をフォアグラウンドで実行する。
.TP 8
.B -s
.\"O Process the at/batch queue only once.
.\"O This is primarily of use for compatibility with old versions of
.\"O .BR at ;
.\"O .B "atd -s"
.\"O is equivalent to the old
.\"O .B atrun
.\"O command.
at/batch キューを一回しか処理しない。これは主として古いバージョンの
.B at
との互換性を保つために用いられる。
.\"O .SH WARNING
.\"O .B atd
.\"O won't work if its spool directory is mounted via NFS even if
.\"O .I no_root_squash
.SH 警告
スプールディレクトリが NFS 経由でマウントされている場合は、たとえ
.I no_root_squash
を設定していても、
.B atd
はうまく動作しないだろう。
.\"O .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.I /var/spool/cron/atjobs
.\"O The directory for storing jobs; this should be mode 700, owner
.\"O daemon.
ジョブを保存するディレクトリ。このディレクトリはモードを 700、オーナーを
daemon にするべきである。
.PP
.I /var/spool/cron/atspool
.\"O The direcotry for storing output; this should be mode 700, owner
.\"O daemon.
出力を保存するディレクトリ。このディレクトリはモードを 700、オーナーを
daemon にするべきである。
.PP
.IR /etc/at.allow ,
.IR /etc/at.deny
.\"O determine who can use the
によって、だれが
.B at
システムを利用できるか決定できる。
.\"O .SH "SEE ALSO"
.SH 関連項目
.BR at (1),
.BR at.deny (5),
.BR at.allow (5),
.BR cron (8),
.BR crontab (1),
.\"O .BR syslog (3).
.BR syslog (3)
.\"O .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\"O The functionality of
.\"O .B atd
.\"O should be merged into
.\"O .BR cron (8) .
.B atd
の機能は
.BR cron (8)
へ統合されるべきである。
