.\" 
.\" Translated Sun Aug 22 18:02:41 JST 1999
.\"         by FUJIWARA Teruyoshi <fujiwara@linux.or.jp>
.\" Updated Sun Jul 29 01:31:16 JST 2001
.\"         by Yuichi SATO <ysato@h4.dion.ne.jp>
.\" 
.TH CDPARANOIA 1
.\"O .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\"O cdparanoia (Paranoia release III) \- an audio CD reading utility which includes extra data verification features
cdparanoia (Paranoia release III) \- オーディオ CD 読み取りユーティリティ。特別なデータ照合機能を持つ。
.\"O .SH DATE
.SH 日付
.\"O version III release alpha 9.8 (02 Mar 2001)
バージョンIII リリースα9.8 (02 Mar 2001)
.\"O .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B cdparanoia
.RB [ options ]
.B span 
.RB [ outfile ]
.\"O .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\"O .B cdparanoia
.\"O retrieves audio tracks from CDDA capable CDROM drives.  The data can
.\"O be saved to a file or directed to standard output in WAV, AIFF, AIFF-C
.\"O or raw format.  Most ATAPI, SCSI and several proprietary CDROM drive
.\"O makes are supported;
.\"O .B cdparanoia
.\"O can determine if the target drive is CDDA capable.
.B cdparanoia
は CD-DA 機能を持つ CD-ROM ドライブからオーディオトラックを取り出します。
このデータは WAV, AIFF, AIFF-C, raw 形式でファイルにセーブすることや、
標準出力に送ることができます。
ほとんどの ATAPI, SCSI, メーカー独自の CD-ROM ドライブがサポートされています。
.B cdparanoia
は対象のドライブが CD-DA 機能を持っているかどうかを判別できます。
.P
.\"O In addition to simple reading, 
.\"O .B cdparanoia
.\"O adds extra-robust data verification, synchronization, error handling
.\"O and scratch reconstruction capability.
単純な読み取りだけでなく、
.B cdparanoia
は特別に頑健なデータ照合機能、同期機能、エラー処理機能、破損データの再
構成機能を持っています。
.\"O .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション

.TP
.B \-v --verbose
.\"O Be absurdly verbose about the autosensing and reading process. Good
.\"O for setup and debugging.
自動検出と読み取りの処理について、ばかばかしいほど詳細な表示を行います。
設定やデバッグの際に便利です。

.TP
.B \-q --quiet
.\"O Do not print any progress or error information during the reading process.
読み取り処理の途中に、進行状況やエラー情報を全く表示しません。

.TP
.B \-e --stderr-progress
.\"O Force output of progress information to stderr (for wrapper scripts).
進行状況を (ラッパスクリプトのために) 標準エラー出力に出力します。

.TP
.B \-V --version
.\"O Print the program version and quit.
プログラムのバージョンを表示して終了します。

.TP
.B \-Q --query
.\"O Perform CDROM drive autosense, query and print the CDROM table of
.\"O contents, then quit.
CD-ROM ドライブの自動検出、CD-ROM の TOC の問い合わせと表示を行い、
終了します。

.TP
.B \-s --search-for-drive
.\"O Forces a complete search for a cdrom drive, even if the /dev/cdrom link exists.
たとえ /dev/cdrom のリンクが存在していても、CD-ROM ドライブの完全な
検索を行います。

.TP
.B \-h --help
.\"O Print a brief synopsis of 
.\"O .B cdparanoia 
.\"O usage and options.
.B cdparanoia 
の使い方とオプションを簡単な説明を出力します。

.TP
.B \-p --output-raw
.\"O Output headerless data as raw 16 bit PCM data with interleaved samples in host byte order.  To force little or big endian byte order, use 
.\"O .B \-r 
.\"O or 
.\"O .B \-R
.\"O as described below.
ヘッダ無しのデータをホストのバイト順で、インタリーブ処理を施した
サンプル音声を含む raw 形式の 16 ビット PCM データとして出力します。
バイト順としてリトルエンディアンあるいはビッグエンディアンを指定するには、
後述の
.B \-r 
または
.B \-R
オプションを使ってください。

.TP
.B \-r --output-raw-little-endian
.\"O Output headerless data as raw 16 bit PCM data with interleaved samples in LSB first byte order.
ヘッダ無しのデータを LSB first のバイト順で、インタリーブ処理を施した
サンプル音声を含む raw 形式の 16 ビット PCM データとして出力します。

.TP
.B \-R --output-raw-big-endian
.\"O Output headerless data as raw 16 bit PCM data with interleaved samples in MSB first byte order.
ヘッダ無しのデータを MSB first のバイト順で、インタリーブ処理を施した
サンプル音声を含む raw 形式の 16 ビット PCM データとして出力します。

.TP
.B \-w --output-wav
.\"O Output data in Micro$oft RIFF WAV format (note that WAV data is always
.\"O LSB first byte order).
データを Micro$oft の RIFF WAV 形式で出力します
(WAV データのバイト順は必ず LSB first である点に注意)。

.TP
.B \-f --output-aiff
.\"O Output data in Apple AIFF format (note that AIFC data is
.\"O always in MSB first byte order).
データを Apple の AIFF 形式で出力します
(AIFC データのバイト順は必ず MSB first である点に注意)。

.TP
.B \-a --output-aifc
.\"O Output data in uncompressed Apple AIFF-C format (note that AIFF-C data is
.\"O always in MSB first byte order).
データを無圧縮 の Apple AIFF-C 形式で出力します(AIFF-C データのバイト
順は必ず MSB first である点に注意)。

.TP
.BI "\-B --batch "
.\"O 
.\"O Cdda2wav-style batch output flag; cdparanoia will split the output
.\"O into multiple files at track boundaries.  Output file names are
.\"O prepended with 'track#.'
cdda2wav 形式のバッチ出力を行います。cdparanoia は出力をトラック境界で
複数ファイルに分割します。出力ファイルのファイル名の先頭部分は、'track(番号)' 
となります。

.TP
.B \-c --force-cdrom-little-endian
.\"O Some CDROM drives misreport their endianness (or do not report it at
.\"O all); it's possible that cdparanoia will guess wrong.  Use
.\"O .B \-c
.\"O to force cdparanoia to treat the drive as a little endian device.
一部の CD-ROM は間違ったエンディアンを報告します
(あるいはエンディアンに関する情報を全く報告しません)。
そのため、cdparanoia がエンディアンを間違えることがあります。
ドライブをリトルエンディアンのデバイスとして
cdparanoia に扱わせるには、
.B \-c
オプションを使います。

.TP
.B \-C --force-cdrom-big-endian
.\"O As above but force cdparanoia to treat the drive as a big endian device.
前のオプションの逆で、デバイスをビッグエンディアンのデバイスとして
cdparanoia に扱わせます。

.TP
.BI "\-n --force-default-sectors " n
.\"O Force the interface backend to do atomic reads of 
.\"O .B n
.\"O sectors per read.  This number can be misleading; the kernel will often
.\"O split read requests into multiple atomic reads (the automated Paranoia
.\"O code is aware of this) or allow reads only wihin a restricted size
.\"O range. 
.\"O .B This option should generally not be used.
インタフェースのバックエンドが行う最小単位の読み取りを、
1 回の読み取りごとに
.B n
セクタとします。
この数は問題を起こすおそれがあります。
カーネルは多くの場合、読み取り要求を複数個の最小単位の読み取りに分割するか
(cdparanoia による自動処理はこれに対応しています)、
制限された大きさの範囲でしか読み取りを許可しません。
.B 普通はこのオプションを使うべきではありません。

.TP
.BI "\-d --force-cdrom-device " device
.\"O Force the interface backend to read from
.\"O .B device
.\"O rather than the first readable CDROM drive it finds.  This can be used
.\"O to specify devices of any valid interface type (ATAPI, SCSI or
.\"O proprietary).
インタフェースのバックエンドによる読み取りを、
最初に見つけた読み取り可能な CD-ROM ドライブではなく、
指定した
.B device
から行うようにします。
このオプションでは、利用可能である任意のインタフェース
(ATAPI, SCSI, メーカー独自) を持つデバイスを指定することができます。

.TP
.BI "\-g --force-generic-device " device
.\"O This option is used along with
.\"O .B \-d
.\"O when one wants explicit control in setting both the SCSI cdrom and
.\"O generic devices seperately. This option is only useful on
.\"O non-standard SCSI setups.
このオプションは、SCSI CD-ROM と汎用デバイスの設定を
明示的に別々に制御したい時に
.B \-d
オプションと組み合わせて使います。
このオプションが役立つのは、SCSI の設定が標準と異なる場合だけです。

.TP
.BI "\-S --force-read-speed " number
.\"O Use this option explicitly to set the read rate of the CD drive (where
.\"O supported).  This can reduce underruns on machines with slow disks, or
.\"O which are low on memory.
CD ドライブからの読み込み速度を設定するには、このオプションを明示的に
使ってください (ドライブが対応している場合)。このオプションを用いると、
ディスクが遅い場合やメモリが少ない場合に起こるアンダーランを減らすこと
ができます。

.TP
.BI "\-t --toc-offset " number
.\"O Use this option to force the entire disc LBA addressing to shift by
.\"O the given amount; the value is added to the beginning offsets in the
.\"O TOC.  This can be used to shift track boundaries for the whole disc
.\"O manually on sector granularity.  The next option does something
.\"O similar...
ディスク全体の LBA アドレスを指定した値だけシフトさせるには、
このオプションを使って下さい。
この値は TOC の開始オフセットに加算されます。
このオプションを使うと、ディスク全体のトラック境界を
セクタ単位でシフトすることができます。
次のオプションも同じような動作をします。

.TP
.BI "\-T --toc-bias "
.\"O Some drives (usually random Toshibas) report the actual track
.\"O beginning offset values in the TOC, but then treat the beginning of
.\"O track 1 index 1 as sector 0 for all read operations.  This results in
.\"O every track seeming to start too late (losing a bit of the beginning
.\"O and catching a bit of the next track).
あるドライブ (たいてい Toshiba 製) は、
TOC の実際のトラック開始オフセットの値を表示するにもかかわらず、
全ての読み取り操作においてトラック 1 の先頭のインデックス 1 を
セクタ 0 として扱います。
そのため、全てのトラックで開始が非常に遅く感じます
(トラックの先頭が少し消えて、次のトラックが少し入ってしまいます)。
.\"O .B \-T
.\"O accounts for this behavior.  Note that this option will cause
.\"O cdparanoia to attempt to read sectors before or past the known user
.\"O data area of the disc, resulting in read errors at disc edges on most
.\"O drives and possibly even hard lockups on some buggy hardware.
.B \-T
オプションはこのような挙動を解消します。
このオプションを使うと、cdparanoia は
ディスク上の既知のユーザーデータエリアの前後のセクタを読み取ろうとします。
多くのドライブにおいてディスクの端での読み取りでエラーが起こり、
バグのあるハードウェアでは、ハードウェア的に固まってしまうこともあるので
注意して下さい。

.TP
.BI "\-O --sample-offset " number
.\"O Use this option to force the entire disc to shift sample position
.\"O output by the given amount; This can be used to shift track boundaries
.\"O for the whole disc manually on sample granularity. Note that this will
.\"O cause cdparanoia to attempt to read partial sectors before or past the
.\"O known user data area of the disc, probably causing read errors on most
.\"O drives and possibly even hard lockups on some buggy hardware.
ディスク全体について、指定した値の分だけサンプル位置出力をシフトさせるには、
このオプションを使って下さい。
このオプションを使うと、ディスク全体のトラック境界を
サンプル単位でシフトすることができます。
このオプションを使うと、cdparanoia は
ディスク上の既知のユーザーデータエリアの前後のセクタを一部読み取ろうとします。
多くのドライブにおいて読み取りエラーが起こるかもしれず、
バグのあるハードウェアでは、ハードウェア的に固まってしまうこともあるので
注意して下さい。

.TP
.B \-Z --disable-paranoia
.\"O Disable 
.\"O .B all
.\"O data verification and correction features.  When using -Z, cdparanoia
.\"O reads data exactly as would cdda2wav with an overlap setting of zero.
.\"O This option implies that 
.\"O .B \-Y
.\"O is active.
データ照合と訂正機能を
.b 全て
無効にします。-Z オプションを用いると、cdparanoia は
オーバーラップの設定が 0 である cdda2wav と全く同じようにデータの
読み取りを行います。
このオプションを指定すると
.B \-Y
オプションも有効になります。

.TP
.B \-z --never-skip[=max_retries]
.\"O Do not accept any skips; retry forever if needed.  An optional maximum
.\"O number of retries can be specified; for comparison, default without -z is
.\"O currently 20.
スキップしません。
必要ならば永久に再試行します。
オプションとして再試行の最大回数を指定できます。
現在のところ、デフォルト (-z オプションがない場合) の
再試行の回数は 20 回です。

.TP
.B \-Y --disable-extra-paranoia
.\"O Disables intra-read data verification; only overlap checking at read
.\"O boundaries is performed. It can wedge if errors occur in the attempted overlap area. Not recommended.
読み取ったデータの中間におけるデータ照合を行いません。
つまり、データの読み取り境界における
オーバーラップ部分のチェックしか行いません。
チェックしているオーバーラップ部分でエラーが起こった場合は、
分割することができます。
このオプションは推奨しません。

.TP
.B \-X --abort-on-skip
.\"O If the read skips due to imperfect data, a scratch, whatever, abort reading this track.  If output is to a file, delete the partially completed file.
不完全なデータや傷などで読み取りがスキップされた場合、
そのトラックの読み取りを中止します。
ファイルへの出力の場合、部分的にしか完成していないファイルは削除されます。

.\"O .SH OUTPUT SMILIES
.SH 出力される顔文字
.TP
.B
  :-)   
.\"O Normal operation, low/no jitter
正常動作。ジッタは少ないか、全くない
.TP
.B
  :-|   
.\"O Normal operation, considerable jitter
正常動作。ジッタは許容範囲
.TP
.B
  :-/   
.\"O Read drift
読み取りでドリフトが発生
.TP
.B
  :-P   
.\"O Unreported loss of streaming in atomic read operation
最小単位の読み取り操作において、報告されていない損失がストリーミングにある
.TP
.B
  8-|   
.\"O Finding read problems at same point during reread; hard to correct
繰り返して読み取りを行ったが、同じ位置で問題が起きた。修正は困難である
.TP
.B
  :-0   
.\"O SCSI/ATAPI transport error
SCSI/ATAPI のデータ転送エラー
.TP
.B
  :-(   
.\"O Scratch detected
傷が検出された
.TP
.B
  ;-(   
.\"O Gave up trying to perform a correction
データの訂正をあきらめた
.TP
.B
  8-X
.\"O Aborted read due to known, uncorrectable error
既知の訂正できないエラーにより、読み取りが中止された
.TP
.B
  :^D   
.\"O Finished extracting
読み取り終了

.\"O .SH PROGRESS BAR SYMBOLS
.SH 進行表示の意味
.TP
.B
.\"O <space> 
<スペース> 
.\"O No corrections needed
訂正は不要
.TP
.B
   -    
.\"O Jitter correction required
ジッタの訂正が必要
.TP
.B
   +    
.\"O Unreported loss of streaming/other error in read
報告されていない損失がストリーミングにある。
あるいは別のエラーが読み取り時に発生した
.TP
.B
   !  
.\"O Errors found after stage 1 correction; the drive is making the
.\"O same error through multiple re-reads, and cdparanoia is having trouble
.\"O detecting them.
ステージ 1 訂正の後にエラーが見つかった。
読み取りを複数回繰り返しても同じエラーが発生し、
cdparanoia はそのエラーをうまく検出できない。
.TP
.B
   e    
.\"O SCSI/ATAPI transport error (corrected)
SCSI/ATAPI のデータ転送エラー (訂正済み)
.TP
.B
   V    
.\"O Uncorrected error/skip
訂正できないエラー/データのスキップ

.\"O .SH SPAN ARGUMENT
.SH 引き数 'span' 

.\"O The span argument specifies which track, tracks or subsections of
.\"O tracks to read.  This argument is required. 
引き数 span は、読み取りを行うトラックまたはトラックの一部を指定します。
この引き数は必ず必要です。
.\"O .B NOTE:
.\"O Unless the span is a simple number, it's generally a good idea to
.\"O quote the span argument to protect it from the shell.
.B 注意:
span が単なる数字でなければ、シェルが引き数 span を
展開してしまわないようにクォートするのが普通でしょう。
.P
.\"O The span argument may be a simple track number or an offset/span
.\"O specification.  The syntax of an offset/span takes the rough form:
引き数 span は、単なるトラック番号か、
オフセットとスパンの組合せの指定となります。
オフセットとスパンの組合せを指定する方法は、だいたい以下のようになります:
.P
1[ww:xx:yy.zz]-2[aa:bb:cc.dd] 
.P
.\"O Here, 1 and 2 are track numbers; the numbers in brackets provide a
.\"O finer grained offset within a particular track. [aa:bb:cc.dd] is in
.\"O hours/minutes/seconds/sectors format. Zero fields need not be
.\"O specified: [::20], [:20], [20], [20.], etc, would be interpreted as
.\"O twenty seconds, [10:] would be ten minutes, [.30] would be thirty
.\"O sectors (75 sectors per second).
ここで 1 と 2 はトラック番号です。
角括弧の中の数値は、指定されたトラックにおける、より細かいオフセット指定です。
[aa:bb:cc.dd] は [時間:分:秒.セクタ] の形式です。
値が 0 であるフィールドは指定しなくても構いません。
つまり [::20], [:20], [20], [20.] 等は 20 秒と解釈され、
[10:] は 10 分と解釈され、[.30] は 30 セクタと解釈されます
(75 セクタで 1 秒です)。
.P
.\"O When only a single offset is supplied, it is interpreted as a starting
.\"O offset and ripping will continue to the end of the track.  If a single
.\"O offset is preceeded or followed by a hyphen, the implicit missing
.\"O offset is taken to be the start or end of the disc, respectively. Thus:
オフセットを 1 つしか指定しなければ、これは開始位置のオフセットを表し、
吸い出しはそのトラックの終わりまで行われます。
オフセットが 1 つだけあり、その前後にハイフン (-) がある場合には、
省略されているオフセットはディスクの先頭あるいは末尾として解釈されます。
例を以下に示します:

.TP
.B  1:[20.35]    
.\"O Specifies ripping from track 1, second 20, sector 35 to the end of
.\"O track 1.
トラック 1 の 20 秒、35 セクタの位置から、
トラック 1 の末尾までを吸い出します。
.TP
.B 1:[20.35]-   
.\"O Specifies ripping from 1[20.35] to the end of the disc
1[20.35] の位置からディスクの末尾までを吸い出します。
.TP
.B \-2           
.\"O Specifies ripping from the beginning of the disc up to (and including) track 2
ディスクの先頭からトラック 2 まで (トラック 2 も含みます) を吸い出します。
.TP
.B \-2:[30.35]   
.\"O Specifies ripping from the beginning of the disc up to 2:[30.35]
ディスクの先頭から 2:[30.35] の位置まで吸い出します。
.TP
.B 2-4          
.\"O Specifies ripping from the beginning of track 2 to the end of track 4.
トラック 2 の先頭からトラック 4 の末尾までを吸い出します。
.P
.\"O Again, don't forget to protect square brackets and preceeding hyphens from
.\"O the shell.
繰り返しになりますが、角括弧および単語の先頭にあるハイフンは
必ずクォートして、シェルに展開されないようにしてください。

.\"O .SH EXAMPLES
.SH 例

.\"O A few examples, protected from the shell:
クォートも含めた指定例をいくつか示します:
.TP
.\"O Query only with exhaustive search for a drive and full reporting of autosense:
ドライブの調査だけを徹底的に行い、自動検出の結果を全て報告します:
.P
       cdparanoia -vsQ
.TP
.\"O Extract an entire disc, putting each track in a seperate file:
ディスク全体を吸い出します。それぞれのトラックは別々のファイルにします:
.P
       cdparanoia -B 
.TP
.\"O Extract from track 1, time 0:30.12 to 1:10.00:
トラック 1 の時刻 0:30.12 から時刻 1:10.00 までを吸い出します:
.P
       cdparanoia "1[:30.12]-1[1:10]"
.TP
.\"O Extract from the beginning of the disc up to track 3:
ディスクの先頭からトラック 3 までを吸い出します:
.P
       cdparanoia -- "-3"
.TP
.\"O The "--" above is to distinguish "-3" from an option flag.
上記の "--" は、オプションフラグと "-3" を区別するためのものです。
.\"O .SH OUTPUT
.SH 出力

.\"O The output file argument is optional; if it is not specified,
.\"O cdparanoia will output samples to one of
.\"O .BR cdda.wav ", " cdda.aifc ", or " cdda.raw
.\"O depending on whether 
.\"O .BR \-w ", " \-a ", " \-r " or " \-R " is used (" \-w 
.\"O is the implicit default).  The output file argument of 
.\"O .B \-
.\"O specifies standard output; all data formats may be piped. 
出力ファイルを指定する引き数は省略可能です。
指定されていなければ、cdparanoia はサンプル音声を
.BR cdda.wav ", " cdda.aifc ", " cdda.raw
のいずれかに出力します。
どのファイルに出力されるのかは、オプション
.BR \-w ", " \-a ", " \-r "," \-R
のうちいずれを使うかによって決まります
(何も指定しなければ
.BR \-w 
がデフォルト値です)。
出力ファイルを指定する引き数が
.B \-
ならば、出力は標準出力に対して行われます。
どのデータ形式でもパイプに送ることができます。

.\"O .SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
.SH 謝辞
.\"O Cdparanoia sprang from and once drew heavily from the interface of
.\"O Heiko Eissfeldt's (heiko@colossus.escape.de) 'cdda2wav'
.\"O package. Cdparanoia would not have happened without it.
cdparanoia の基となったのは Heiko Eissfeldt さん
(heiko@colossus.escape.de) が作成した 'cdda2wav' パッケージであり、
以前は cdparanoia のインタフェースの大部分は
cdda2wav からもらってきたものでした。
cdda2wav がなければ、cdparanoia が作られることはなかったでしょう。
.P
.\"O Joerg Schilling has also contributed SCSI expertise through his
.\"O generic SCSI transport library.
Joerg Schilling さんが作成した汎用 SCSI データ転送ライブラリから、
SCSI の専門知識を多く学ばせていただきました。
.P
.\"O .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
Monty <monty@xiph.org>
.P
.\"O Cdparanoia's homepage may be found at:
cdparanoia のホームページは以下の場所にあります:
.P
.ce 
http://www.xiph.org/paranoia/
