.\"
.\" Original man-page is part of at-3.1.14.
.\"
.\" This is the Debian GNU/Linux prepackaged version of the deferred
.\" execution scheduler called at.
.\"
.\" This package was debianized by its author Thomas Koenig
.\" <ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de>, taken over and re-packaged first by Martin
.\" Schulze <joey@debian.org> and then by Siggy Brentrup <bsb@winnegan.de>,
.\" and then taken over by Ryan Murray <rmurray@debian.org>.
.\"
.\" In August 2009 the upstream development and Debian packaging were taken over
.\" by Ansgar Burchardt <ansgar@debian.org> and Cyril Brulebois <kibi@debian.org>.
.\"
.\" This may be considered the experimental upstream source, and since there
.\" doesn't seem to be any other upstream source, the only upstream source.
.\"
.\"    Copyright: 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 (c) Thomas Koenig
.\"               1993 (c) David Parsons
.\" 	      2002, 2005 (c) Ryan Murray
.\"
.\"    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"    (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"    GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 2014 Takayuki Ogawa
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Fri 1 Aug 2014, by Takayuki Ogawa <takayuki@compusophia.com>
.\"
.TH AT.ALLOW 5 "Sep 1997" "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH 名前
at.allow, at.deny \- at や batch にジョブを登録できるユーザーを決める
.SH 説明
.I /etc/at.allow
と
.I /etc/at.deny
ファイルは、
.BR at (1)
や
.BR batch (1)
経由で後刻実行するコマンドを、どのユーザが登録できるかを決定する。
.PP
ファイルの書式は、1 行に 1 ユーザ名を書いたリストである。空白 (whitespace) は許されない。
.PP
.I /etc/at.allow
があれば、そこに書かれたユーザーのみが
.BR at
を使える。
.PP
.I /etc/at.allow
がなければ
.I /etc/at.deny
をチェックし、そこに書かれて「いない」ユーザーすべてが
.BR at
を使える。
.PP
したがって、空の
.I /etc/at.deny
のみがあるときは、全てのユーザーが
.BR at
を使うことができる。
.PP
もしどちらのファイルもなければ、スーパーユーザーのみ
at を使うことができる。
.SH 関連項目
.BR at (1),
.BR cron (8),
.BR crontab (1),
.BR atd (8)
