.\"    This file documents the GNU shell utilities.
.\" 
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Wed Dec 31 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH CHROOT 1L "GNU Shell Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
chroot \- ルートディレクトリを設定して、コマンドまたは対話型シェルを実行する
.SH 書式
.B chroot
[\-\-help] [\-\-version]
directory [command...]
.SH 説明
この文書はもうメンテナンスされていないので、不正確・不完全
な可能性がある。現在は texinfo 文書が正式な情報となっている。
.PP
このマニュアルページは GNU 版
.BR chroot
について記述したものである。
.B chroot
はファイル名変換のためのルートディレクトリを、指定したディレクトリに変更
してからコマンドを実行する。
.I command
が与えられなかった場合、
.B chroot
は対話型シェルを起動する。 `SHELL' 環境変数で指定しているシェルプログ
ラムが起動される。環境変数による指定がない場合のデフォルトは /bin/sh。
.SS オプション
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
標準出力に使用方法のメッセージを出力し、実行成功を返して終了する。
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
標準出力にバージョンの情報を出力し、実行成功を返して終了する。
.SS 注意
多くのシステムではスーパーユーザーしかルートディレクトリを変更できない
ようになっている。
