.\"    This file documents the GNU shell utilities.
.\"
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 UEYAMA Rui
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu Aug 21 00:50:55 JST 1997
.\"         by UEYAMA Rui <ueyama@campusnet.or.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	built-in	組みこみ
.\"WORD:	alert		アラート
.TH ECHO 1 "GNU Shell Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
echo \- テキストの行を表示する
.SH 書式
\fBecho\fP [\fB\-ne\fP] [\fIstring\fP ...]
.br
.B echo
{\-\-help,\-\-version}
.SH 解説
この文章はもはやメンテナンスされていないので、不正確だったり不完全だったり
するかもしれない。Texinfoのドキュメントがきちんとした情報源である。
.PP
このマニュアルページはGNUバージョンの
.BR echo
の解説である。
多くのシェルの組みこみコマンドに同じ名前で同じ機能があることに
注意して欲しい。
.PP
.B echo
は与えられた\fIstring\fPを標準出力に書きだす。文字列はスペースで区切られ、
最後に改行を出力する。
.SS オプション
.TP
.I \-n
最後の改行を出力しない。
.TP
.I \-e
バックスラッシュでエスケープした文字を解釈するようにする。文字の意味は:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \ea
アラート (ベル)
.TP
.B \eb
バックスラッシュ
.TP
.B \ec
最後の改行の出力を抑える
.TP
.B \ef
フォームフィード(form feed)を作る
.TP
.B \en
改行 (new line)
.TP
.B \er
改行 (carriage return)
.TP
.B \et
水平タブ
.TP
.B \ev
垂直タブ
.TP
.B \e\e
バックスラッシュ
.TP
.B \ennn
ASCIIコードが(8進数で)\fInnn\fPの文字
.PD
.RE
.SS オプション
.B echo
をちょうど一つのオプションをつけて実行するなら、次のオプションが有効である:
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
簡単な使い方を標準出力に表示して正常終了する。
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示して正常終了する。
