.\"    This file documents the GNU shell utilities.
.\" 
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\" 
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo, all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu May 16 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.\"WORD:	directive	書式指定子
.\"
.TH PRINTENV 1 "GNU Shell Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
printenv \- 環境変数の一部または全部を表示する
.SH 書式
.B printenv
[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [variable...]
.SH 説明
この文書はもうメンテナンスされていないので、不正確・不完全
な可能性がある。現在は texinfo 文書が正式な情報となっている。
.PP
このマニュアルページは GNU 版
.BR printenv
について記述したものである。
もし引き数がひとつも与えられなかった場合には、
.B printenv
はすべての環境変数を表示する。ひとつ以上の変数名が与えられた場合には、
それぞれの変数について、設定されていればその設定値を表示する。設定され
ていなければ何も表示しない。
.PP
戻り値は以下の通り:
.nf
0 指定されたすべての変数が設定されていた。
1 少なくともひとつの変数が設定されていなかった。
2 書き込みエラーが起こった。
.SS オプション
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
使い方に関するメッセージを標準出力に表示し、実行成功を返して終了する。
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示し、実行成功を返して終了する。
