.\"    This file documents the GNU shell utilities.
.\"
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu May 21 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH PWD 1 "GNU Shell Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
pwd \- カレントディレクトリ（ワーキングディレクトリ）の名前を表示する。
.SH 書式
.B pwd
.br
.B pwd
{\-\-help,\-\-version}
.SH 説明
この文書はもうメンテナンスされていないので、不正確・不完全
な可能性がある。現在は texinfo 文書が正式な情報となっている。
.PP
このマニュアルページは GNU 版
.BR pwd
について記述したものである。
.B pwd
はカレントディレクトリの名前を完全に展開してから表示する。
つまり表示された名前におけるディレクトリはすべて実体であり、
シンボリックリンクではない。
.PP
Unix のほとんどのシェルには同様の機能を持った
.B pwd
が組み込みコマンドに入っている。
従ってコマンドラインからフルパス指定しないで
.B pwd
コマンドを起動した場合、実行されるのは通常シェルの組み込みコマンド
であり、この GNU 版 \fBpwd\fR ではないことに注意。
.SS オプション
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
使い方に関するメッセージを標準出力に表示し、実行成功を返して終了する。
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示し、実行成功を返して終了する。
