.\"    This file documents the GNU shell utilities.
.\" 
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 CHIDA Kazunori
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jun 22 10:04:17 JST 1997
.\"         by CHIDA Kazunori <chida@mondo.mech.muroran-it.ac.jp>  
.\"WORD:	interrupt signals   割り込みシグナル
.TH TEE 1L "GNU Shell Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
tee \- 標準入力から読みとり、標準出力とファイルに書き出す
.SH 書式
.B tee
[\-ai] [\-\-append] [\-\-ignore-interrupts] [\-\-help] [\-\-version] [file...]
.SH 説明
このマニュアル・ページは
GNU版
.BR tee
を文章化したものである。  
.B tee
コマンドは標準入力を標準出力と引数で与えられた任意のファイルにコピー
する。
.P
もし存在しないファイルに書き出そうとしたなら、このファイルは作成される。  もし
すでに存在しているファイルに書き出す時は、以前に書き込まれた内容は
.I \-a
オプションを使わない限り上書きされる。
.SS オプション
.TP
.I "\-a, \-\-append"
ファイル内容を上書きせずに、標準入力をファイルに書き加える。
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
使用方法を標準出力に印字し、正常終了する。
.TP
.I "\-i, \-\-ignore-interrupts"
割り込みシグナル(interrupt signals)を無視する。
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
バージョン情報を標準出力に印字し、正常終了する。
