.\"    This file documents the GNU shell utilities.
.\" 
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 CHIDA Kazunori
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Sun Jun 22 10:04:17 JST 1997
.\"         by CHIDA Kazunori <chida@mondo.mech.muroran-it.ac.jp>  
.\"WORD: exit status 戻りステータス
.TH TTY 1L "GNU Shell Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
tty \- 標準入力に接続されている端末のファイル名の出力
.SH 書式
.B tty
[\-s] [\-\-silent] [\-\-quiet] [\-\-help] [\-\-version]
.SH 説明
このマニュアル・ページはGNU版
.BR tty
のドキュメントである。  
.B tty
は標準入力に接続されているttyのファイル名を出力する。  もし、標準入力がtty
でないならば `not a tty'と出力する。  戻りステータスは次の通りである：
.nf
0 標準入力がttyの場合
1 標準入力がttyでないの場合
2 間違った引数が与えられた場合
3 書き込みエラーが発生した場合
.fi
.SS オプション
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
使用法を標準出力に印字し、正常終了する。
.TP
.I "\-s, \-\-silent, \-\-quiet"
何も表示しない；戻りステータスだけを返す。
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
バージョン情報を標準出力に印字し、正常終了する。
