.\"    This file documents the GNU shell utilities.
.\"
.\"    Copyright (C) 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\"    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\"    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1997 NAKANO Takeo all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Thu May 28 1997 by NAKANO Takeo <nakano@apm.seikei.ac.jp>
.\"
.TH USERS 1 "GNU Shell Utilities" "FSF" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH 名前
users \- 現在ホストにログインしているユーザー全員のユーザー名を表示する
.SH 書式
.B users [FILE]
.br
.B users
{\-\-help,\-\-version}
.SH 説明
この文書はもうメンテナンスされていないので、不正確・不完全
な可能性がある。現在は texinfo 文書が正式な情報となっている。
.PP
このマニュアルページは GNU 版
.BR users
について記述したものである。
.B users
は現在のホストにログインしているユーザー全員のユーザー名を、空白で区切っ
て一行に表示する。
表示されたそれぞれのユーザー名はログインセッションに対応する。従って
あるユーザーが複数のログインセッションを行っている場合は、そのユーザー
の名前はセッション数と同じだけ表示される。
ファイル名が引き数として与えられない場合
.B users
はログインユーザーの情報を
.B /etc/utmp
ファイルから引き出す。
ファイル名が引き数に与えられた場合は
.B users
そのファイルを代わりに用いる。
この目的には
.B /etc/wtmp
が良く使われる。
.SS オプション
.TP
.I "\-\-help"
使い方に関するメッセージを標準出力に表示し、実行成功を返して終了する。
.TP
.I "\-\-version"
バージョン情報を標準出力に表示し、実行成功を返して終了する。
